                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USING SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS TO EVALUATE GOVERNMENT R&D SPENDING:
                         THE CASE OF ENERGY

                                               David Popp

                                         Working Paper 21415
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21415


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2015




This work was supported by NSF grant # SMA-1064161. Jung Eun Kim, Qing Miao and Tian Tang
all provided excellent research assistance on this project. I thank Andrew Toole and seminar participants
at Syracuse University, Resources for the Future, and the London School of Economics for helpful
comments on earlier versions of this research. Finally, I thank Ann Kushmerick and Lauren Seltzer
of Thomson Reuters for their assistance in obtaining the publication data used in this paper. Certain
data included herein are derived from the Web of Science ® prepared by THOMSON REUTERS ®,
Inc. (Thomson ®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: the noted data is © Copyright THOMSON REUTERS
® 2012. All rights reserved. Thomson Reuters reserves the right to review the paper prior to dissemination
to ensure that the confidentiality of the data is not unintentionally compromised. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Scientific Publications to Evaluate Government R&D Spending: The Case of Energy
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 21415
July 2015
JEL No. O21,O38,Q42,Q48,Q55

                                           ABSTRACT

The mix of public and private research funding investments in alternative energy presents a challenge
for isolating the effect of government R&D funding. Factors such as energy prices and environmental
policy influence both private and public R&D decisions. Moreover, because government R&D is further
upstream from the final commercialized product, it may take several years for its effect on technology
to be realized. Combining data on scientific publications for alternative energy technologies with
data on government R&D support for these technologies, we address these challenges. First, we ask
how long it takes for energy R&D to provide successful research outcomes. We both provide information
on the lags between research funding and new publication and link these articles to citations in U.S.
energy patents. One million dollars in additional government R&D funding leads to 1-2 additional
publications, but with lags as long as ten years between initial funding and publication. Second, we
ask whether adjustment costs associated with large increases in research funding result in diminishing
returns to government R&D. There is no evidence of diminishing returns on the level of publication
output, but some evidence that additional funding leads to lower quality publications, using citations
as a measure of publication quality.


David Popp
Department of Public Administration
and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
I. Introduction

        Because of the long-term, uncertain nature of climate change, government R&D funding

plays an important role in long-term strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The mix of

public and private research funding for technologies to reduce emissions presents a challenge for

estimating the effect of government-funded R&D. Because it is further upstream from the final

commercialized product, government R&D should take longer to have an observable effect on

outcomes than private R&D. At the same time, both private and public R&D are driven by the

same demand-side influences, such as energy prices and environmental policy, making it difficult

to disentangle the effect of each.

        Such funding is particularly important for alternative energy sources, many of which are

still too costly to be competitive with fossil fuels without policy support. Generation of electricity

and heat is the largest source of carbon emissions, accounting for 42% of carbon emissions

worldwide in 2012 (IEA 2014). Meeting the climate policy goals currently under consideration,

such as European Union discussions to reduce emissions by 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030,

will not be possible without replacing much of this electric generating capacity with alternative,

carbon-free energy sources. 1

        In this paper, we use data on scientific publications to assess the effect of government-

sponsored energy R&D. While many economists now use patent data to evaluate energy R&D

(Popp 2001, 2002, 2006; Johnstone et al. 2010 Verdolini and Gaelotti, 2011), publication data are

used less frequently within the field. For evaluating public research funding efforts, publication

data provide a more appropriate outcome measure than patents. Moreover, while direct evidence

on the relationship between public R&D funding and energy costs is desirable, the long lags


1
 These limits come from http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/future/index_en.htm, accessed
January 7, 2015.
between basic research support and commercial outcomes make measuring the final impact of

basic research difficult (Lane, 2009). For example, the costs of renewable energy sources depend

not only on knowledge accumulated from public R&D, but also on advances due to private R&D,

both of which are driven by many of the same demand signals. By looking at the effect of public

R&D funding on publications, this paper attempts to isolate the effect of public R&D to shed light

on the process through which public R&D helps develop scientific knowledge. In addition,

publication data are available for a wide range of countries and technologies. In contrast, studies

using direct measures of energy research outcomes, such as changes in renewable energy costs,

use data from only a few countries (e.g. Söderholm and Klaasen 2007).

       However, compared to patents, publication data bring additional challenges to evaluate

properly. Scientific publications are observed for papers that have been accepted by a journal

editor. Editors not only judge the potential article for quality, but also must consider whether it

will be of interest to readers. Thus, our econometric model accounts for factors influencing both

the willingness of scientists to study renewable energy and the willingness of editors to publish

such articles. Using this framework, we combine data on scientific publications for alternative

energy technologies, such as wind and solar power, with data on government R&D support for

specific energy technologies and controls such as energy prices and the nature of electricity

production in each country. Such controls are important to assess the marginal impact of additional

government R&D. We use these data to address two research questions.

       First, we ask how long it takes for energy R&D to provide successful research outcomes.

Within the energy R&D literature, most studies consider only a single year of energy R&D or

construct aggregated stocks of past R&D efforts using predetermined rates of decay. By focusing

on both inputs and outputs of the research process, this study provides new evidence on the timing



                                                2
of these flows and suggests that simply focusing on a single year of energy R&D omits longer run

effects from R&D spending. Using both finite distributed lag and polynomial distributed lag

models, we provide information on the lags between research funding and new publications. Then,

we link these articles to citations in U.S. energy patents. Asking how long it takes for publications

to be cited by a patent helps illuminate the lags between basic science and applied work.

       Second, we ask whether adjustment costs associated with large increases in research

funding result in diminishing returns to government R&D. Despite concerns raised about the

adjustment costs of dramatic changes in funding for medical science (Freeman and van Reenen

2009), Schulke-Leech (2014) provides evidence of similar experiences for energy R&D budgets,

raising the concern that such volatility may be particularly problematic for energy technology

research, which requires large capital investment. As scientists’ time is limited and the supply of

researchers able and willing to work on a given topic is inelastic in the short run, large increases

in funding may not lead to corresponding increases in scientific output (e.g. Goolsbee 1998).

Moreover, assuming that funding agencies support the highest quality projects first, as funding

increases and governments provide support to a greater number of projects, the additional projects

supported may be of lower quality than those supported in leaner budget years. In this paper, we

use counts of publications to ask whether there are diminishing returns to the quantity of

publications produced from new energy R&D funding, and citation data to ask whether the quality

of publications fall as research output increases.



II. Literature Review

       Within the field of economics, there is a long tradition of evaluating the research process

using econometric techniques that provide a theoretical framework for analysis. However, until



                                                     3
recently, most of this analysis has used patent data, rather than publication data, as the measure of

research output. 2 While the use of publication data within the economic research community has

recently increased, the focus has primarily been on using publication data to measure knowledge

flows, rather than evaluating the effectiveness of research inputs. 3 Research using publication data

to examine the returns to research includes Jacob and Lefgren (2011), who find that receiving an

National Institutes of Health (NIH) NIH grant leads to just one additional publication over five

years. Jacob and Lefgren suggest that the small effect of NIH funding comes from non-recipients

simply switching to other sources of funding. The potential for other sources of funding to serve

as substitutes raises questions about the true marginal effects of government research funds. Using

university level data, Rosenbloom et al. (2014) find a larger return on public chemistry R&D

funding at U.S. universities. However, they do not provide estimates of the lag structure of R&D.

Showing the importance of other demand factors, Bhattacharya and Pachalen (2011) use

publication data to examine medical research across related technological areas. They link

scientific opportunity, measured by the availability of new drugs, to scientific publications

referencing both these ingredients and these medicines. While they find that both research

opportunities and potential market size matter, they do not directly evaluate the effects of research

inputs, such as public R&D spending.

         Within the energy innovation literature, most studies evaluating the effect of publicly

funded energy R&D focus on the effect of public R&D on new energy patents or on the cost of



2
  Early exceptions include Pardey (1989), who finds that long-term trends in agricultural R&D spending matter more
than short-run, year-to-year variation within states; Adams (1990), who uses publications as an explanatory variable,
linking scientific knowledge, as represented by an accumulated stock of publications, to output growth; and Adams
and Griliches (1996), who estimate a production function of knowledge produced by 110 top U.S. research
universities, finding a positive relationship between R&D and publications, but an even stronger link between
employment of scientists and engineers at universities and publication counts.
3
  Examples include Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan ( 2004, 2006), Adams and Clemmons (2008), Jones et al.
(2008), Wuchty et al. (2007), Azoulay, Zivin, and Wang (2010), Zucker et al. (2007), and Furman et al. (2012) .

                                                         4
alternative energy sources. Looking at patents, Popp (2002) uses a distributed lag framework and

finds a limited role for government R&D, with government energy R&D serving as a substitute

for private energy R&D during the 1970s, but as a complement to private energy R&D afterwards.

Other papers consider just a single year of public R&D data, either contemporary or lagged (e.g.

Johnstone et al 2010, Verdolini and Gaelotti 2011, Dechezleprêtre and Glachant 2014, Nesta et al.

2014). While these studies typically find a positive effect of public R&D on patenting, the short

lags raise questions about what is truly being identified.

           Similarly, a second line of research explores the role of both R&D investment and

experience using two-factor learning curves, modeling cost reductions as a function of both

cumulative capacity (learning-by-doing, or LBD) and R&D (learning-by-searching, or LBS).

Examples include Klaasen et al. (2005), Söderholm and Sundqvist (2007), Söderholm and Klaasen

(2007) and Ek and Söderholm (2010). To be comparable with the notion of cumulative capacity,

R&D is typically aggregated into a stock of R&D capital. 4 Thus, endogeneity is a concern, as both

investments in capacity and past R&D expenditures are simultaneously determined. Ek and

Söderholm model R&D choice directly, treating public R&D as a function of the real investment

cost of wind, the opportunity cost of public R&D, measured by real rate of return on long-term

treasury bonds, and the share of total government debt. They estimate a learning-by-searching rate

of about 20 percent, but find it is only significant at the 12 percent level.

           As these papers show, our understanding of the timing of energy R&D’s potential benefits

remains limited. Most studies consider only a single year of energy R&D or construct aggregated

stocks of past R&D efforts using predetermined rates of decay. Related research in other fields

offers some evidence, but remains incomplete. Research on the productivity of publicly funded



4
    Söderholm’s work typically lags the R&D stock by two-years and assumes a depreciation rate of three percent.

                                                          5
health R&D illustrates the challenges of identifying the effect of public R&D funding that comes

at the beginning of a long, uncertain research process. In medical research, the discovery of a

potential new drug is followed by years of clinical studies and human testing. The average lag

between the beginning of human testing to FDA application is nine years, and R&D to explore

potential new drugs occurs years before testing can begin. Toole (2012) studies the effect of public

basic research funding from the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) on applications for new

molecular entities (NMEs) approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). To make the

regressions manageable given the long lags necessary to develop a new treatment, Toole creates

separate stocks of accumulated private and public R&D. His results confirm that the lag between

public R&D funding and new product development can be large, estimating a lag between initial

public R&D investment and NME application between 17 and 24 years. Similarly, Blume-Kohout

(2012) examines the links between NIH funding and the number of drugs entering clinical testing

for a range of diseases, controlling for potential market size. Unlike Toole, she uses a finite

distributed lag model, including up to 12 years of lagged R&D funding.                   Because of

multicollinearity concerns, she focuses on the aggregate long-run effect of NIH R&D funding,

with a 10 percent increase in NIH funding leading to a 4.5 percent increase in clinical trials after

12 years, but does not provide information on the how the effect of R&D from a particular year

varies over time.

       Using macro-level data, Crespi and Geuna (2008) find an optimal lag length between 6 and

7 years in their study of higher education research and development spending on publications

across 14 OECD countries from 1981-2002. However, their study includes research on a wide

range of topics, and does not consider differences among fields, nor other demand factors that may

influence scientific research. In contrast, in this paper I both provide estimates of the year-by-year



                                                  6
effect of energy R&D on publications, similar to Crespi and Geuna, while also controlling for other

market-driven and policy forces that affect the direction of basic research. This allows me to assess

the extent to which increases to public energy R&D funding within a specific field lead to increased

scientific output within that field.



III. Estimation

        We estimate the effects of public R&D on scientific publications for each of four

technologies: biofuels, energy efficiency, solar energy, and wind energy. While many economists

now use patent data to evaluate R&D, publication data are used less frequently within the field for

this purpose. Both patents and publications are the outcome of a research process. To observe

either, the researcher must have a successful project and the appropriate authority (patent examiner

or journal editor) must decide to accept the completed project to patent or publish. For patents,

the only threshold is a legal threshold. In contrast, the acceptance process for a research paper is

more complex. The number of publications observed in a given year is the equilibrium outcome

of a demand process, in which editors choose desired articles based on the perceived importance

to their readers, and a supply process, in which researchers produce articles to submit in response

to incentives provided by research funding and perceived prestige. Editors not only judge the

potential article for quality, but also must consider whether it will be of interest to readers. This

complicates analyzing the effect of public R&D spending on publications, as many of the same

factors determining public R&D decisions likely affect reader interest, and thus the editor’s

decision to publish

        Controlling for other factors influencing research interest in a given technology is also

important, as it affects the supply of articles available to publish. For instance, even researchers



                                                 7
without public funding are likely to find alternative energy an attractive area of research when

energy prices are high. While we do not observe alternative funding sources that may be available

to researchers, we do observe other factors affecting the availability of these funds, such as energy

prices and policy. Omitting these variables erroneously assumes that all new research is the result

of government R&D funding. However, controlling for such factors complicates the model, as the

same factors that provide scientists incentives to work on alternative energy may also influence

government research funding decisions.

       We use two alternative approaches to address this concern. First, the regressions include

both country and year fixed effects. Many of the factors influencing both R&D spending and

publication on a specific technology will be country-specific. For example, countries with

abundant sunshine should both be willing to support solar R&D and have researchers actively

publishing on solar energy. Similarly, year fixed effects account for both changes in the research

opportunities available to scientists at a given time, which fluctuate as advances in science make

some areas of research look more or less fruitful, and for the competing submissions from other

fields that editors may have to choose from at any given time.

       Second, to control for any remaining omitted variable bias that does vary over time, we

also use instrumental variables for contemporaneous energy R&D. Potential instruments must be

correlated with research spending, but not the publication decision. Thus, we include instruments

for R&D spending on related technologies (e.g. using biofuels R&D as an instrument for solar

energy R&D spending), as well as instruments that model the political process determining R&D

funding: tax revenues (excluding social security) as a percentage of GDP, general government

expenditure as a percentage of GDP, and a set of dummy variables representing the political

leanings of the government. Specific instruments for each technology are discussed in section IV.



                                                 8
         Because the research process takes place over time, lagged effects for the variables

described above will be important. Articles are first observed on their publication date, t, and thus

contribute to publication counts in this year. However, publication occurs at the end of a long

process. 5 Indexing countries by i, we estimate the following model:

(1)   𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 = ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛄𝛄𝐭𝐭−𝐬𝐬 𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛅𝛅𝐭𝐭−𝐬𝐬 𝐗𝐗 𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + 𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖 + 𝜂𝜂𝑡𝑡 + 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

In equation (1), Qi,t represents the number of publications from authors in country i published in

year t and Ri,t-s represents government R&D spending on a given technology by country i in year

t-s. We separate the variables measuring interest in each energy source into two parts: POLICYi,t-s

represents policies relevant to the technology and Xi,t-s represents various control variables that

affect demand for alternative energy sources in each country, such per capita GDP and the share

of energy coming from hydropower and nuclear. Both the policy variables and other controls used

vary by technology, and are discussed in the next section. αi and ηt, represent the country and year

fixed effects described above.

         We use first-differenced panel data techniques to estimate equation (1). First differencing

has two advantages over a fixed effect model for this estimation.                                              Most importantly, first

differencing avoids the problem of spurious regressions in the case where explanatory variables

have a unit root (Wooldridge, 2012). I find evidence of unit roots for R&D using the IPS test (Im,

Pesaran and Shin, 2003) both with and without a trend included. In all cases, I reject the null

hypothesis of a unit root when using first-differenced data. In addition, first differencing does not

depend on strict exogeneity of the explanatory variables. Strict exogeneity will not hold in the

case of R&D funding if, for example, a positive shock to R&D productivity leads to more funding



5
 In the patent literature, researchers traditionally use the patent application date to avoid delays due to the
examination process. Unfortunately, that is not possible with publication data, as the submission date is not known,
and articles may need to be submitted at multiple journals before finding one to accept it.

                                                                        9
in future years. In contrast, the first difference model only requires that E[∆Xi,t ∆εi,t] = 0 (Cameron

and Trivedi, 2009). By using instruments for contemporaneous R&D, I am able to test whether

this assumption holds and avoid bias by using instrumental variables for ∆RDi,t if necessary. The

instruments used vary by technology and are discussed in the next section.

       Finally, because of multicollinearity concerns when using multiple lagged variables, I also

estimate equation (1) using a polynomial distributed lag (PDL) model (e.g. Almon 1965). Rather

than impose structure on the lag process, the PDL model uses polynomials of various degrees to

proxy for the effect of the lagged variables. I retain the use of first-differenced variables and

instruments for ∆RDi,t in the PDL model.



IV. Data

       The publication data come from the Thomson Reuters Web of Science database. Using a

series of keyword searches of article titles, abstracts, and keywords, provided in Appendix A, we

identified journal publications for each of our technologies. We focus on publications in scientific

journals by dropping articles such as reviews, editorials, or news items. We do include proceedings

papers that are included in the Web of Science database. The publication data run from 1991-

2011, as complete records of titles, abstracts, and keywords begin in 1991. Once we identified

appropriate keywords, Thomson Reuters provided a custom database containing all publications

from 1991-2011 for our four technologies. The database includes descriptive information on each

paper, including the date of publication and addresses for each author, which we use to assign

articles to each country. For each technology, articles are aggregated by year and country. In the

case of articles with multiple authors from multiple countries, we use weighted counts, assigning

articles proportionately by the number of countries represented. For example, an article with 2 US


                                                  10
authors and 1 Japanese author counts as 0.67 for the US and 0.33 for Japan. 6 In addition, the

database also includes descriptive data on each article citing these energy articles, which we use

as a proxy for article quality in section VE.

         When developing keyword searches, there is a tradeoff between using broad searches that

identify as many relevant articles as possible but also include some irrelevant articles or using

narrower searches that filter out irrelevant articles but may miss some relevant ones. We devised

searches that would be narrow, so as to avoid irrelevant articles, as these articles would respond

differently to alternative energy R&D trends and thus bias our results downward. As such, our

database does not necessarily include, for example, every article related to wind energy published

since 1991. However, as long as there is no change in the share of relevant articles identified over

time, our results will still be an unbiased indicator of the effect of R&D spending on research

outputs. This simply requires assuming that our searches consistently identify a fixed percentage

of wind articles published in any given year. In contrast, using broader search terms that identified

more wind articles but also included irrelevant articles would require assuming that the irrelevant

articles responded in the same way as actual wind publications to the variables in our model.

         Government R&D data by country and technology are taken from the International Energy

Agency (IEA).         IEA data include technology-specific government energy technology R&D

budgets for 26 IEA member countries. While annual data are available, the time series are

incomplete for some countries. As such, the available R&D limit the number of countries included

in the analysis. R&D data go back as far as 1974 for some countries. Using a starting date of 1992

for the publication data, we select countries with at least 10 years of lagged R&D data for a given



6
  We also ran models using unweighted counts, where we assign a full article to each country represented. The
results do not change. It is not possible to assign a primary country by identifying the first or last author listed, as
the order of addresses and authors in the database are not linked.

                                                            11
technology. Table 1 lists the countries included in the regressions for each technology. 7

         Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for both R&D and the weighted publications. R&D

data are shown in millions of 2010 dollars. Evaluated at the means, for most technologies we see

a bit less than one million dollars of R&D spending per publication. The exception is energy

efficiency, for which a little over $3 million of R&D is spent per publication. While this may

indicate that energy efficiency R&D is less productive than other R&D spending, it may also

indicate that our keyword searches identify a lower percentage of relevant energy efficiency

articles than for other technologies. Table 3 shows the top 10 sources of publications for each

technology. While our sample includes most of the top publishing countries, note that some

emerging economies such as China and Brazil are also actively publishing on alternative energy.

         Figure 1 shows the aggregate trends in both energy R&D and publications for all countries

in each regression. Not surprisingly, both R&D and publications have been increasing over time.

The large increase in energy R&D in 2009 is primarily a result of the US stimulus spending and is

a one-time shock to R&D. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate these trends for each country for solar and

wind energy. Note that there is variation both across times and across countries, which is important

for separately identifying the effect of energy R&D, as opposed to simply finding that publications

increase due to increased global attention to climate change. For example, prior to the 2009

stimulus, the U.S. experiences two peaks in wind energy R&D – one after the 1970s energy crises,

and another in the mid-1990s. In contrast, Denmark and the Netherlands have relatively flat R&D

budgets, with the exception of the Netherlands in 1985. Note also that countries also choose to



7
  One complication with the R&D data is that the reported national data of European countries omits funding from
the European Commission (IEA 2011). Fortunately, such funding represents a small percentage of overall public
energy funding in Europe (Dechezleprêtre and Popp, 2015). Nonetheless, to insure that missing European-wide
funding efforts do not affect our results, we include EU-specific year effects in the regressions to account for any
EU-wide changes in R&D funding. These year effects have little effect on the final results, as shown in Appendix
B, which compares the results with and without these EU-specific year fixed effects.

                                                         12
emphasize different technologies. For example, in 2010 the United States spent over ten times as

much on wind energy as Japan in 2007, but nearly twice as much over twice as much on biofuels

research as on solar energy, whereas Japan spent more on solar energy R&D than on biofuels.

These figures also show the importance of lagged R&D effects, as within individual countries,

R&D spending generally peaks several years before publication counts. Examples include wind

energy in Germany, Italy, and Japan.

        Table 4 lists the policy variables, controls, and instruments used to estimate equation (1)

for each technology. The columns indicate which variables are included for each technology.

Policies include gasoline taxes (for biofuels) and the level of renewable energy mandates and feed-

in tariffs used to promote wind or solar energy. 8 In addition to per capita GDP, which is included

in all regressions, other controls include gasoline prices for biofuels and energy efficiency. We do

not include electricity prices in the model for solar or wind energy, as increased usage of solar and

wind would lead to higher energy prices. Instead, for solar and wind we consider other factors

influencing its demand, including the prevalence of clean energy substitutes (e.g. hydropower and

nuclear) and the growth rate of electricity consumption. The extent to which a country needs such

policies to reduce emissions depends on the carbon-intensity of electricity generation. Countries

already making extensive use of other carbon-free energy sources, such as hydro or nuclear power,

are expected to make less effort to promote renewable energy, and thus have lower interest in

research on these technologies. 9 Similarly, when electricity consumption is growing more quickly,

more investment in new electricity capacity will be needed, making investments in renewables

more likely.


8
  Continuous variables are constructed for selected policy instruments based on the OECD Renewable Energy Policy
Database (OECD-EPAU 2013) – an update and extension of the dataset originally used in Johnstone et al. (2010).
9
  For instance, Popp et al. (2011) shows that investment in renewable energy capacity is lower in countries using
more nuclear or hydro power.

                                                       13
         As noted earlier, our instruments include two categories of variables.                       We include

instruments for R&D spending on related technologies, with the specific technologies chosen for

each technology indicated in the table. 10 Overidentification tests were used to verify the validity

of all technologies included and to rule out invalid instruments. In addition, since all energy R&D

decisions are a result of a political process, we also include instruments that model the political

process determining R&D funding. Overidentification tests assume that at least one instrument is

valid. Since all energy R&D decisions are made through similar political processes, additional

instruments that control for the political pressures that shape R&D decisions help ensure the

validity of the overidentification tests. The policy instruments control for a country’s general

proclivity for government spending and for the political leanings of the government. 11



V. Results

         Our results focus on the two questions posed in the introduction. First, we consider the

optimal number of years of lagged energy R&D to include for each technology. With this

information in hand, we then examine the impact of both energy R&D and our control variables

on energy publications. Next, we link the publications in our data to references on U.S. patents,

allowing us to estimate the time it takes for new energy R&D to impact applied research. Finally,

we consider the possibility of diminishing returns to large increases in energy R&D, looking both

at the quantity of publications (e.g. Does the marginal effect of R&D fall with large increases?)

and the quality of publications.




10
   Any related technologies are not used as instruments. For example, nuclear R&D is only used as an instrument
for biofuels, a transportation-based technology, but not for any technologies pertaining to electricity. Note, for
example, that the share of nuclear energy is a control for solar and renewable energy. As such, decisions on nuclear
R&D cannot be considered exogenous for these technologies.
11
   For example, Baccini and Urpelainen (2012) show that political shifts affect the volatility of public energy R&D.

                                                         14
A. Estimating the Lag Length

         We employ several strategies to identify the appropriate lag length. First, as is common in

the literature, the primary criterion is finding the minimum AIC statistic across a range of models

(e.g. Crespi and Geuna, 2008). 12 One complication is that our model includes not only lagged

values of the R&D variables, but also of several control variables. These controls are often

individually insignificant. Thus, we also run models including only a single year of the control

and policy variables, to see if this changes the recommended number of lags. We initially examine

models including up to ten lags of R&D. Adding additional lags is problematic when the model

includes renewable energy policy variables as only two countries in our sample adopted renewable

energy certificates before 2003, so that estimates of the lagged value of the REC variable beyond

eight years are unreliable. However, adding up to 11 years of lags is possible for biofuels and

energy efficiency. 13

         In addition, even collinearity among the R&D variables themselves may cause the AIC

statistic to favor smaller lags. Thus, we also run both the full and single control models using a

polynomial distributed lag model (PDL). The PDL models provide similar results to the main first

differenced models, but by requiring fewer parameters to estimate multiple lags, they offer the

potential for lower standard errors on the R&D coefficients. Appendix C presents the AIC

statistics and a discussion of their implications for the optimal lag length.



12
   Alternatively, we also calculated the BIC statistic for each model, which includes a greater penalty for including
irrelevant variables. As a result, collinearity among the lagged R&D values often leads the BIC to recommend
fewer lags than the AIC. However, in the case of collinear lagged R&D values, we can still estimate long-run
effects that are jointly significant, even when individual year coefficients are estimated imprecisely. Moreover,
leaving out relevant lags would lead to omitted variable bias. Thus, I focus on the findings of the AIC statistic in the
discussion that follows.
13
   The first US states to adopt REC limits do so in 1998, and Italy adopts an REC limit in 2002. Most states first
limits appear in the data in 2003.

                                                          15
         In some cases, these strategies recommend different lag lengths. Thus, we also consider

the cumulative long-run effect of R&D when evaluating the lag length. These long-run effects,

illustrated in Figure 4, tend to be similar across the various estimation techniques, so we focus on

the results using first differenced instrumental variables. When the AIC statistic conflicts across

models, we use the pattern of cumulative effects as an additional guide. In particular, we consider

the lag length at which the cumulative effect of government energy R&D spending levels out, as

this is evidence that all relevant lags have been included. Based on these results, we identify an

optimal lag length of ten years for biofuels and energy efficiency, six years for solar energy, and

seven for wind.


B. Effects of Energy R&D

         Having identified the appropriate lag length, Tables 5-6 present results for the first

differenced models for each technology. Table 5 shows the results for government R&D for both

individual years and the cumulative effect. Table 6 shows the cumulative effects of the various

controls included in each model. In each table, the first column for each technology includes

results using instruments for current R&D and the second includes results assuming all variables

are exogenous. All results include robust standard errors that have been corrected for both

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. 14

         Before turning to technology-specific results, we first discuss general trends across all

models. Public sponsored energy R&D generally leads to increases in publications, although the

magnitude of the effect varies across technologies. Other demand characteristics appear less

important, as most controls are insignificant, both individually and in the cumulative effects over



14
  Because of the similarities across models, I focus on the first-differenced panel estimates, which avoid imposing
any structure on the lag process. Results using the PDL models are included in Appendix D.

                                                         16
time. This contrasts with most research focusing on private sector research efforts, where policy

plays an important role (e.g. Johnstone et al. 2010, Verdolini and Gaelotti 2011, Dechezleprêtre

and Glachant 2014, Nesta et al. 2014). Given the long term nature of basic R&D, it is not

necessarily surprising that demand factors such as policy shocks have less influence on research

supported by the public sector. However, these results also suggest that public R&D funding is

not simply replicating support that would otherwise be provided by the private sector. We discuss

exceptions to these findings in the technology-by-technology results below.

       Turning to the quality of our instruments, the Hansen J test reveals that the instruments are

valid in all cases. Each table also presents the p-value of the endogeneity test, where the null

hypothesis is that the current value of energy R&D is exogenous. We fail to reject the null for all

technologies except solar energy.      However, as the results are generally unchanged across

endogenous and exogenous specifications, we choose to be conservative and focus on the IV

results when presenting the various robustness checks that follow.

       Energy R&D has the largest cumulative effect in biofuels. One million dollars of additional

government R&D support results in slightly more than two new publications over ten years. One

reason for the stronger biofuels effect is the long lag length. While the effect of public R&D levels

out for other technologies after six or seven years, for biofuels we find a strong effect even in years

nine and ten. There is a strong contemporary effect, with 0.376 publications being induced in year

t-1. The FD results suggest a cyclical pattern, with strong effects also found in years two and four

in the first differenced model before picking up again in year t-9. One possibility that the long

range effects suggest is that public R&D leads to increases in the supply of scientific personnel

and infrastructure devoted to biofuels research. While verifying such an explanation is beyond the

scope of the current data set, such questions about the long run impact of public R&D are a fruitful



                                                  17
avenue for further study. While most individual controls are insignificant, gasoline prices net of

taxes have a large positive impact on publications. Higher prices make substitutes such as biofuels

look more attractive and researchers seem sensitive to the market potential of biofuels when

deciding on research projects. Also, while the cumulative effect of per capita oil reserves is

insignificant, individual year effects have a significant positive effect in years t-3, t-7, and t-8.

        Similar to biofuels, the lagged effect for energy efficiency R&D is long. While the largest

single year effect occurs in year t-2, the magnitudes in year t-10 are similar. Compared to the other

technologies, the magnitude of both the individual year effects and cumulative effects for energy

efficiency are much smaller, with one million of energy efficiency R&D generating just under 0.2

new publications in the long run. Compared to the other technologies in this study, energy

efficiency covers a wider range of potential applications, including specific equipment for

production, vehicles, and even high technology applications such as computers and server farms.

Thus, the smaller magnitude may be an artifact of our data, which relies on keyword searches to

identify relevant articles and may miss some of these broader applications. However, it is also

possible that, because of the broader nature of energy efficiency research, the costs of generating

new energy efficiency results is larger, as the ability to stand on the shoulders of past researchers

may be lower in a more diverse research field. Also, while the cumulative effect of per capita oil

reserves is insignificant, individual year effects have a significant effect in years t-3 through t-7,

with a positive effect in all years except t-5.

        Solar energy is the one case in which instrumental variables lead to changes in the results.

We reject the null hypothesis that current energy R&D expenditures are exogenous, as the p-value

of the endogeneity test is just 0.049. The cumulative effect of energy R&D falls from 2.742 to

2.078 when using instruments for current R&D. The differences are largely driven by changes in



                                                   18
the contemporary effect of R&D, which is much larger when exogenous. Recall from the theory

section that current variables not only pick up the supply of research projects, but also the demand

of editors to publish research on a given topic. As this unobserved demand may be correlated with

energy R&D, and that we would expect some time to pass before R&D led to a new publication,

it is likely using instrumental variables helps correcting for such demand effects. Policy also plays

a role in the case of solar, with larger renewable energy targets inducing more publications.

       Finally, for wind energy, the results are consistent across all specifications. In the long-

run, a million dollars of energy R&D leads to approximately one new publication. Unlike biofuels,

the effect is quick, with most new publications occurring within the first three years. After a brief

leveling off, the cumulative effect continues to rise in years six and seven, after which it levels off

again, as shown in Figure 4. While none of the controls have a significant cumulative effect, the

immediate lag is significant for both the percentage of electricity from hydro and nuclear, although

unexpectedly positive for both.



C. Linking basic and applied research – citations by patents

       As the ultimate goal of government energy R&D funding is not a publication, but rather a

new technology, any evaluation of government R&D should also ask whether any resulting

increase in basic science outputs leads to new applications. For this, we link our publication data

to patent data, which reflect the output of applied research efforts. Patents contain citations to

scientific publications, allowing direct linkages to be made. Moreover, recent work by Roach and

Cohen (2013) shows that references to non-patent literature (NPL) such as journal articles are

better measures of knowledge flows from public research to patents than are citations to other

patents. Using references to non-patent literature found on patents, we gain new information on



                                                  19
the speed of diffusion by asking how long it takes energy publications to be cited by patents for

new energy technology. The results of this work can thus inform other studies where assumptions

about the rate of diffusion of public R&D must be made.

           The major challenge for this analysis is linking the publication data used in the previous

sections to patents. Due to data constraints, the focus will be on citations made by U.S. patents.

Using the International Patent Classification (IPC) system to identify patents pertaining to specific

technologies, we identify patents related to biofuels, solar energy, and wind. 15 Data on relevant

patents come from the on-line database provided by Delphion (http://www.delphion.com/). We

obtained the NPL references for these patents, identifying those referencing journal articles. As

there is no standard form for citing articles in a patent, matching articles and patents was done

manually.

           Table 7 shows the percentage of articles receiving an NPL citation. Because we focus on

citations made by U.S. patents, the table separates articles by US and foreign authors, using the

same author weights as in the previous section. While the total percentage of articles is about 2

percent, the low number is in because of the large number of articles published in recent years that

have yet to be cited. Still, even looking back to articles from earlier five year intervals, the share

of articles receiving an NPL citation is always below 10 percent. Moreover, even among articles

receiving an NPL citation, the average number of citations received is two or less. Also important

is that the opportunity for citation increases over time. Figure 5 shows the total number of patents

in each technology by year. For each technology, patenting has increased during the 2000s, as

government interest in renewable energy increases (see, e.g. Johnstone et al. 2010).




15
     There are no IPC classifications dedicated solely to energy efficiency.

                                                            20
       Because of these truncation issues, and because the count of citations is low, we use a

hazard regression to focus on the time until the first NPL citation is received. To allow time for

articles to be cited, we only consider articles published in 2009 or earlier. Our patent data extends

through 2011. The model includes the citation lag, calculated using the publication year of both

the cited article and citing patent, a set of country by cited year fixed effects (denoted YCi,t in the

equation below), which control for the different opportunities for future citations available to

articles from different countries and from different times, and a dummy variable to control for

articles with authors from multiple countries. As we explicitly model the effect of time using the

citation lag, we use an exponential baseline hazard:

(2)    ℎ(𝑡𝑡) = exp(𝛼𝛼0 + 𝛼𝛼1 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 + 𝛼𝛼2 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐2 + 𝛼𝛼3 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 + 𝛄𝛄𝛄𝛄𝐂𝐂𝐢𝐢,𝐭𝐭 )

As articles published early in the sample had fewer opportunities for immediate citation, we expect

their citation lag to be longer. Thus, in addition to estimating the model using the full sample of

articles published between 1991-2009, we also estimate a second model using only articles

published from 2000-2009, to ascertain whether the time to citation is faster when citing

opportunities increase.

       Table 8 presents the regression results, showing that the coefficients on citation lags are

significant at the one percent level, except for the squared term on wind energy. To interpret the

time to citation, panel A of Figure 6 illustrates how the annual probability of citation changes over

time. For the post-2000 sample (shown using solid lines), the annual probability peaks between

8-10 years after publication. The peak shifts out to 11-14 years when considering the full sample

(dashed lines). As both the average and median lag between initial application and grant for

patents in our sample is 5 years, this means that patents citing these articles are filed 3-5 after

publication of the article in the post-2000 sample. Panel B shows the cumulative probability of


                                                               21
citation, which begins to grow rapidly 4-6 years after publication, and levels out about 12-14 years

afterwards in the post-2000 sample.

       While it may take just a few years for an article to be cited by a patent, it also takes a few

years for R&D funding to generate new articles. To assess the full time it takes for new energy

R&D funding to influence technology development, Figure 7 traces the increased probability of

an NPL citation resulting from an additional $1 million R&D funding in year t. This calculation

combines the regression results from Table 5 to determine the number of new articles induced by

additional R&D funding with the results above, predicting the probability of citation to each of

these new articles in different years. Appendix E describes the methodology in more detail.

Allowing for the lags between initial funding and publication, the probability of a citation resulting

from new R&D funding peaks from 10-12 years after funding in the post-2000 sample, and 13-19

years in the full sample. Looking at the cumulative effect, we see little increase in citation until

approximately 6 years after funding, with the effect not leveling out until almost 18 years after

funding. Again considering a five year window for processing patents, this suggests that new

patent applications begin appearing about one year after funding and continue for 13 years. While

these lags are shorter than those found by Toole (2012) in his study linking NIH research funding

to applications for new molecular entities, as clinical testing prolongs the development of new

medicines, these figures still demonstrate that the effect of public energy R&D funding will not be

felt until several years after the funding occurs. This finding suggests that papers using just a

single value of contemporary or one-year lagged energy R&D to evaluate the effect of public

energy R&D spending, such as those cited in section II, do not sufficiently control for the lagged

effects between R&D and patenting. While many of these papers do find a positive correlation

between current or one-year lagged values of public energy R&D and patenting, the lack of a



                                                 22
proper lag structure suggests that these papers are merely picking up endogenous relationships

between the factors determining energy R&D funding and those driving renewable energy

innovation in the private sector, such as changes in energy prices.



D. Are there diminishing returns to government R&D?

           While the previous results provide new information on both the magnitude and duration of

the effect of energy R&D, finding a positive effect of public energy R&D funding on related

scientific publications is not surprising. However, large increases in energy R&D may come at a

cost. Government research funding often fluctuates dramatically. U.S. public energy R&D

spending rose from $2.5 billion to $7.8 billion between 1975 and 1982 before leveling of near $3

billion by the mid-1980s. Because researchers have a limited amount of time, and the supply of

researchers able and willing to work on a given topic is inelastic in the short run, such large

increases may have adjustment costs that limit the potential of large surges in energy R&D funding.

           In this section, we consider two additional model specifications to test for the possibility

of diminishing returns to research funding: one adding a quadratic term for R&D, and a second

including a dummy variable for large increases in R&D. Table 9 presents the cumulative effect

for each coefficient, with the model including R&D squared in columns 1-4, and the model using

the interaction term in columns 5-8. All models treat current R&D as endogenous 16. When adding

a quadratic term, the marginal effect of R&D will be a function of the R&D spending in a given

year. Figure 8 evaluates the marginal effect of energy R&D for a given year for various lags, and

Figure 9 shows the cumulative effect. In each, these effects are evaluated for average levels of

energy R&D spending, as well as for the 25th, 75th, and 90th percentile. If diminishing returns are



16
     The results are virtually identical if we instead treat current R&D as exogenous.

                                                            23
a concern, we should expect to see lower marginal effects in the upper percentiles.

         Our results provide almost no support for diminishing returns. While the quadratic term is

negative and significant in a few individual years, the cumulative effect is never negative and

significant (columns 1-4 of Table 9). Moreover, it is significant and positive for both biofuels and

solar energy raising the possibility of positive spillovers from additional R&D. 17 In Figure 8, we

see slightly higher annual marginal effects for the 90th quantile of solar energy R&D for most

years, and for biofuels and energy efficiency in the later years. Only for wind do we see the annual

marginal effects fall for the highest quantiles, and only in the middle years.

         Figure 9 provides more insight, showing how the cumulative effect of energy R&D varies

over time for various levels of R&D funding. For biofuels and energy efficiency, the cumulative

effect is nearly identical across quantiles until the later years. This would be consistent with the

notion that large increases in R&D result in positive spillovers providing dividends in future years,

such as by attracting more researchers into the field. For energy efficiency R&D, the cumulative

effect for the 90th percentile is below those of other percentiles through year three before catching

up, raising the possibility of a period of adjustment for large increases in energy R&D.

         Solar energy provides evidence of positive spillovers from large energy increases, with a

significant positive quadratic terms. As shown in Figure 9, the cumulative effect of R&D is lowest

for the 25th percentile, increasing significantly for each higher percentile. Finally, the only

technology showing any evidence of long run diminishing returns is wind. Here, we see that the

cumulative effect of wind energy is slightly larger in the 90th percentile in early years, but soon

becomes lower than the cumulative effect of other percentiles.



17
  Individual years with significant negative coefficients on the quadratic term include lags 9 and 10 (both positive)
for biofuels, lags 2 (positive), 3 (negative), and 8 (positive) for energy efficiency, lags 0, 1, 2, and 5 (all positive) for
solar energy, and years 1, 2 (both positive) and 4 (negative) for wind.

                                                             24
       Second, we ask specifically whether rapid increases in energy R&D funding are less

effective (columns 5-8 of Table 9). We include a dummy variable equal to one if energy R&D

increases by 100% or more in a given year, and interact this variable with the level of energy R&D

funding. Thus, a negative coefficient on this interaction indicates that the marginal effect of R&D

is lower in years with a doubling or more of R&D. As Figure 10 shows, the number of countries

choosing to double energy R&D in a given year is generally equally dispersed across time, with

one or two countries per year experiencing such increases. The one exception is the large number

of countries choosing to double energy R&D as part of stimulus packages in 2009 and 2010.

Overall, between 6 and 12 percent of all country/year observations from 1981-2011 include a

doubling of energy R&D.

       The results confirm that diminishing returns and adjustment costs are not a significant

concern given the current levels of energy R&D funding and provide some support for positive

spillovers. The coefficient on the interaction term is positive for all technologies except solar, with

statistically significant results for biofuels and wind. For individual years, the interaction is

positive and significant at the 5% level for several years in the biofuels and wind regressions.

Thus, despite concerns about diminishing returns to R&D, we instead find evidence that a doubling

of energy R&D creates potential positive spillovers that makes energy R&D spending more

productive.



E. Does Quality Change: Citation Analysis

       While we find little evidence of diminishing returns regarding the number of publications

generated from increased government R&D, these results tell us nothing about the quality of those

publications. Even if publication counts increase as funding increases, those projects only able to



                                                  25
win support during periods of ample funding would be expected to have lower quality than those

projects earning support even when available funding is low. Thus, diminishing returns to research

may be exhibited not in the quantity of publications, but in the quality of publications. To assess

publication quality, we turn to citation data. The assumption made is that more frequently cited

articles are of higher quality. Using citations as an indicator of article quality is a common

technique in bibliometric analyses (see, for example, National Science Board, 2008). Within

economics, patent citations have been used in a similar way (e.g. Trajtenberg 1990, Lanjouw and

Schankerman 2004, Popp 2002, 2006).

       As in the patent citation literature, simple counts of citations received are not sufficient to

evaluate the quality of an article. The number of citations that an article receives depends not only

on the quality of the article, but also on the number of opportunities for citation. Let i represent

an article, j represent the home country of the article’s authors, and t represent the publication year

of the article. The number of citations received by an article from country j and published in year

t can be described by the following relationship:

       (2)     NumCitei,j,t = f(ln(NUMPubsj,t), ln(NUMPubsj,t)2, αj, βt).

αj and βt represent country and year fixed effects. We expect articles to receive more citations

from other authors in the same country. Country fixed effects acknowledge that the number of

citing opportunities may vary by country. Year fixed effects capture the number of citing

opportunities that occur in the years after publication. For energy publications, we would expect

the raw number of citations to be higher during periods of intense research activity, such as when

energy prices are highest.

       Our variable of interest is NUMPubsj,t. This represents the total number of articles

published on a given topic in country j in a given year, t. If additional research leads to marginal


                                                  26
articles being published, we would expect the number of citations to fall when more articles are

published. To allow for the possibility of positive spillovers at moderate levels of research, we

also estimate a model using a squared term. If positive spillovers exist at moderate levels of

research, we would expect the linear term to be positive, with the squared term being negative.

Because the average number of publications per year varies by country, we use the log of

publications in the regressions that follow. Because many articles receive zero citations, we use a

generalized negative binomial regression to estimate equation (4). All standard errors are clustered

by article.

         One final complication is that just over 25% of all articles include authors from multiple

countries. For these cases, we include a separate observation for each article/country pair, using

weighted regression to weight each article/country pair by the share of authors from that country.

For example, if an article has two authors from the United States and one from Canada, we would

include observations for both the United States and Canada, with a weight of 0.67 for the U.S.

observations and a weight of 0.33 for the Canadian observations. We include a separate dummy

variable for these articles, as we expect them to receive more citations than single-country authors,

since the authors of these articles are exposed to multiple research networks. 18

         Table 10 presents the results. Publication counts are in logs, so that the coefficients can be

interpreted as elasticities.       For all technologies except solar energy, we find evidence of

diminishing returns, with an elasticity between publications and citations ranges from -0.167 to -

0.186. Results are significant at the 5% level for each of these three technologies. Including a

squared term provides no evidence of increasing returns for smaller numbers of publication. As



18
   As a robustness check, we also run our regressions dropping all multicountry articles. General trends are the same
in both models, although the results for wind are no longer significant when dropping multicountry articles. These
results are available upon request.

                                                         27
expected, multicountry articles are 17-24% more likely to be cited than articles with authors from

a single country.



VI. Conclusion

       Although government R&D support for alternative energy and energy efficiency

improvements is seen as an important component of climate change policy, empirical evidence on

the effectiveness of such R&D is limited. Attempts to assess the effectiveness of government

energy R&D support are complicated by the long lags between initial funding and the final

research outcomes, as well as by the challenge of isolating the effect of public R&D funding from

demand-side influences, such as energy prices and environmental policy, that influence both public

and private R&D activity. In this paper, we use scientific publications as an indicator of basic

research output to assess the effectiveness of energy R&D. Using a panel of OECD countries, we

control for other factors that may influence the direction of research and use instrumental variables

to separately identify the effect of publicly funded R&D on publications.

       The results show that, even controlling for other energy policies and energy prices that will

influence private R&D funding decisions, government R&D support does increase the number of

related energy publications. In general, an additional million dollars of energy R&D leads to 1-2

additional publications. Moreover, factors found to influence private R&D activity in other papers,

such as energy prices and policy, have little impact on publications. Thus, it does not appear that

public R&D merely substitutes for other sources of funding.

       This effect of energy R&D occurs over a period of years, with lags as long as 10 years in

the case of biofuels and energy efficiency. Moreover, as the ultimate goal of public R&D is to

provide the building blocks for new innovation, we use citations to link the publication data to



                                                 28
U.S. patents, providing evidence of the time it takes for public R&D to stimulate private sector

innovation. Related patent applications begin soon after funding and continue for up to 13 years.

That long lags matter is important to the evaluation of energy R&D, as many studies evaluating

the effect of government R&D on innovation consider just contemporary or one-year lagged

energy R&D. While these studies often find little effect of energy R&D on private sector

innovation, failure to consider sufficient lags call these results into question.

       Importantly, we also find little evidence of diminishing returns to public energy R&D. We

find no evidence that the marginal increase in publications from new R&D funding declines

following large increases in energy R&D. We do find some evidence of diminishing quality, as

citations to new articles fall by approximately 1.7% when energy R&D increases by 10 percent for

three of the four technologies studied. Thus, while the number of publications induced continues

to increase as energy R&D expands, large increases in funding may simply provide support for

marginal projects of less overall value to society. Overall, the lack of evidence for diminishing

returns to energy funding suggests that there is room to expand current public energy R&D efforts,

and that the constraints for funding are likely to come from other sources, such as macroeconomic

constraints or the pool of scientist and engineering personnel currently available to work on energy

projects. In particular, the long-run effects particularly evident in the case of biofuels and energy

efficiency suggest that increases in public funding have positive spillovers, either through

increasing the amount of research on which to build or by increasing the number of researchers in

the field. Additional research to better understand the mechanisms behind these long run effects

is warranted.




                                                  29
References
Adams, James D. (1990), “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,” Journal

       of Political Economy, 98(4), 673-702.

Adams, James D. and J. Roger Clemmons (2008), “Science and Industry: Tracing the Flow of

       Basic Research through Manufacturing and Trade,” Economics of Innovation and New

       Technology,” 17(5), 473 - 495.

Adams, James D., J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan. (2004), “Standing on Academic

       Shoulders: Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” NBER Working Paper #10875.

Adams, James D., Clemmons, J. Roger, and Stephan, Paula E. (2006), “How rapidly does Science

       leak out?” NBER Working Paper #11997.

Almon, Shirley. 1965. The distributed lag between capital appropriations and expenditures.

       Econometrica 33: 178-196

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. Superstar extinction. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 125(2): 549-589.

Baccini, Leonardo and Johannes Urpelainen. 2012. Legislative fractionalization and partisan shifts

       to the left increase the volatility of public energy R&D expenditures. Energy Policy 46:

       49-57.

Bhattacharya, Jay and Mikko Packalen. 2011. Opportunities and benefits as determinants of the

       direction of scientific research. Journal of Health Economics 30: 603-615.

Blume-Kohout, Margaret E. 2012. Does targeted, disease-specific public research funding

       influence pharmaceutical innovation? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31(3),

       641-660.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2009. Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications.

       Cambridge University Press, New York.

                                               30
Crespi, Gustavo A. and Aldo Geuna (2008), “An empirical study of scientific production: A cross

       country analysis, 1981-2002,” Research Policy, 37, 565-579.

Dechezleprêtre, A, Popp, D. 2015. Fiscal and regulatory instruments for clean technology

       development in the European Union. CESifo Working Paper # 5361.

Dechezleprêtre, A., Glachant, M. (2014). Does foreign environmental policy influence domestic

       innovation? Evidence from the wind industry. Environmental and Resource Economics

       58: 391-413.

Ek, Kristina and Patrik Söderholm. 2010. Technology learning in the presence of public R&D:

       The case of European wind power. Ecological Economics, 69, 2356-2362.

Freeman Richard and John Van Reenen (2009), “What if Congress doubled R&D spending on the

       physical sciences?” in Josh Lerner, Scott Stern, eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy,

       vol. 9, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1-38.

Furman, Jeffrey L., Fiona Murray, and Scott Stern. 2012. Growing stem cells: The impact of

       federal funding policy on the U.S. scientific frontier. Journal of Policy Analysis and

       Management 31(3), 661-705.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. Does government R&D policy mainly benefit scientists and engineers?

       American Economic Review 88(2): 298-302.

Im, K.S., M.H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin. 2003. Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels. Journal

       of Econometrics 115: 53-74.

International Energy Agency. 2014. CO2 Emissions From Fuel Combustion: Highlights.

       OECD/IEA, Paris, France.

International Energy Agency. 2011. IEA Guide to Reporting Energy RD&D Budget/Expenditure

       Statistics. OECD/IEA, Paris, France.



                                               31
Jacob, Brian A, Lars Lefgren. 2011. The impact of research grant funding on scientific

       productivity. Journal of Public Economics 95: 1168-1177.

Johnstone, Nick, Ivan Hascic, and David Popp (2010), “Renewable energy policies and

       technological innovation: Evidence based on patent counts,” Environmental and Resource

       Economics, 45(1), 133-155

Jones, Benjamin F., Stefan Wuchty, and Brian Uzzi (2008), “Multi-university research teams:

       Shifting impact, geography, and stratification in science,” Science, 322, 1259-1262.

Klaassen, G., S. Miketa, K. Larsen, and T. Sundqvist. 2005. The impact of R&D on innovation for

       wind energy in Denmark, Germany and the United Kingdom, Ecological Econ. 54, 227-

       240.

Lane, Julia (2009), “Assessing the impact of science funding,” Science, 324, 1273-1275.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Shankerman (2004), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation

       with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.

National Science Board (2008), Science and Engineering Indicators 2008, Arlington, VA:

       National Science Foundation (NSB 08-01).

Nesta, Lionel, Francesco Vona, and Francesco Nicolli (2014), “Environmental policies,

       competition, and innovation in renewable energy,” Journal of Environmental Economics

       and Management, 67, 396-411.

OECD-EPAU (2013) Renewable Energy Policy Dataset, version February 2013. Compiled by the

       OECD Environment Directorate’s Empirical Policy Analysis Unit (Johnstone, N., Haščič,

       I., Cárdenas Rodríguez M., Duclert, T.) in collaboration with an ad hoc research consortium

       (Arnaud de la Tour, Gireesh Shrimali, Morgan Hervé-Mignucci, Thilo Grau, Emerson




                                               32
       Reiter, Wenjuan Dong, Inês Azevedo, Nathaniel Horner, Joëlle Noailly, Roger Smeets,

       Kiran Sahdev, Sven Witthöft, Yunyeong Yang, Timon Dubbeling).

Pardy, Philip G. (1989), “The agriculture knowledge production function: An empirical look,”

       Review of Economics and Statistics, 71(3), 453-461.

Popp, David, Ivan Hascic and Neelakshi Medhi (2011), “Technology and the Diffusion of

       Renewable Energy,” Energy Economics,, 33(4), 648-662

Popp, David (2006), “They Don't Invent Them Like They Used To: An Examination of Energy

       Patent Citations Over Time,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(8), 753-

       776.

Popp, David (2002), “Induced innovation and energy prices,” American Economic Review, 92(1),

       160-180.

Popp, David (2001), “The Effect of New Technology on Energy Consumption,” Resource and

       Energy Economics, 23(3), 215-239.

Roach, Michael and Wesley M. Cohen, (2013). Lens or Prism? Patent Citations as a Measure of

      Knowledge Flows from Public Research. Management Science 59(2):504-525.

      http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1644

Rosenbloom, Joshua L., Donna K. Ginther, Ted Juhl, and Joseph Heppert (2014), “The effects of

       research and development funding on scientific productivity: Academic chemistry 1990-

       2009,” NBER Working Paper #20595.

Schuelke-Leech, Beth-Anne. 2014. Volatility in federal funding of energy R&D. Energy Policy

       67, 943-950.

Söderholm Patrik and Ger Klaassen (2007), “Wind Power in Europe: A Simultaneous Innovation-

       Diffusion Model,” Environmental and Resource Economics, 36, 163-190.



                                              33
Söderholm Patrik and T. Sundqvist (2007), “Empirical challenges in the use of learning curves for

       assessing the economic prospects of renewable energy technologies,” Renewable Energy.

       32, 2559-78.

Thorsten Beck, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh, 2001. New tools

       in comparative political economy: The Database of Political Institutions. 15:1, 165-176

       (September), World Bank Economic Review.

Toole, Andrew A. 2012. The impact of public basic research on industrial innovation: Evidence

       from the pharmaceutical industry. Research Policy 41, 1-12.

Trajtenberg, Manuel (1990), “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of

       Innovations,” RAND Journal of Economics, 20, 172-187.

Verdolini, Elena and Marzio Galeotti. 2011. At home and abroad: An empirical analysis of

       innovation and diffusion in energy technologies. Journal of Environmental Economics and

       Management 61, 119-134.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2012. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press,

       Cambridge, MA.

Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi (2007), “The increasing dominance of teams

       in production of knowledge,” Science, 316, 1036-1039.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu, and Hongyan Ma (2007),

       “Minerva unbound: Knowledge stocks, knowledge flows and new knowledge production,”

       Research Policy, 36(6), 850-863.




                                               34
Figure 1 – Trends in Energy R&D and Publications – All Countries




                                          35
Figure 2 – Trends in Energy R&D and Publications by Country: Solar Energy




                                                         36
Figure 3 – Trends in Energy R&D and Publications by Country: Wind Energy




                                                        37
Figure 4 – Cumulative effect of energy R&D on publications




Figure shows the cumulative effect of energy R&D on publications through year t-x, where x is the year shown on the x-axis. Calculated
using the first differenced model with instrumental variables for contemporary energy R&D.

                                                                 38
Figure 5 – Alternative energy patents over time




Figure shows the total number of patents granted in the U.S. for biofuels, solar, and wind energy.
Patents are dated using their priority year.




                                               39
Figure 6 – Probability of NPL citation over time
A. Annual probability of NPL citation




B. Cumulative probability of NPL citation




                                            40
Figure 7 – Increased probability of NPL citation from additional energy R&D
A. Annual probability of NPL citation




B. Cumulative probability of NPL citation




                                            41
Figure 8 – Marginal effect of R&D per year: Models including R&D squared




Figure shows the marginal effect of energy R&D on publications in year t-x, where x is the year shown on the x-axis. Calculated at
different percentiles of energy R&D spending, using the first differenced model including R&D2 with instrumental variables for
contemporary energy R&D.

                                                               42
Figure 9 – Cumulative effect of R&D: Models including R&D squared




Figure shows the cumulative marginal effect of energy R&D on publications through year t-x, where x is the year shown on the x-axis.
Calculated at different percentiles of energy R&D spending, using the first differenced model including R&D2 with instrumental
variables for contemporary energy R&D.

                                                                43
Figure 10—Number of countries doubling energy R&D per year




Figure shows the number of countries whose energy R&D budget for a given technology is at least double that of the previous year.


                                                                44
Table 1 – Countries included for each technology

                                  Energy       Solar
                     Biofuels    Efficiency   Energy         Wind
 Austria                X             X         X             X
 Canada                 X             X         X             X
 Denmark                X             X                       X
 France                 X             X         X             X
 Germany                X             X         X             X
 Italy                  X             X         X             X
 Japan                  X             X         X             X
 Netherlands            X             X         X             X
 New Zealand                          X
 Norway                X              X        X              X
 Portugal              X              X        X
 Spain                 X              X        X              X
 Sweden                X                       X              X
 Switzerland           X             X         X              X
 United Kingdom        X                       X              X
 United States         X            X          X              X
 TOTAL                 15           14         14             14



Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics for R&D and Publications

 technology           variable                          N          mean       sd    min       max
 biofuels                                R&D           315         25.48    86.02   0.00   1186.90
                      weighted publications            315         35.06    96.38   0.00   1138.25
 energy efficiency                       R&D           294        102.31   216.09   0.01   2149.17
                      weighted publications            294         29.94    55.95   0.00    493.99
 solar energy                            R&D           294         33.49    51.17   0.00    401.70
                      weighted publications            294         74.66   128.47   0.00   1208.84
 wind                                    R&D           294         10.69    17.54   0.00    187.19
                      weighted publications            294         11.83    20.03   0.00    188.20
 Total                                   R&D        1197           42.69   123.79   0.00   2149.17
                    weighted publications           1197           37.82    88.68   0.00   1208.84
NOTES: R&D in millions of 2010 US $




                                                       45
Table 3 – Top 10 publication sources, by technology

 Biofuels                               Energy Efficiency
 United States        4428.62           United States       3753.56
 Peoples R China      1817.09           Peoples R China     1932.32
 India                1279.08           Japan               1308.66
 Brazil                949.75           South Korea          839.05
 Turkey                793.54           United Kingdom       834.05
 Japan                 761.61           Germany              719.78
 United Kingdom        749.06           Canada               634.77
 Canada                735.17           Italy                613.12
 Germany               735.05           Taiwan               545.87
 Spain                 714.40           France               477.72




 Solar Energy                           Wind
 United States        6323.95           United States        916.47
 Peoples R China      5044.19           United Kingdom       571.13
 Japan                4314.37           Denmark              337.15
 Germany              3525.28           Germany              290.77
 South Korea          2415.65           Spain                268.43
 India                2123.81           Peoples R China      255.60
 Taiwan               1506.67           Canada               251.87
 United Kingdom       1409.72           Japan                222.81
 France               1219.91           Greece               200.63
 Spain                1187.10           Turkey               197.62




                                            46
Table 4 – Other variables and data sources
                                                                                        Energy
 Variable                                                     Source        Biofuels   Efficiency    Solar      Wind
 Policy Variables
   Gasoline taxes (2010 US $ per liter)                       IEA              X
   % renewables required by RPS                               OECD-EPAU                               X          X
   Feed-in tariff, solar PV (2010 US $ per kWh)               OECD-EPAU                               X
   Feed-in tariff, wind (2010 US $ per kWh)                   OECD-EPAU                                          X
 Control Variables
   ln(per capita GDP) (2005 US$)                              OECD             X           X          X          X
   Gasoline prices, w/out taxes (2010 US $ per liter)         IEA              X
   Gasoline prices, inc. taxes (2010 US $ per liter)          IEA                          X
   Household electricity price (2010 US$ per MWh)             IEA                          X
   Crude oil proved reserves per capita (million barrels)     EIA/OECDa        X           X
   Natural gas proved reserves per capita (billion cu. ft.)   EIA/OECDa                    X
   Coal production per capita (short tons)                    EIA/OECDa                    X
   % electricity from hydropower                              EIA                                     X          X
   % electricity from nuclear                                 EIA                                     X          X
   growth rate of electricity consumption                     EIA                                     X          X
 Instruments
   Dummy: is executive branch party orientation right-wing    DPI              X           X          X          X
   Dummy: is executive branch party orientation center        DPI              X           X          X          X
   Tax revenue (excluding social security), % of GDP          OECD             X           X          X          X
   General government consumption expenditure, % of GDP       OECD             X           X          X          X
   Government energy R&D: biofuels                            IEA                                     X          X
   Government energy R&D: energy efficiency                   IEA              X                                 X
   Government energy R&D: energy storage                      IEA              X           X
   Government energy R&D: nuclear fusion                      IEA              X
   Government energy R&D: solar energy                        IEA                          X
   Government energy R&D: wind                                IEA              X           X
DPI: Database of Political Institutions 2012 (Beck et al 2001); EIA: US Energy Information Administration; IEA: International
Energy Agency Energy Prices and Taxes Database (IEA 2006); OECD: OECDStat; OECD-EPAU: OECD Renewable Energy Policy
Database (OECD-EPAU 2013) , an update and extension of the dataset originally used in Johnstone et al. (2010).
a
  : Reserve data from Energy Information Administration; population data to calculate per capita values from OECDStat


                                                                47
Table 5 – First-differenced panel regression results: Government R&D
                                    Biofuels                Energy Efficiency             Solar Energy             Wind Energy
                                IV            exog          IV             exog         IV           exog        IV          exog
 RD                         0.152***       0.152***    0.0197***        0.0113**    -0.0267        0.372***   0.0983**     0.124***
                            (0.0153)       (0.0151)    (0.00649)       (0.00524)    (0.276)        (0.0839)   (0.0440)    (0.0246)
 RD(t-1)                    0.376***       0.376***    0.0460***       0.0443***    0.601***       0.663***   0.197***     0.212***
                            (0.0259)       (0.0245)    (0.00675)       (0.00705)    (0.167)         (0.150)   (0.0520)    (0.0462)
 RD(t-2)                    0.429***       0.429***    0.0722***       0.0697***    0.483**         0.331*    0.335***     0.348***
                            (0.0196)       (0.0196)    (0.00886)       (0.00845)    (0.246)         (0.200)   (0.0547)    (0.0549)
 RD(t-3)                    0.00719        0.00721       -0.0128         -0.0185      0.154         0.312**    0.0313       0.0525
                            (0.0719)       (0.0720)     (0.0296)        (0.0294)    (0.144)         (0.127)   (0.0580)    (0.0587)
 RD(t-4)                     0.176**        0.176**       0.0141         0.0190     0.447**        0.601***    0.0263       0.0287
                            (0.0891)       (0.0891)     (0.0253)        (0.0253)    (0.191)         (0.225)   (0.0585)    (0.0575)
 RD(t-5)                      -0.101         -0.100      -0.0303         -0.0324     0.0350          0.116     0.0130       0.0216
                             (0.109)        (0.109)     (0.0255)        (0.0253)    (0.243)         (0.225)   (0.0532)    (0.0523)
 RD(t-6)                     0.0940         0.0942        0.0167        0.00891     0.385**         0.347*     0.0618       0.0639
                             (0.104)        (0.104)     (0.0176)        (0.0165)    (0.194)         (0.186)   (0.0519)    (0.0515)
 RD(t-7)                     0.0585         0.0588     0.000165         0.00361                               0.121***     0.127***
                            (0.0965)       (0.0956)     (0.0229)        (0.0222)                              (0.0451)    (0.0436)
 RD(t-8)                     0.0884         0.0882       -0.0329         -0.0331
                             (0.118)        (0.116)     (0.0255)        (0.0249)
 RD(t-9)                    0.558***       0.558***       0.0381         0.0408
                             (0.160)        (0.162)     (0.0268)        (0.0266)
 RD(t-10)                    0.318**        0.319**    0.0598***       0.0616***
                             (0.152)        (0.151)     (0.0211)        (0.0212)
 Cumulative effects:
 R&D                           2.155***        2.158***      0.191***        0.175***    2.078*** 2.742***    0.883***     0.977***
                               (0.348)         (0.353)       (0.0520)        (0.0511)    (0.599)  (0.573)     (0.225)      (0.202)
 N                                300            300            280             280         280     280          280         280
 AIC                            2351.3          2351.3        2110.7          2108.3      2676.4   2648.1      1766.5       1765.3
 BIC                            2703.2          2703.2        2535.9          2533.5      2999.9   2971.5      2115.5       2114.3
 F RD 1st stage                  32.51                         18.01                       11.40                38.49
 Hansen J p-value                0.293                         0.183                       0.491                0.502
 Endog. test p-value             0.979                         0.240                      0.0459                0.258
 Standard errors in parentheses. All models use robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation.
 *: significant at 10% level. **: significant at 5% level. ***: Significant at 1% level.

                                                                        48
Table 6 – First differenced panel regression results: Controls
                                Biofuels            Energy Efficiency          Solar Energy          Wind Energy
                           IV              exog     IV           exog        IV          exog      IV         exog
 Cumulative effects:
 R&D                    2.155***       2.158***   0.191***    0.175***     2.078***   2.742***   0.883***   0.977***
                        (0.348)        (0.353)    (0.0520)    (0.0511)     (0.599)     (0.573)   (0.225)    (0.202)
 lnGDP                   -6.353         -6.549     53.815      60.706     -290.964*   -217.063   -47.685    -48.347
                        (74.85)        (74.97)     (73.49)     (72.62)     (174.4)     (162.4)   (33.00)    (33.09)
 gas price no taxes    240.449***     240.23***
                        (81.66)        (81.56)
 gas tax                 -3.763         -3.752
                        (25.22)        (25.21)
 gas price                                          -16.821     -17.865
                                                    (19.50)     (19.66)
 oil per capita        7211.473       7235.793    -7884.717   -9278.706
                       (10175.8)      (10120.7)   (17329.9)   (17305.9)
 gas per capita                                   -1413.198   -1245.722
                                                   (2200.3)    (2181.3)
 coal per capita                                    -10.85*     -12.21*
                                                    (6.385)     (6.566)
 electric price                                      0.099       0.107
                                                    (0.121)     (0.122)
 grow_elec                                                                  -5.258      -3.77     -0.872     -0.802
                                                                           (5.688)     (5.039)   (0.920)    (0.929)
 % hydro                                                                    0.629       1.627     1.043       0.98
                                                                           (2.065)     (1.788)   (0.718)    (0.737)
 % nuclear                                                                 -4.819*     -4.592*    -0.499     -0.421
                                                                           (2.493)     (2.454)   (0.678)    (0.681)
 FIT wind                                                                                         9.827     12.061
                                                                                                 (25.86)    (26.07)
 FIT pv                                                                    18.874      39.523
                                                                           (60.28)     (53.99)
 REC levels                                                               15.092**    13.524**    2.133      2.102
                                                                           (7.234)     (6.352)   (1.376)    (1.352)




                                                                 49
Table 7 – Share of articles receiving NPL citations

                          Biofuels                          Solar                  Wind
                                 % with                       % with                 % with
                                  NPL                          NPL                    NPL
                          N      citation              N      citation        N      citation
 USA
       1991-1995      168.8       4.1%          618.0          4.2%         56.3        8.9%
       1996-2000      318.1       7.8%          669.3          6.7%         96.3        4.2%
       2001-2005      408.9       4.9%          981.4          4.4%        163.4        6.1%
       2006-2011     3532.9       0.7%         4055.2          0.6%        600.6        0.3%
            Total    4428.6       1.7%         6323.9          2.2%        916.5        2.3%
 foreign
       1991-1995      630.2       0.6%         2054.0          2.8%        264.7        3.0%
       1996-2000      959.9       1.2%         3669.7          4.2%        406.8        3.2%
       2001-2005     1783.1       1.1%         6172.6          2.3%        758.7        2.2%
       2006-2011    12847.1       0.2%        23055.8          0.2%       3268.4        0.2%
            Total   16220.4       0.4%        34952.1          1.2%       4698.5        0.9%

Note: Table uses weighted shares, weighting each article by the share of U.S. and foreign authors



Table 8 – Time to first NPL citation hazard regression

                                            full sample                            articles from 2000 or later
                               Biofuels        Solar            Wind          Biofuels          Solar       Wind
 citation lag                 0.706***       0.333***         0.531***        1.359***         0.691***    0.973**
                               (0.142)       (0.0500)          (0.157)         (0.326)          (0.109)    (0.480)
 (citation lag)^2             -0.0249***    -0.0167***       -0.0191***      -0.0682***    -0.0412***      -0.0562
                              (0.00754)      (0.00331)        (0.00731)       (0.0231)     (0.00866)       (0.0377)
 Multiple country dummy        -0.0301        -0.0294         -1.234**        -0.0478          -0.0821     -1.775*
                               (0.282)        (0.123)          (0.626)         (0.322)          (0.151)    (1.058)
 Constant                     -8.987***      -7.500***        -7.353***       -11.22***        -8.621***   -8.283***
                               (0.948)        (0.597)          (1.096)         (1.324)          (0.659)    (1.655)
 N                             55790          164957           21895           35568            95725       13670
 AIC                           1407.3         4306.9            831.2          881.6            2444.9      487.3
 BIC                           3827.1         6930.5           2709.8          2170.4           3780.1      1525.5
 log likelihood                -432.6         -1891.5          -180.6          -288.8          -1081.5      -105.6
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Standard errors in parentheses. All standard errors clustered by article.
All regressions include publication year x country fixed effects, with publications from 2001 in
the US as the base category.




                                                       50
Table 9 -- Tests for diminishing returns to government R&D

                                            Energy          Solar          Wind                           Energy        Solar     Wind
                              Biofuels     Efficiency      Energy         Energy           Biofuels      Efficiency    Energy    Energy
 Cumulative effects:
       R&D                     0.168       0.093          -1.386*       0.975               1.39***          0.21***   1.694     0.518*
                              (0.840)      (0.155)        (0.799)       (0.623)             (0.439)      (0.0614)      (1.066)   (0.275)
       R&Dsq                 0.0189***     0.0003         0.0113***     -0.0062
                             (0.00670)     (0.000237)     (0.00314)     (0.00843)
       R&Dx100%                                                                            3.461***          0.177     -0.358    1.715***
                                                                                            (1.189)          (0.400)   (2.725)   (0.437)
 N                              300        280            280           280                   300             280       280        280
 AIC                          2263.2       2171.6         2542.5        1730.7              2300.5           2101.9    2583.7    1717.7
 BIC                          2655.8       2636.9         2891.5        2108.7              2693.1           2567.2    2932.6    2095.7
 F RD 1st stage                162.3          237.4       68.98         114.9               40.91            33.11     4.411      45.95
 F RDsq 1st stage             3043.6         1876.7       452.6         777.4
 F RDx100% 1st stage                                                                         42.3            22.55      56.3      30.25
 Hansen J p-value              0.143         0.0135       0.0632        0.263               0.254            0.232     0.257      0.491
 Endog. test p-value           0.689       0.527          0.477         0.845               0.917            0.0557    0.415      0.262
 Robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                                  51
Table 10 –Does the quality of publications change?


                                     (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
                                               Energy                                         Energy
 Biofuels                          Biofuels   Efficiency    Solar      Wind      Biofuels    Efficiency    Solar      Wind
 ln(publications, cited year)      -0.170**    -0.186*     0.0321     -0.167*    -0.0351      -0.0451     -0.220     -0.263*
                                   (0.0537)   (0.0894)     (0.0774)   (0.0784)   (0.0803)     (0.121)     (0.153)    (0.112)
 ln(publications, cited   year)2                                                 -0.0136*     -0.0312     0.0300*    0.0221
                                                                                 (0.00667)   (0.0174)     (0.0132)   (0.0177)
 multicountry                      0.228***   0.220***     0.167***   0.238***   0.227***    0.218***     0.168***   0.238***
                                   (0.0347)   (0.0595)     (0.0337)   (0.0645)   (0.0347)    (0.0596)     (0.0335)   (0.0644)
 cited year fixed effects            Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
 country fixed effects               Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
 N                                  13347      10163        27697      4232       13347       10163        27697      4232
 log likelihood                 -32424.9 -22919.8 -74139.3 -8534.9                  -32421.9 -22917.0 -74128.9 -8534.2
 Dependent variable is total citations received by each article after publication. For articles with authors from multiple
 countries, each country/article observation is weighted by the share that country in the total number of authors.
 Standard error, clustered by article, in parentheses
 * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                                          52
                        Appendix A: Web of Science Keyword Searches

       Our publication data were provided as a custom database from Thomson Reuters, created

using keyword searches in Web of Science developed by the researchers in consultation with

experts at Thomson Reuters. As noted in the text, we devised searches that would be narrow, so

as to avoid irrelevant articles, as such articles would respond differently to alternative energy R&D

trends and thus bias our results downward. Thus, for each category, we devised keyword searches

that are refined by focusing on specific subject categories in the Web of Science database




                                                                                                  53
Biofuels

 #11 TS = ("biomass" NEAR/5 "electricit*" OR "biomass fuel*" OR
     "biomass heat*" OR "biomass energy" OR "Bio feedstock*" OR
     "biofeedstock*" OR "Hydrotreated vegetable oil*" or "lignocellulosic
     biomass*" OR "cellulosic ethanol*" or "biomass to liquid*" OR "bio
     synthetic gas*" OR "algae-based fuel*" OR "landfill gas*" or
     "Biohydrogen production*" or "Biological hydrogen production*" or
     "bio energy" or "bioenergy" or "biofuel*" or "bio fuel*" or "biodiesel*"
     or "bio diesel*" or "biogas*" or "bio gas*" OR "Bio syngas*" or "bio
     oil" or "bio ethanol*" or "bioethanol*" OR "fuel ethanol*" OR
     "Biomethanol*" OR "bio methanol*") NOT TS = ("co-combust*" or
     "cocombust*" or "co-fir*" or "cofir*" or "multi-combust*" or
     "multicombust*" or "multi-fir*" or "multifir*" or "fuel cell*" or
     "biofuel cell*")
     Refined by: Web of Science Categories=( ENERGY FUELS OR
     SPECTROSCOPY OR BIOTECHNOLOGY APPLIED
     MICROBIOLOGY OR ENTOMOLOGY OR ENGINEERING
     CHEMICAL OR ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES OR POLYMER
     SCIENCE OR AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING OR
     ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENTAL OR GEOSCIENCES
     MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR CHEMISTRY MULTIDISCIPLINARY
     OR TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY OR FOOD
     SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY OR CHEMISTRY PHYSICAL OR
     CHEMISTRY APPLIED OR GENETICS HEREDITY OR
     BIOCHEMISTRY MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OR BIOLOGY OR
     WATER RESOURCES OR THERMODYNAMICS OR CHEMISTRY
     ORGANIC OR AGRONOMY OR PHYSICS ATOMIC
     MOLECULAR CHEMICAL OR GEOCHEMISTRY GEOPHYSICS
     OR PLANT SCIENCES OR ENGINEERING MECHANICAL OR
     CHEMISTRY ANALYTICAL OR MULTIDISCIPLINARY
     SCIENCES OR METEOROLOGY ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE BIOMATERIALS OR AGRICULTURE
     MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY OR
     MICROBIOLOGY OR ECOLOGY OR MECHANICS OR
     ENGINEERING INDUSTRIAL OR FORESTRY OR
     HORTICULTURE OR BIOCHEMICAL RESEARCH METHODS OR
     NANOSCIENCE NANOTECHNOLOGY OR ENGINEERING
     MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR SOIL SCIENCE OR MATERIALS
     SCIENCE PAPER WOOD OR METALLURGY METALLURGICAL
     ENGINEERING OR MATERIALS SCIENCE TEXTILES OR
     ELECTROCHEMISTRY OR ENGINEERING CIVIL OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE MULTIDISCIPLINARY )
     Timespan=1991-2010. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED.
     Lemmatization=Off

                                                                                54
Energy Efficiency

Note: The energy efficiency search strategy uses the three separate searches below, and excludes
publications included in other energy categories,

 #1   TS = ("waste heat" NEAR/3 (recover* OR convert* OR utilize* OR
      use)) OR TS = ("district heat*" OR "district cool*") OR TS = (("LED"
      OR "light emitting diode") NEAR/1 (lighting OR lightbulb* OR "light
      bulb*" OR lamp* OR “solid state light*” OR “solid state lamp*”)) OR
      TS = (("CFL" OR "compact fluorescent") NEAR/1 (lighting OR
      lightbulb* OR "light bulb*" OR lamp*)) OR TS = "solid state light*"
 #2   (TS = ((electric OR hybrid OR “electric drive” OR “hybrid drive”)
      NEAR/0 (vehicle* OR automobile* OR "auto" OR "autos" OR"car"
      OR "cars")) NOT TS = (“fuel cell*” OR “fuel-cell*” OR “Hybrid Car-
      Parrinello”))
      Refined by: [excluding] Web of Science Categories=( ASTRONOMY
      ASTROPHYSICS OR DERMATOLOGY OR INFECTIOUS
      DISEASES OR LITERATURE BRITISH ISLES OR MEDICINE
      GENERAL INTERNAL OR PHARMACOLOGY PHARMACY OR
      HISTORY PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE OR SPECTROSCOPY OR
      VETERINARY SCIENCES OR CLINICAL NEUROLOGY )
      Timespan=1991-2010. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED.
      Lemmatization=Off




                                                                                             55
#3   (TS=((energy OR fuel OR gas* OR electric* OR petrol*) NEAR/1
     (consum* OR use OR using OR usage OR burn*) NEAR/1 (reduc* OR
     less OR lower OR decreas*)) OR TS=((energy OR fuel OR gas* OR
     petrol) NEAR/1 (efficien* OR economy OR mileage OR productivity)
     NEAR/1 (improv* OR increas* OR better OR greater OR more)) OR
     TS=((energy OR fuel OR gas* OR electric* OR petrol*) NEAR/1
     (saving* OR save OR saves OR saved))) NOT TS = ("fuel cell*" OR
     “fuel-cell*”)
     Refined by: [excluding] Web of Science Categories=(
     ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES OR FOOD SCIENCE
     TECHNOLOGY OR ZOOLOGY OR NUTRITION DIETETICS OR
     PHYSIOLOGY OR BIOCHEMISTRY MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OR
     BIOLOGY OR METEOROLOGY ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES OR
     CARDIAC CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEMS OR ASTRONOMY
     ASTROPHYSICS OR MATHEMATICS APPLIED OR ROBOTICS )
     AND Web of Science Categories=( ENERGY FUELS OR
     ENGINEERING CHEMICAL OR ENGINEERING ELECTRICAL
     ELECTRONIC OR ENGINEERING MECHANICAL OR
     THERMODYNAMICS OR ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES OR
     CONSTRUCTION BUILDING TECHNOLOGY OR MATERIALS
     SCIENCE MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR ENGINEERING
     ENVIRONMENTAL OR METALLURGY METALLURGICAL
     ENGINEERING OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS OR COMPUTER
     SCIENCE INFORMATION SYSTEMS OR COMPUTER SCIENCE
     HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE OR COMPUTER SCIENCE
     THEORY METHODS OR TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE
     TECHNOLOGY OR ENGINEERING MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE PAPER WOOD OR AGRICULTURAL
     ENGINEERING OR AUTOMATION CONTROL SYSTEMS OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE CERAMICS OR COMPUTER SCIENCE
     SOFTWARE ENGINEERING OR MINING MINERAL
     PROCESSING OR ENGINEERING INDUSTRIAL OR COMPUTER
     SCIENCE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OR AGRONOMY OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE COMPOSITES OR MATERIALS SCIENCE
     TEXTILES OR OPERATIONS RESEARCH MANAGEMENT
     SCIENCE OR ENGINEERING MARINE OR ENGINEERING
     OCEAN OR URBAN STUDIES )
     Databases=SCI-EXPANDED Timespan=1991-2010
     Lemmatization=Off




                                                                        56
Solar Energy

The solar energy search combines searches for specific types of solar energy (e.g. solar PV) and a
more general search strategy:

 Solar Thermal Power
 #1 (TS = (solar NEAR/2 thermoelectr*) OR TS = (solar NEAR/2 “power
       plant”) OR TS = (“concentrat* solar” NEAR/2 power) OR TS= (“solar
       thermal” NEAR/2 (power OR electric*)) OR TS=(parabolic* NEAR/2
       trough*) OR TS=((parabolic NEAR/2 dish*) AND solar) OR TS =
       (stirling NEAR/2 dish*) OR TS=((Fresnel NEAR/2 (reflector* OR
       lens*)) AND solar)) NOT (TS = (cell* OR photovoltaic* OR PV) OR
       TS = (hydrogen NEAR/1 (generat* or product*)) OR TS = (battery OR
       batteries) OR TS = (storage OR store OR storing))
       Refined by: [excluding] Web of Science Categories=( ENGINEERING
       AEROSPACE OR ASTRONOMY ASTROPHYSICS )
       Timespan=1991-2010. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED.
       Lemmatization=Off
 #2 TS=(solar NEAR/2 tower) NOT (TS = (cell* OR photovoltaic* OR
       PV) OR TS = (hydrogen NEAR/1 (generat* or product*)) OR TS =
       (battery OR batteries) OR TS = (storage OR store OR storing))
       Refined by: [excluding] Web of Science Categories=( ASTRONOMY
       ASTROPHYSICS OR NUCLEAR SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY OR
       METEOROLOGY ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES )
       Timespan=1991-2010. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED.
       Lemmatization=Off
 Solar Photovoltaic
 #3 TS = ("photovoltaic energ*" OR "solar cell*" OR "photovoltaic power
       *" OR "photovoltaic cell*" OR "photovoltaic solar energy*") NOT
       (TS = (hydrogen NEAR/1 (generat* or product*)) OR TS = (battery
       OR batteries) OR TS = (storage OR store OR storing))




                                                                                               57
Solar General
#4 TS = (“solar panel*” OR “solar array*” OR “solar resource*” OR
      “solar potential” OR “solar energy” OR “solar collector*”) NOT (#5
      OR #8 OR #9 OR TS = (hydrogen NEAR/1 (generat* or product*))
      OR TS = (battery OR batteries) OR TS = (storage OR store OR
      storing))
      Refined by: Web of Science Categories=( AUTOMATION
      CONTROL SYSTEMS OR CHEMISTRY ANALYTICAL OR
      CHEMISTRY INORGANIC NUCLEAR OR CHEMISTRY
      MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR CHEMISTRY ORGANIC OR
      CHEMISTRY PHYSICAL OR CONSTRUCTION BUILDING
      TECHNOLOGY OR ELECTROCHEMISTRY OR ENERGY FUELS
      OR ENGINEERING CIVIL OR ENGINEERING ELECTRICAL
      ELECTRONIC OR ENGINEERING MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR
      ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES OR IMAGING SCIENCE
      PHOTOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY OR MATERIALS SCIENCE
      CERAMICS OR MATERIALS SCIENCE COATINGS FILMS OR
      MATERIALS SCIENCE MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR MECHANICS
      OR METALLURGY METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING OR
      MINING MINERAL PROCESSING OR NANOSCIENCE
      NANOTECHNOLOGY OR OPTICS OR PHYSICS APPLIED OR
      PHYSICS CONDENSED MATTER OR PHYSICS NUCLEAR OR
      POLYMER SCIENCE OR THERMODYNAMICS OR WATER
      RESOURCES ) AND [excluding] Web of Science Categories=(
      METEOROLOGY ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES OR
      ENGINEERING AEROSPACE OR ASTRONOMY
      ASTROPHYSICS)
      Timespan=1991-2010. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED.
      Lemmatization=Off




                                                                           58
Wind Energy

#1   TS = ("wind power" OR "wind energy" OR "wind turbine*" OR "wind
     farm*" OR "wind park*" OR "wind plant*") NOT TS = (battery OR
     batteries OR storage OR store OR storing OR "hydrogen production*"
     OR "wind" NEAR "hydrogen" OR "grid integration*" OR "load
     management" OR "offshore" NEAR/5 ("connect*" OR "link*" OR
     "electric*" OR "grid*"))
     Refined by: Web of Science Categories=( ENERGY FUELS OR
     MATERIALS SCIENCE COMPOSITES OR ENGINEERING
     ELECTRICAL ELECTRONIC OR ORNITHOLOGY OR
     ENGINEERING MECHANICAL OR ENVIRONMENTAL
     SCIENCES OR COMPUTER SCIENCE ARTIFICIAL
     INTELLIGENCE OR MECHANICS OR MATERIALS SCIENCE
     CHARACTERIZATION TESTING OR ENGINEERING CIVIL OR
     PHYSICS MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR THERMODYNAMICS OR
     STATISTICS PROBABILITY OR MATHEMATICS
     INTERDISCIPLINARY APPLICATIONS OR METEOROLOGY
     ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES OR ENGINEERING MARINE OR
     ENGINEERING MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR ECOLOGY OR
     METALLURGY METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING OR
     AUTOMATION CONTROL SYSTEMS OR INSTRUMENTS
     INSTRUMENTATION OR MATERIALS SCIENCE
     MULTIDISCIPLINARY OR MULTIDISCIPLINARY SCIENCES OR
     BIOLOGY OR PHYSICS APPLIED OR COMPUTER SCIENCE
     THEORY METHODS OR ENGINEERING AEROSPACE OR
     CONSTRUCTION BUILDING TECHNOLOGY OR REMOTE
     SENSING OR ENGINEERING OCEAN OR OPERATIONS
     RESEARCH MANAGEMENT SCIENCE OR ACOUSTICS OR
     COMPUTER SCIENCE INTERDISCIPLINARY APPLICATIONS
     OR MARINE FRESHWATER BIOLOGY OR ENGINEERING
     INDUSTRIAL OR ZOOLOGY OR PHYSICS MATHEMATICAL OR
     MATHEMATICS APPLIED ) AND [excluding] Web of Science
     Categories=( ASTRONOMY ASTROPHYSICS OR GEOSCIENCES
     MULTIDISCIPLINARY )
     Databases=SCI-EXPANDED Timespan=1991-2010
     Lemmatization=Off




                                                                          59
Appendix B: Results without European Union fixed effects
        To account for unreported energy R&D support from the European Union to its member

countries, the results in the text include separate year fixed effects for EU countries. Table B1 of

this appendix compares the results from the first-differenced instrumental variables model with

and without the EU- specific fixed effects for the R&D coefficients, and Table B2 compares the

results for the controls.

        Dechezlepretre and Popp (2015) report that the EU’s share of renewable energy R&D

funding is small, so that unaccounted for EU spending is unlikely to be a major factor in scientific

productivity. For example, EU RD&D investments dedicated to the six technologies covered by

the EU Strategic Energy Technology Plan (wind, solar (photovoltaics and concentrated solar

power), electricity grids, bioenergy, carbon capture and storage, fuel cells and hydrogen and

nuclear fission) accounted for just 11 percent of public R&D spending on these technologies in

2010. Tables B1 and B2 confirm that the effect of any omitted EU-wide R&D is minimal, as the

results are virtually the same when excluding the EU-specific year effects. The cumulative effects

of energy R&D range from 6 to 15 percent higher without the EU-specific year trends, which is

consistent with the expected bias, assuming that EU funding follows similar trends as country-

level funding. F-tests for the joint significance of all EU-specific year fixed effects fail to reject

the null hypothesis for all technologies except wind. Nonetheless, to avoid any bias from

unreported EU-wide energy R&D spending, the results in the main text include EU-specific year

fixed effects.




                                                                                                   60
Table B1 – Effect of EU-specific year effects on first-differenced IV panel regression results: Government R&D
                                   Biofuels                Energy Efficiency             Solar Energy               Wind Energy
                          EU x year        no EU       EU x year        no EU      EU x year       no EU      EU x year      no EU
 RD                        0.152***       0.159***     0.0197***      0.0197***     -0.0267         0.00768   0.0983**     0.0956**
                           (0.0153)         (0.0178)   (0.00649)       (0.00688)    (0.276)         (0.313)    (0.0440)      (0.0469)
 RD(t-1)                   0.376***       0.361***     0.0460***      0.0442***     0.601***      0.609***     0.197***     0.196***
                           (0.0259)         (0.0296)   (0.00675)       (0.00764)    (0.167)         (0.216)    (0.0520)      (0.0571)
 RD(t-2)                   0.429***       0.397***     0.0722***      0.0732***     0.483**          0.566*    0.335***     0.338***
                           (0.0196)         (0.0229)   (0.00886)       (0.00965)    (0.246)         (0.301)    (0.0547)      (0.0635)
 RD(t-3)                   0.00719            0.0726    -0.0128          -0.0153      0.154           0.141     0.0313         0.0412
                           (0.0719)         (0.0789)    (0.0296)        (0.0323)    (0.144)         (0.172)    (0.0580)      (0.0613)
 RD(t-4)                    0.176**       0.294**        0.0141           0.0105    0.447**          0.390*     0.0263         0.0222
                           (0.0891)          (0.121)    (0.0253)        (0.0273)    (0.191)         (0.220)    (0.0585)      (0.0662)
 RD(t-5)                     -0.101          -0.0270    -0.0303          -0.0132     0.0350           0.136     0.0130        0.00634
                            (0.109)          (0.118)    (0.0255)        (0.0284)    (0.243)         (0.303)    (0.0532)      (0.0594)
 RD(t-6)                    0.0940             0.139     0.0167           0.0149    0.385**          0.374*     0.0618         0.0942
                            (0.104)          (0.127)    (0.0176)        (0.0182)    (0.194)         (0.219)    (0.0519)      (0.0596)
 RD(t-7)                    0.0585            0.0587   0.000165           0.0136                               0.121***     0.145***
                           (0.0965)          (0.121)    (0.0229)        (0.0246)                               (0.0451)      (0.0510)
 RD(t-8)                    0.0884           0.00444    -0.0329          -0.0355
                            (0.118)          (0.147)    (0.0255)        (0.0280)
 RD(t-9)                   0.558***         0.559***     0.0381           0.0426
                            (0.160)          (0.209)    (0.0268)        (0.0318)
 RD(t-10)                   0.318**           0.365*   0.0598***       0.0646***
                            (0.152)          (0.214)    (0.0211)        (0.0192)
 Cumulative effects:
 R&D                           2.155***          2.383***    0.191***         0.219***   2.078***  2.223***   0.883***      0.939***
                               (0.348)            (0.444)    (0.0520)         (0.0535)   (0.599)    (0.727)   (0.225)        (0.246)
 N                                300                300        280                280      280         280      280            280
 AIC                            2351.3            2367.0      2110.7            2099.1    2676.4     2682.1    1766.5         1760.1
 EU x year p-value               0.284                         0.458                       0.155               0.0220
 F RD 1st stage                  32.51             29.82       18.01             20.31     11.40      13.44     38.49          32.07
 Hansen J p-value                0.293             0.411       0.183             0.197     0.491      0.632     0.502          0.540
 Endog. test p-value             0.979             0.737       0.240             0.267    0.0459      0.124     0.258          0.192
 Standard errors in parentheses. All models use robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation.
 *: significant at 10% level. **: significant at 5% level. ***: Significant at 1% level.
                                                                                                                                        61
Table B2 – Effect of EU-specific year effects on first-differenced IV panel regression results: Controls
                                   Biofuels               Energy Efficiency             Solar Energy              Wind Energy
                              IV              exog        IV           exog           IV          exog          IV         exog
 Cumulative effects:
 R&D                       2.155***        2.383***    0.191***       0.219***     2.078***       2.223***    0.883***    0.939***
                           (0.348)          (0.444)    (0.0520)       (0.0535)     (0.599)         (0.727)    (0.225)      (0.246)
 lnGDP                      -6.353          -41.66      53.815          64.658    -290.964*       -231.318    -47.685      -40.879
                           (74.85)         (87.24)      (73.49)        (71.41)     (174.4)         (175.7)    (33.00)      (34.85)
 gas price no taxes       240.449***     293.545***
                           (81.66)          (94.19)
 gas tax                    -3.763            -8.82
                           (25.22)          (28.14)
 gas price                                              -16.821         -10.405
                                                        (19.50)         (21.33)
 oil per capita            7211.473      5833.289     -7884.717      9947.448
                           (10175.8)      (8473.9)    (17329.9)       (13063.0)
 gas per capita                                       -1413.198     -1353.485
                                                       (2200.3)        (2104.4)
 coal per capita                                        -10.85*          -7.408
                                                        (6.385)         (7.198)
 electric price                                          0.099            0.108
                                                        (0.121)         (0.108)
 grow_elec                                                                           -5.258          2.215     -0.872       -0.033
                                                                                    (5.688)        (4.959)    (0.920)      (0.888)
 % hydro                                                                              0.629          1.102      1.043        1.236
                                                                                    (2.065)        (2.335)    (0.718)      (0.794)
 % nuclear                                                                          -4.819*         -1.843     -0.499       -0.163
                                                                                    (2.493)        (2.551)    (0.678)      (0.677)
 FIT wind                                                                                                       9.827       16.495
                                                                                                              (25.86)      (27.57)
 FIT pv                                                                                   18.874    -70.981
                                                                                          (60.28)   (66.22)
  REC levels                                                                             15.092**     7.073    2.133         1.753
                                                                                          (7.234)   (7.325)   (1.376)      (1.440)
 Standard errors in parentheses. All models use robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation.
 *: significant at 10% level. **: significant at 5% level. ***: Significant at 1% level.
                                                                                                                                     62
Appendix C: Determining the Optimal Lag Length

         As noted in the text, we employ several strategies to identify the appropriate lag length.

First, as is common in the literature, the primary criterion is finding the minimum AIC statistic

across a range of models (e.g. Crespi and Geuna, 2008). 19 One complication is that our model

includes not only lagged values of the R&D variables, but also of several control variables. These

controls are often individually insignificant. Thus, we also run models including only a single year

of the control and policy variables, to see if this changes the recommended number of lags. We

initially examine models including up to ten lags of R&D. Adding additional lags is problematic

when the model includes renewable energy policy variables as only two countries in our sample

adopted renewable energy certificates before 2003, so that estimates of the lagged value of the

REC variable beyond eight years are unreliable. However, adding up to 11 years of lags is possible

for biofuels and energy efficiency. 20

         In addition, even collinearity among the R&D variables themselves may cause the AIC

statistic to favor smaller lags. Thus, we also run both the full and single control models using a

polynomial distributed lag model (PDL). The PDL models provide similar results to the main first

differenced models, but by requiring fewer parameters to estimate multiple lags, they offer the

potential for lower standard errors on the R&D coefficients. Table C1 presents the AIC statistics.

         In some cases, these strategies recommend different lag lengths. Thus, we also consider

the cumulative long-run effect of R&D when evaluating the lag length. These long-run effects,



19
   Alternatively, we also calculated the BIC statistic for each model, which includes a greater penalty for including
irrelevant variables. As a result, collinearity among the lagged R&D values often leads the BIC to recommend
fewer lags than the AIC. However, in the case of collinear lagged R&D values, we can still estimate long-run
effects that are jointly significant, even when individual year coefficients are estimated imprecisely. Moreover,
leaving out relevant lags would lead to omitted variable bias. Thus, I focus on the findings of the AIC statistic in the
discussion that follows.
20
   The first US states to adopt REC limits do so in 1998, and Italy adopts an REC limit in 2002. Most states first
limits appear in the data in 2003.
                                                                                                                     63
illustrated in Figure 4, tend to be similar across the various estimation techniques, so we focus on

the results using first differenced instrumental variables. When the AIC statistic conflicts across

models, we use the pattern of cumulative effects as an additional guide. In particular, we consider

the lag length at which the cumulative effect of government energy R&D spending levels out, as

this is evidence that all relevant lags have been included.

        Turning first to biofuels, we see relatively consistent recommendations across models.

Using the AIC criterion we find an optimal lag length of ten years using the full model and eleven

years using a single year of controls. The PDL results suggest an optimal lag length of nine years

in the full model and ten when using a single year of controls. As the AIC is lowest for the full

FD model, which has an optimal lag of ten years, I use a lag length of ten years for analyzing the

biofuels results.

        The results for wind demonstrate the potential advantages of the PDL model and for

looking at the results of models with a single year of controls. Using the standard first differenced

model, the AIC suggests an optimal lag length of just two years. Using just a single year of

controls, the AIC suggests using seven years of lagged data. In contrast, the PDL model suggests

ten year lags in the full model and four lags when using a single year of controls. This difference,

however is not caused by adding lags of energy R&D, but rather lags of the tradable permit policy

variable, which becomes large and significant beginning with the ninth lagged variable. However,

beyond nine years of lags, this coefficient is identified off of just one country, as only the United

States had renewable credit trading before 2002. Thus, we turn to the cumulative effect of energy

R&D to help sort through the options. In all four models (FD, FD single control, PDL, PDL single

control), the cumulative effect grows significantly between years 6 and 7 before leveling off,

suggesting a lag of seven years (as suggested by the FD model with a single year of controls) is

                                                                                                  64
appropriate. Indeed, the eighth and ninth lags of energy R&D are insignificant and close to zero.

Thus, I use a lag length of seven years for analyzing the wind energy results.

        For solar energy, shorter lags appear to suffice, although the choice using the AIC statistic

varies across models. In the FD model, the AIC statistic is minimized with just four lags in the

full model and with nine lags when using just a single year of controls. In contrast, the AIC

suggests ten years of lags in the PDL model with full controls, and eight when using just a single

year of controls.

        Thus, again we turn to the estimated cumulative effects for more information. Here, we

see a large increase in the cumulative effect between years three and four, and again between years

five and six. While the individual coefficient for year t-6 is only significant at the 10 percent level,

both the large size of the coefficient, as well as the continued growth in the cumulative effect

through year six, suggests that six years should be included in the solar energy models. There is

little value to adding additional lags of energy R&D in the PDL models. Indeed, results in year

10 seem to be largely driven by changes in the REC variable, as the sign of the effect of R&D

becomes negative in the model with full controls. In contrast, the cumulative effect of energy

R&D remains level beyond year 6 in the model using a single year of control variables.

        The appropriate lag length is more difficult to identify in the case of energy efficiency, as

the effect of energy R&D itself is smaller. In the FD model, the AIC statistic suggest a lag of two

years using the full model but ten years when using a single year of controls. In the PDL model,

the AIC is minimized using a lag of five years using a full set of controls, and four lagged years

with a single year of controls. Given these divergent results, we turn to the cumulative effect of

energy R&D. The cumulative effect levels off after year six before rising again beginning in year




                                                                                                     65
9. Among models with 9 to 11 lags, the AIC is minimized in the main FD model when using 10

lags. Thus, I use ten years of lagged R&D when evaluating energy efficiency.




                                                                                       66
Table C1 – AIC statistic for alternative number of years of lagged R&D
 Biofuels                                                       Energy Efficiency
                        FDIV                 PDL IV                                    FDIV                 PDL IV
                  all        single      all       single                        all        single      all       single
                controls      year    controlsc     yearb                      controls      year    controlsa     yearc
 AIC lag 1:     2811.9      2806.3                              AIC lag 1:     2183.4       2173
 AIC lag 2:     2406.5      2400.5                              AIC lag 2:     2060.2      2045.4
 AIC lag 3:      2408       2402.4                              AIC lag 3:     2071.4      2047.3
 AIC lag 4:     2401.2      2401.9     2401.2     2435.8        AIC lag 4:     2079.9      2047.8    2076.7      2047.8
 AIC lag 5:     2397.2      2403.8     2425.6     2434.8        AIC lag 5:     2083.9      2044.7    2071.9      2054.0
 AIC lag 6:     2401.6       2399      2425.6     2428.4        AIC lag 6:     2091.5      2046.8    2086.6      2054.4
 AIC lag 7:     2394.1      2400.7     2421.9     2428.5        AIC lag 7:      2098        2049     2096.9      2062.5
 AIC lag 8:     2378.3      2400.2     2413.7     2427.5        AIC lag 8:     2106.5      2049.2    2093.6      2069.7
 AIC lag 9:      2356       2372.6     2388.8     2417.5        AIC lag 9:     2114.7      2048.4    2114.4      2067.9
 AIC lag 10:    2351.3      2356.9     2389.8     2397.2        AIC lag 10:    2110.7      2038.6    2130.9      2062.4
 AIC lag 11:    2351.5      2352.3     2408.2     2420.1        AIC lag 11:    2114.6      2039.2    2133.7      2063.4
 Solar Energy                                                   Wind Energy
                        FDIV                 PDL IV                                    FDIV                 PDL IV
                  all        single      all       single                        all        single      all       single
                controls      year    controlsb     yeara                      controls      year    controlsb     yearc
 AIC lag 1:     2742.8      2732.5                              AIC lag 1:     1839.5      1844.9
 AIC lag 2:     2704.1      2688.2                              AIC lag 2:     1738.7      1742.5
 AIC lag 3:     2714.2      2689.9                              AIC lag 3:     1748.1       1744
 AIC lag 4:     2672.9      2641.2     2652.6     2632.9        AIC lag 4:     1750.8       1745     1764.3      1745.0
 AIC lag 5:     2674.6      2643.2     2657.3     2636.6        AIC lag 5:     1756.5      1746.9    1771.8      1758.3
 AIC lag 6:     2676.4      2640.4     2654.2     2625.5        AIC lag 6:     1763.3      1747.8    1773.2      1765.3
 AIC lag 7:     2676.8       2641      2644.7     2624.6        AIC lag 7:     1766.5      1737.3    1770.6      1760.5
 AIC lag 8:     2682.4      2640.3     2638.9     2623.7        AIC lag 8:     1777.1      1739.3    1788.2      1767.7
 AIC lag 9:     2689.1      2636.9     2631.8     2626.0        AIC lag 9:     1747.7      1740.2    1758.6      1768.7
 AIC lag 10:    2760.2      2639.4     2623.8     2626.0        AIC lag 10:    1746.3      1737.7    1741.3      1768.7
   nd                         rd                   th
a: 2 degree polynomial; b: 3 degree polynomial; c: 4 degree polynomial
                                                                                                                           67
Appendix D: Polynomial Distributed Lag Results

       The following tables present results using the polynomial distributed lag (PDL) model. To

accommodate instrumental variables for current energy R&D, I used the following steps:

           1. Estimate a first-stage model for R&D using the same number of lagged controls as

               in the final PDL regression to be estimated.

           2. Obtain predicted energy R&D from this regression.

           3. Use the predicted current R&D, along with actual values of lagged R&D, to

               construct first differenced data.

           4. Use first differenced data to construct the polynomials for estimation. Polynomials

               from degree 2-4 were used, as were lags from 4-10 years.

       As noted in the text, there are few differences between the PDL results and those simply

including all lags in the model. Moreover, there is little gain in efficiency from using the PDL

model, but it does hele to identify the appropriate lag length for each technology. Thus, except for

the discussion of lag length, I focus on the unrestricted model in the discussion in the text. For

reference, complete PDL results are presented here. Table D1 shows the results for government

R&D for both individual years and the cumulative effect, and Table D2 shows the cumulative

effects of the various controls included in each model.

       The main differences between the unrestricted results and the PDL results are as follows.

First, for biofuels, the FD results suggest a cyclical pattern, with strong effects also found in years

two and four in the first differenced model before picking up again in year t-9. In contrast, the PDL

model suggests a more gradual effect of energy R&D, with the effect initially peaking in year t-2,

and gradually fading until recurring in years nine and ten. Similarly, for energy efficiency, the




                                                                                                    68
largest single year impact does not occur until year t-10 in the PDL mode, compared to year t-2 in

the FD model. However, the long-run cumulative effects are similar in both models.




                                                                                               69
Table D1 – Polynomial distributed lag regression results: Government R&D

                                 Biofuels                 Energy Efficiency             Solar Energy                Wind Energy
                              IV          exog            IV            exog          IV           exog           IV          exog
RD                        0.1435***    0.1449***      0.0152**         0.0100      0.2678**     0.3909***      0.1085*     0.1276***
                          (0.0123)      (0.0143)      (0.0067)       (0.0073)      (0.1228)      (0.0852)     (0.0568)      (0.0323)
RD(t-1)                   0.3121***    0.3127***      0.0440***      0.0410***     0.3872***    0.4460***     0.2507***    0.2647***
                          (0.0278)      (0.0283)      (0.0045)       (0.0053)      (0.1041)      (0.1013)     (0.0451)      (0.0411)
RD(t-2)                   0.3822***    0.3826***      0.0523***      0.0506***     0.4532***    0.4692***     0.2658***    0.2764***
                          (0.0181)      (0.0181)      (0.0085)       (0.0084)      (0.1431)      (0.1405)     (0.0514)      (0.0551)
RD(t-3)                   0.3768***    0.3774***      0.0457***      0.0447***     0.4655***    0.4604***     0.2021***    0.2104***
                          (0.0366)      (0.0365)      (0.0104)       (0.0100)      (0.1620)      (0.1549)     (0.0555)      (0.0604)
RD(t-4)                   0.3210***    0.3219***      0.0298***      0.0291***     0.4243***    0.4198***      0.1078*      0.1147*
                          (0.0614)      (0.0615)      (0.0107)       (0.0104)      (0.1518)      (0.1461)     (0.0552)      (0.0594)
RD(t-5)                   0.2415***    0.2426***        0.0102         0.0095      0.3295**     0.3472**       0.0312        0.0370
                          (0.0729)      (0.0736)      (0.0106)       (0.0104)      (0.1355)      (0.1419)     (0.0497)      (0.0523)
RD(t-6)                   0.1669**      0.1681**       -0.0074        -0.0083       0.1811        0.2428       0.0204        0.0252
                          (0.0720)      (0.0737)      (0.0104)       (0.0103)      (0.1797)      (0.1966)     (0.0397)      (0.0397)
RD(t-7)                    0.1274*      0.1287*       -0.0175*       -0.0183*                                 0.1237**     0.1271**
                          (0.0717)      (0.0744)      (0.0102)       (0.0101)                                 (0.0517)      (0.0497)
RD(t-8)                    0.1553*      0.1564*        -0.0145        -0.0149
                          (0.0855)      (0.0884)      (0.0103)       (0.0102)
RD(t-9)                   0.2843**      0.2854**        0.0073         0.0078
                          (0.1175)      (0.1195)      (0.0135)       (0.0134)
RD(t-10)                  0.5502***    0.5515***      0.0535**       0.0556**
                          (0.1971)      (0.1978)      (0.0231)       (0.0230)

 R&D                        3.0612***       3.0723***      0.2186***       0.2067***    2.5085*** 2.7764***   1.1101***    1.1830***
                             (0.4413)        (0.4611)      (0.0627)        (0.0633)     (0.6621)  (0.7313)    (0.2765)     (0.2792)
N                               300             300            280            280          280       280         280          280
AIC                           2389.8          2389.8        2085.2          2084.1       2641.1    2637.1      1770.6       1770.0
BIC                           2630.5          2630.5        2332.3          2331.3       2862.8    2858.8      2017.8       2017.1
Standard errors in parentheses. All models use robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation.
*: significant at 10% level. **: significant at 5% level. ***: Significant at 1% level.


                                                                                                                                       70
Table D2 – Polynomial distributed lag regression results: Controls
                                   Biofuels               Energy Efficiency                 Solar Energy             Wind Energy
                              IV              exog        IV            exog           IV             exog         IV         exog
 Cumulative effects:
 R&D                      3.0612***      3.0723***     0.2186***     0.2067***     2.5085***        2.7764***   1.1101***   1.1830***
                           (0.4413)       (0.4611)      (0.0627)      (0.0633)     (0.6621)         (0.7313)     (0.2765)    (0.2792)
 lnGDP                      -2.1057        -2.8775      53.2447       51.4496      -1.9e+02         -1.7e+02     -41.2015    -41.6738
                          (82.2929)      (81.7642)     (69.5854)     (69.2378)    (169.4939)       (168.1542)   (33.6773)   (33.8759)
 gas price no taxes      221.8810***    221.2094***
                          (84.4800)      (83.8467)
 gas tax                    -3.1941        -3.1393
                          (27.2391)      (27.1973)
 gas price                                               -5.2159       -6.8539
                                                       (21.2337)     (21.2315)
 oil per capita            7.1e+03        7.1e+03      -1.2e+04      -1.2e+04
                          ( 1.1e+04)     ( 1.1e+04)   ( 8.5e+03)    ( 8.4e+03)
 gas per capita                                        -1.4e+03      -1.5e+03
                                                      ( 2.2e+03)    ( 2.2e+03)
 coal per capita                                      -11.4431**    -12.0952**
                                                        (5.2265)      (5.2584)
 electric price                                           0.0753        0.0774
                                                        (0.1234)      (0.1238)
 grow_elec                                                                           -3.2878        -2.7047       -0.7717     -0.7167
                                                                                    (5.1424)        (1.0026)     (1.0169)    (1.0026)
 % hydro                                                                             -0.0743         0.0766        0.4473      0.4144
                                                                                    (1.6134)        (1.5613)     (0.8803)    (0.8923)
 % nuclear                                                                           -3.6867        -3.6852       -0.0177      0.0323
                                                                                    (2.5755)        (2.5097)     (0.7553)    (0.7685)
 FIT wind                                                                                                        25.0600     25.8369
                                                                                                                (26.4234)   (26.5270)
 FIT pv                                                                                   55.4779    55.7739
                                                                                         (60.0910)  (59.4518)
  REC levels                                                                             14.4206**  13.5407*    2.6813*     2.6451*
                                                                                          (7.2394)   (6.9293)   (1.5560)    (1.5268)
 Standard errors in parentheses. All models use robust standard errors with correction for autocorrelation.
 *: significant at 10% level. **: significant at 5% level. ***: Significant at 1% level.
                                                                                                                                        71
Appendix E: Detailed methodology for NPL citation calculations

      The increased probability of an NPL citation resulting from an additional one million dollars

of new energy R&D funding depends on both the number of articles induced by this R&D each

year and on the probability of an article from any given year being cited in the future. Thus,

Figures 6 and 7 use the results of both our R&D estimation and the NPL citation regression:

(1)     𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 = ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛄𝛄𝐭𝐭−𝐬𝐬 𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑠𝑠=0 𝛅𝛅𝐭𝐭−𝐬𝐬 𝐗𝐗 𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠 + 𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖 + 𝜂𝜂𝑡𝑡 + 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

(2)     ℎ(𝑡𝑡) = exp(𝛼𝛼0 + 𝛼𝛼1 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 + 𝛼𝛼2 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐2 + 𝛼𝛼3 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 + 𝛄𝛄𝛄𝛄𝐂𝐂𝐢𝐢,𝐭𝐭 )

        Let 𝛃𝛃 = [𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−1 ⋯ 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−𝑇𝑇 ] represent a row vector of coefficients on contemporary and

lagged R&D from equation (1). Using the results of (2), the annual probability that a publication

from year t receives a citation in year t + s can be written as:

                                                      𝑤𝑤𝑠𝑠 = exp{𝛼𝛼0 + 𝛼𝛼1 𝑠𝑠 + 𝛼𝛼2 𝑠𝑠 2 }

        Next, define a matrix WAnnual representing the annual probability that an article published

in year t, represented by the rows of the matrix, will be cited in year t + s, represented by the

columns of the matrix:

                                                                 𝑤𝑤0   𝑤𝑤1   𝑤𝑤2   ⋯         𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀
                                                             ⎡         𝑤𝑤0   𝑤𝑤1            𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀−1 ⎤
                                                             ⎢               𝑤𝑤0                   ⎥
                                           𝐖𝐖𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀   =⎢                                     ⎥
                                                             ⎢                            ⋱        ⎥
                                                             ⎣                               𝑤𝑤0 ⎦

Similarly, the cumulative probability of a publication in year t receiving a citation by year t + s is

given by the following matrix:

                                     𝑤𝑤0    𝑤𝑤0 + 𝑤𝑤1        𝑤𝑤2 + 𝑤𝑤1 + 𝑤𝑤0       ⋯            𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀 + 𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀−1 + … + 𝑤𝑤0
                                 ⎡             𝑤𝑤0              𝑤𝑤1 + 𝑤𝑤0                      𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀−1 + 𝑤𝑤𝑀𝑀−2 + … + 𝑤𝑤0 ⎤
                                 ⎢                                 𝑤𝑤0                                                   ⎥
       𝐖𝐖𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂𝐂   =⎢                                                                                       ⎥
                                 ⎢                                                                    ⋱                  ⎥
                                 ⎣                                                                         𝑤𝑤0           ⎦



                                                                                                                                            72
       Using these matrices, the product βWAnnual yields a row matrix with the increase in the

annual probability of an NPL citation each year after an additional one million dollars of energy

R&D, and the product βWCumulative yields a row matrix with the increase in the cumulative

probability resulting from an additional one million dollars energy R&D.




                                                                                              73
