                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SAVING AND INVESTMENT IN AN
                OPEN ECONOMY WITH NON-TRADED GOODS




                         Charles Engel

                        Kenneth Kletzer




                     Working Paper No. 2141




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1987




I would like to thank Jonathan Eaton for extrememly useful com-
ments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2141
                                                    February 1987




               Saving and Investment in an Open Economy
                        with Non-Traded Goods



                                  ABSTRACT




     We examine a model of a small open economy in which there is free
international mobility of financial capital, investment in capital goods and
a non-traded good.   Such an environment is rich enough to explain several
phenomena that are inexpicable in more barren models.      We suggest an
explanation of why saving and investment may be correlated even with no
restrictions on trade in assets. We explain why a high saving country may
nonetheless borrow from abroad to finace investment. We also provide an
optimizing model of stages in the balance of payments.




Charles Engel                                     Kenneth Kletzer
NBER                                              Economic Growth Center
1050 Massachusetts Ave.                           BoX 1987
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Yale Station
                                                  New Haven, CT 06520
1. Introduction



     Two important but often neglected features of almost all open economies

are that they trade investment goods and there are some goods which are

non-traded.       We explore such an economy in a dynamic model with perfect

international mobility of financial capital. In this context we can explain

several phenomena that are inexplicable in more barren models.

     Consider the following questions:

     -   - In   a world where financial assets are freely traded, are saving and

investment decisions independent?

     -   - If   a country postpones consumption in order to reach eventually

higher levels of welfare, is it ever optimal for this country to borrow from

abroad to expand domestic investment?

     -   - Will   a country following an optimal saving plan run through stages

in its balance of payments in which it first acquires debt, then begins to

reduce its liabilities to foreigners and then reach a point where it is

actually a net creditor to the rest of the world?

     In practically all of the simpler models that exist in the literature,

the answer to all of these questions is fttt         However, when the economy

produces investment goods and non-traded goods, the answer to all three

questions may be "yes".

     The first question is the one raised by Feldstein and Horioka (1980)

and subsequently studied by, for example, Feldstein (1983), Obstfeld (1986),

Frankel (1985) and Summers (1986).       Feldstein and Horioka in essence argue

                                         1
that if financial capital is perfectly mobile that all countries face the

same real interest rate. The desired capital stock (and, thus, the level of

investment) is assumed to depend only on the real interest rate.       Hence,

investment decisions are made independently of any saving choices. We show

that in the presence of non-traded goods, saving choices affect the marginal

productivity of capital.        In this environment, saving and investment

decisions within a country are closely linked, even though there is free

asset trade and the real interest rate is determined on international

capital markets.

        As we will show, the second question is closely related to the first.

We demonstrate that if the rate of time preference for planners falls, it

may be optimal to borrow from abroad. This seeming paradox contradicts the

usual presumption, as discussed for example in Buiter (1981) and Frenkel and

Razin (1986), that more impatient countries borrow from abroad. Critical to

explaining our result (which in turn may help to explain the Sachs (1981)

observation that many developing countries seemed to be borrowing to finance

domestic investment) is the presence of an investment good and a non-traded

good.

        The stages in the balance of payments theory has a long history, and

has from time to time in recent years provoked interest.    (See Eaton (1986)

for a survey of the field.)      Probably the most prominent recent paper to

study the phenomenon is Fischer and Frenkel (1972).        Although seemingly

plausible behavior could lead to the familiar stages, Bazdarich (1978) built

a model in which saving behavior is optimal and demonstrates in that context

that stages are impossible.     The consumption dynamics that are allowed in

his model are, however, limited, and we show that under slightly richer

assumptions the stages theory can be rehabilitated.

        The general plan of this paper is to discuss why simple models give

misleading answers to the three questions posed. We show why the presence

                                       2
 of investment goods and non-traded goods is important. Although we examine

 these questions informally in general terms, we do not proceed by proving

 general theorems that hold for economies with n goods and m factors of

 production (and x non-traded goods and y immobile factors, and so on).

 Instead our formal model is a simple and familiar two sector model.      The

 generalization to many goods and factors, when possible, would follow as in

 higher order trade theory (see the surveys by Ruffin (1984) and Ethier

 (1984)).

      Section 2 of this paper first lays out the two sector model.       The

 second part of this section contains the general discussion of the three

 questions posed above.      In section 3, the model is solved.    The final

section contains concluding remarks.




2. Non-Traded Goods and Investment Goods



A. The Model



     The economy of our simple model produces two goods: a non-traded

consumption good and a traded good which is a composite good that can be

used either for production or consumption.1 A planner, or given the absence

of externalities, a representative consumer maximizes utility over an

infinite horizon. There is a freely traded bond. The country is small in

the market for traded goods and in international bond markets.

     The two goods are produced with a constant returns to scale technology.

There are two factors of production, capital and labor, that are freely

mobile between industries.

     There are perhaps two assumptions we make that are controversial. The

                                       3
implication of the above assumptions that physical capital is freely traded

and freely mobile between industries is that there are no lags in

investment. When the desired capital stock changes, all the desired new

investment or disinvestment can occur instantaneously. Perhaps it would be

more desirable to make some assumptions that caused the capital stock to

adjust slowly. For example, investment could be assumed to be irreversible;

there could be a cost to new investment; and, there could be a cost to

importing physical capital. We do not make these assumptions because, even

though they would make the model more realistic, they would complicate the

model considerably and have the unfortunate consequence of obfuscating the

key economic behavior we want to focus on. Thus, we will look at changes in

the desired capital stock.      In our model these desired changes will

translate into actual changes with no delay, but the reader may wish to

think of them in real life as changes in a target capital stock which will

be approached over time through investment.

     The second controversial assumption involves our modelling of the rate

of time preference.   It is well known that difficulties arise under the

assumption of a constant rate of time preference if the consumers have an

infinite horizon and face a given interest rate. Either no steady state can

be approached, or consumption expenditures are constant. At least two ways

exist in the literature to avoid this problem: either assume a finite

horizon, or let the consumer's discount rate vary endogenously. We choose

the second approach, and parameterize the rate of time preference as does

Uzawa (1968).   The assumption of Uzawa that provokes disagreement is that

the discount rate is an increasing function of the level of current utility.

There is little empirical evidence to support (or refute) this assumption.2

In this paper, however, none of our major insights depend on this property.

We are interested in how the economy changes when desired saving increases.

We generate an increase in saving by allowing a shift down in the rate of

                                     4
time preference. Under almost any conditions, lower time preference should

mean higher desired saving -   there is nothing special about this.
      Output of each good can be expressed by the functions:

                                      = V


                                      (l-v)


where v is the amount of labor used in the traded goods sector, k refers to

the capital-labor ratio in each sector, and the subscripts T and N refer to

the traded and non-traded sectors repectively. (The total labor supply does

not grow and is fixed at 1.)

      The traded goods price is given and equal to 1, and the price of the

non-traded good is p.     Under constant returns to scale, cost functions

depend only on the factor prices -- w, the wage; and r, the internationally

given interest rate. Equating prices to costs

                                1 =              and
                                      CT(w,r),

                                 p =
                                        CN(w,r).
From these equations it follows that the wage and the price of non-traded

goods are completely determined by the interest rate, and are therefore

fixed over time. Furthermore, the capital-labor ratios in each industry are

constant, because goods and factor prices are constant and marginal

productivities depend only on the k's.

      Utility is homothetic, which means that consumption of each good, c, is

proportional to total consumption expenditure, z (since p is constant):

                                        az, and
                                 cT


                                CN —   (l-a)z/p.
Letting k denote the total capital stock, it follows that

(1)                               z—,7+k
                                            5
where


                        Ti
                             p{kg(k)]/(lQ)(k                 -
                                                                 kN), and



        We see that consumption expenditures are a linear function of the

capital stock. If the traded goods industry is capital intensive, then fi                  is
negative.      In this case as expenditures fall, the desired (and actual)

capital stock must rise. A decrease in expenditure implies a decrease in

spending on the non-traded good.            Production of the non-traded good must

fall.      Factors are released to the traded goods sector.                     However, the

non-traded goods sector releases proportionally too much labor. This would

lead to potentially a higher marginal productivity of capital in the traded

goods sector. The desired capital stock rises.

        The reverse relation between expenditure and the capital stock would

hold if non-traded goods were capital intensive.

        Each consumer maximizes

                                                         -(t) dt.
(2)                           V =
                                     j v(z)
                                      0
                                                     e


In this expression, v represents the indirect instantaneous utility

function. The rate of time preference is not constant, but instead varies

over time as the level of expenditure changes:

                               A(t) =              5(v(z))ds.
                                           0

Following Uzawa, we assume 5, 5', 5'', and S -                    S'v are all positive.3 The
assumption which guarantees that the economy will converge toward a

steady-state is 5' > 0.           It essentially requires that as income               ,   v,
increases, the rate of time preference rise so that saving will fall.                      If

the opposite assumption were made, the rich would get richer and the poor

would get poorer and the economy would be unstable.

      Each consumer faces the dynamic budget constraint

                                               6
 (3)                                W — rW + w     -   z.

Here, W represents total tangible wealth, which is the sum            of   k, the capital

stock, and b, net claims on the rest of the world.               Both forms of wealth

earn the same rate of return. As explained above, should the net marginal

productivity of capital (the gross MPK less the depreciation rate n) exceed

the world interest rate, capital goods are immediately imported to the point

where the equality is restored.

        We also need to impose independently the condition that

                                    limbe
                                            -   rt O.
                                        t


Without     such a constraint, with the infinite planning horizon any level of

utility could be achieved by borrowing an arbitrary amount at some time and

meeting interest payments through further borrowing.

       With this model in mind, we now return to the questions of the previous

section.                        -




B.     General Discussion



       1.   Suppose for a small country that all goods are traded, and there

are more factors of production than there are goods.             Suppose further that

investment can occur, but the total supply of all other factors of

production is fixed over time. Let financial capital be mobile, so that the

real interest rate is determined exogenously for this small economy. Then

the desired total capital stock in this country - -         indeed,   the capital stock

in each industry -    - is   fully determined.         Investment decisions in no way

depend on consumption or saving decisions.

       This seems to be the economic background that Feldstein and Horioka

have in mind when they state that in a world of perfect financial capital


                                         7
mobility, saving and investment decisions will be uncorrelated across

countries.      (Note as Obstfeld (1986) points out, or as can be seen

immediately from Persson and Svensson (1985), even in this world, saving and

investment can be correlated if they react to shocks in the same direction.)

     However, in the presence of non-traded goods, this independence of

saving and investment breaks down. Production decisions obviously depend on

consumption choices for the non-traded goods.     As saving rises, suppose

consumption of non-tradeables falls. For market equilibrium, production of

home goods must fall. However, the factor mix in the non-traded sector need

not be the same as in the traded sector.    As production in the home goods

sector shrinks, factors of production must migrate to find employment.    If

the non-traded sector is relatively labor-using, then marginal productivity

of capital will rise in the economy when home goods production shrinks.

This in turn implies the desired capital stock will rise, and there will be

a positive relation between saving and investment.4

     The model described in section 2.A above is a particularly simple

example of this. The two factor, two good set-up ensures a constant price

of the non-traded good.    This makes things easy, since all the decreased

demand for home goods is translated into a drop in production of those goods

(rather than having the decreased demand being shared between a fall in the

relative price of non-tradeables and a drop in their output).     Also, the

constant price in conjunction with the homotheticity assumption ensures that

the fall in home goods demand is simply proportional to the fall in total

expenditures.    The fact that investment goods are traded and capital [s

mobile between sectors also simplifies things (as discussed above) because

it allows adjustment to the desired capital stock to occur immediately.

    An intuitive real world explanation would say that low saving, high

consumption countries would have to satisfy some of their desired

consumption through imports.   Therefore, the production structure in these

                                     8
 countries will be biased toward non-traded goods.     (We are assuming here

 that there is no particular relation between the level of saving and the

desired consumption mix between traded and home goods.) To the extent that

home goods tend to he such labor intensive goods as non-traded services,

then investment levels in these countries will be lower.     So, countries in

which saving levels are low will also tend to have low levels of investment.

     2.    When will a country that decides to postpone consumption also

choose to borrow from abroad? It is unlikely that such behavior could arise

in a model without investment.     Suppose consumption of all goods declines.

If all goods are traded, there must immediately be a current account

surplus.   If there are both home goods and traded goods, production of

non-traded goods must fall, which, for a given production possibility

frontier, means production of tradeables must rise. If production of traded

goods goes up, and consumption of those goods goes down, the country must

run a current account surplus and lend abroad.

     Even allowing for investment, it will still be the case that

higher saving will lead necessarily to a current account surplus if all

goods are traded. This follows from the discussion above on the Feldstein

and Horioka point.     In such an environment, investment decisions are

independent of saving decisions,     Suppose the country wishes to save now

to increase its long run income.      It would be better off lending abroad

rather than investing at home. Adding to the capital stock at home would

reduce the marginal productivity of capital below the world interest rate.

They could always earn more on foreign bonds.

     In such a context it is hard to establish a relation between high

saving and a higher target capital stock. Of course high saving countries

may turn out to be borrowing to finance investment just because they happen

to be capital scarce. A country, for example, that simultaneously removes

restrictions on financial capital flows and increases saving might find

                                      9
itself in this position.             But the Feldstein-Horioka problem remains for

countries that have maintained fairly free asset trade.

     In the presence of non-traded goods this reasoning no longer applies.

As argued above, if home goods are relatively labor intensive, then

reduced consumption of these goods increases the marginal productivity of

capital at home and induces domestic investment.             It may make sense to

borrow from abroad to finance this increased investment.

     In the model laid out above, if the home goods sector is labor

intensive, the country will initially borrow from abroad if its rate of time

preference shifts down.         This follows because in this case the desired

capital stock at home becomes higher. Since in this model capital goods are

freely traded, the country will initially borrow enough from the rest of the

world to pay for imports of capital goods to bring the capital stock up to

its optimal level.

     3.   The literature on stages in the balance of payments says that a

country will go through five stages in its transition to steady state: a) a

young debtor borrower --       its    trade balance and current account are both in

deficit, and it is a net debtor to the rest of the world; b) a mature

debtor borrower --    its    trade balance is in surplus but the current account

is still in deficit because of its debt-service obligations; c) a

debtor-repayer - -   the   country is still a net debtor, but its current account

is now in surplus; d) a young creditor-lender -- the country becomes a net

creditor, and its trade account and current account are in surplus; and, e)

a mature creditor-lender - -     the    creditor country runs a trade deficit, but

its current account remains in surplus as it earns interest income from the

rest of the world.         In steady state the country is a net creditor, whose

trade deficit is exactly offset by its earnings on foreign assets.

    It is unlikely that a country would pass through such stages just

because of variations in its consumption behavior.             The country passes

                                            10
 through stages of trade balance deficit, then surplus, then deficit again.

 Consumption would have to adjust non-monotonically to steady state to

 generate such a pattern of trade account imbalances.      It seems very likely

 that the mechanism that would lead a country through such stages is an

 interaction of saving and investment decisions.

        A less developed country may initially be capital scarce. In the early

stages of its development it might be borrowing to build up its capital

stock until the marginal productivity of capital is equated with the world

interest rate.       As the capital stock approaches its target level, the
investment motive for borrowing may wane.       At that stage the country may

still have high saving rates (as it is still trying to grow to its optimal

income level), so it may start running a trade surplus and eventually a

current account surplus.      Eventually it would turn into a creditor and in

steady state would support a high level of consumption with earnings from

foreign loans.

        In our model it is very possible for a country to go through exactly

these stages.      Actually, the first stage in which the country adjusts its

capital stock happens instantaneously in the model because of the absence of

any costs of changing the capital stock, The model of Bazdarich (1978) is

an optimizing model which precludes stages.      For the case in his model in

which a steady state is approached (when the constant rate of time

preference equals the world interest rate), consumption is constant over

time.     That model is one for which there are investment dynamics, but no

consumption dynamics.

        In the next section we formally examine the model laid out in part 2.A.




                                       11
3. The Solution of the Model



       In this section we will first derive the first-order conditions for the

optimization problem. Then we will examine the steady-state. Next we will

characterize the dynamics near the steady-state to demonstrate the system is

saddle-stable.       Finally, we will discuss the evolution of the the capital

stock and foreign assets as shown in phase diagrams.                                    We will restrict

attention to regions where the economy remains incompletely specialized in

the production of both goods.5

      Following Uzawa (1968) and Obstfeld (1981), it is useful to rewrite eq.

(2) as


                             V            [v(z)/6(v(z))]e .
                                      0

The Hamiltonian for the optimization problem can then be written as

                       H =   (l/S(v(z)))[v(z)             + q(rW + w        -
                                                                                 z)].
The first-order conditions become


(4)                      q       [v' (5   - S'v)}/[S       +   S'v'l}   ,       and


(5)                                       4   = (5    -
                                                          r)q.
      In the steady state, setting q                       0 in eq. (5), the rate of time

preference must adjust into equality with the given interest rate: 5(v(z)) =

r.    Thus the steady state level of expenditure is determined independently

from the rest of the system.                  There is effectively a target level of

expenditure. Suppose we consider the effect of a drop in the rate of time

preference - -   a   shift down in the S function. This could be interpreted as

a change in preferences on the part of consumers or the planner toward


                                                 12
 giving more weight to the future. Indeed, in the steady state, expenditures

would rise.

     With an increase in long-run spending, the steady-state capital stock

will rise or fall as fi   in   eq. (1) is positive or negative. That is, if the

home goods industry is capital intensive the capital stock will rise, and if

the home goods industry is labor intensive the capital stock will fall.

This is just the Rybczynski theorem in reverse - -   to   induce expansion of the

labor-intensive industry the capital stock must fall, and to induce

expansion of the capital-intensive industry the capital stock must rise.

     It can also be demonstrated that the steady-state trade deficit must

increase when long-run expenditures rise, which in turn implies that claims

on foreigners must be higher to generate enough income to support this

deficit. The trade deficit is equal to net national product less the level

of expenditure. The increase in expenditure contributes to a higher trade

deficit. The change in net national product in the long run is of course

just the interest rate times the change in the capital stock.             If the

capital stock falls (i.e., if home goods are labor intensive) then clearly

there must be a greater long-run trade deficit. Even in the case in which

the capital stock expands (when home goods are capital intensive), the

increase in net national product must be less than the increase in

expenditure. This follows because gross output must increase more than net

output (the difference being depreciation). The output of non-traded goods

must go up more than total gross output, since the output of the traded

goods sector would actually shrink (again the Rybczynski theorem - -         an
increase in the capital stock causes the labor-intensive industry to

contract).    But output of non-traded goods, which equals consumption of

non-traded goods, goes up less than total expenditure. Hence the long-run

trade deficit must rise, and holdings of foreign bonds, b, must expand in

the steady state.

                                        13
      To examine the dynamics of the system, logarithmically differentiate

eq. (4) and equate it to eq. (5) to obtain:

(6)       6 -   r   — Dz   -
                                [(6"v'2   +                 - S'v'rW]/[S'v'W       +   6],   where


                     D         {u"(S -   S'u)      -
                                                       8"uu'2]/u' (6   -   S'u) < 0.

Equations (3) and (6) comprise a two equation dynamic system in z and W that

characterize the path of the economy. The behavior of the capital stock can

be derived from knowing z, since k is just linearly related to z.                                    Total

claims on foreigners is given by the difference between W and k.

      To examine the stability of the system, we linearize eqs. (3) and (6)

near steady-state to obtain:


                           z                    0        SSu/D             z - z


                           W                  -l            r              W-W
(The M_ above a variable represents its long-run value. There is a unique

steady-state.)       The determinant of the system equals 8&'u/D, which is

negative. The system must have one negative and one positive root, which

implies it is saddle stable. The transversality conditon gives a sufficient

condition for optiinality. In this case it may be written:

                                          urn eqW 0.

Along the path that leads to the steady state, this condition is satisfied,

so it is an optimal path. Notice also that if the transversality condition

is met that the intertemporal budget constraint is also obeyed.

      It is useful to draw the phase plane in b,k space as in Figure 1 because

those are the variables we are most interested in.                             Near the steady-state

the   — 0 line is not a function of z, so in b,k space it has a slope of -1.

Away from the steady-state we do not know much about this line, except that

it crosses the W = 0 line only at the steady-state.


                                                       14
        In Figure la the W     0 line slopes upward, which is the case when home

goods are capital intensive. In discussing the steady state above we showed

why an increase in the capital stock must be associated with an increase in

b in this case.      Note that the W     0 line is linear everywhere, not just

near the steady-state.

        In Figure lb the W      0 line slopes downward, which is the case when

home goods are labor intensive. Notice that the W = 0 line cuts the z             o

line from above, indicating that at the steady state the W             0 line has a

slope less than -1. Suppose long-run bond holdings go up one unit. If the

long run capital stock fell by exactly one unit then W would no longer equal

zero.     Total wealth would be unaffected by such a switch but expenditures

would have to rise, since in this case there is a negative relation between

the capital stock and total expenditure. Therefore a one unit increase in

bond holdings must be accompanied by a less than one unit drop in k to keep

wealth accumulation constant.

        The arrows in Figure 1 denote the direction of motion. The dotted line

in each case denotes the saddle path.                This diagram is drawn assuming

incomplete specialization in production of both goods.

        Figure 2 demonstrates the dynamic path of the economy in response to a

drop in S --     i.e.,   an increased concern for the future.        The economy is

initially in steady-state at point a.            The change in the rate of time

preference has no effect on the              —   0   line, but as we have already

discussed, it leads to an increase in long-run claims on foreigners.

        Figure 2a shows the case in which home goods are capital intensive. In

the long-run both the capital stock and foreign bond holdings are higher.

Initially in response to the drop in the S function the economy must jump

from a to a' to get on the new saddle path. It initially sells some of its

capital stock and uses the proceeds to lend abroad. It continues to run a

current account surplus, but also accumulates physical capital as it

                                        15
  b                                               0




                                  k



b=0                                                   k

                                             k2
                                   k= 0

           //


                (a)     >
                             k1




           =0
  b




                                                      k
b=0
      k2                              k1




                                      k= 0




                (b) k1 > k2

                  Figure 1
  b
                                       w= U




                  at


b=U                                               k
                                         0




                       (a) k2 >   k1




  b

          %;= 0



      0




                                              k
b=O




                       (b) k1 >

                        Figure 2
approaches the steady state.

     Figure 2b shows the case which is more relevant for questions 1 and 2

posed in the introduction. Here, the long-run capital stock falls when the

rate of time preference falls. Initially, however, as the economy moves to

the new saddle path (from a to a' ),    the capital stock is increased.   This

new investment is financed with borrowing from abroad. Then along the path

to the new steady state, the capital stock declines while the country runs a

current account surplus.

     In this case, the initial increase in desired saving is accompanied by

an increase in the desired stock of capital. Because of the free mobility

of physical capital, all the investment occurs instantaneously.       In this

initial stage, the discrete increase in the capital stock must be financed

through foreign borrowing.

     Figure 3 depicts a sequence of events that is consistent with stages in

the balance of payments.      The country is initially at a point such as x,

where it is capital poor. It immediately runs a current account deficit and

acquires capital as it moves from x to y.           This corresponds to the

debtor-borrower stage.     As the country moves from y to z, it reduces its

debt to the rest of the world.     It passes through is debtor repayer stage.

From z to the steady state the country is a creditor.      Initially it is a

young creditor lender as its trade account is in surplus. As steady state

is approached, the trade account falls into deficit.     In the long run the

current account is balanced, with interest receipts on foreign loans just

offsetting a trade deficit.




                                       16
   b
                                            0

               k= 0




       x           z
b=0                                             k



           /


                       (a) k2   >
                                    k

   b           w.= 0




                                                k
b= 0


                                        0




                       (b)

                         Figure 3
4. Conclusion



     This paper builds a simple framework that allows us to examine some

questions concerning saving and investment in countries that have free

access to international financial markets.   We discussed in general terms

conditions which might lead to a dependence of the level of investment on

the level of saving. Indeed, we found that an increase in saving might even

lead to greater borrowing from abroad. We also found that passing through

stages in the balances of payments can be consistent with optimizing

behavior.




                                    17
                                    Footnotes



     1Nunes (1983) has recently examined international borrowing in a

similar framework.    However, his assumption of a constant rate of time

preference equal to the world interest rate precludes any of the dynamics of

interest discussed in this paper.

     2There is some evidence to support the Uzawa specification. One of its

implications is that there is a stable stationary equilibrium consumption

level,   (This is indeed the implication that causes the most controversy.)

dower and Johnson (1968), however, find that such a specification has

empirical support.   An experimental study (as yet unpublished) by Raymond

Battalio of Texas A & M University shows that low income (underfed) rats

tend to have a lower discount rate than high income (well fed) rats.       This

is exactly consistent with Uzawa's assumptions.

     3Obstfeld (1981) discusses these assumptions.     The assumption that 5

-6'v is positive ensures that V in steady-state (   v/8)   is increasing in v.

     4lmplicit in Frankel (1985) is the notion that non-traded goods might

cause the Feldstein - Horioka claim to break down.         He might argue that

there is no force to determine the own real rate of interest for non-traded

goods, because while free financial capital markets can equalize nominal

interest rates, they cannot equalize rates of inflation of goods prices.

Note however that this argument must be logically separate from the one

presented here.   In our simple model, the price of home goods relative to

traded goods remains fixed, so the real interest rate relative to home goods

is the same as r.    Nonetheless, there is a relation between saving and

investment.

                                       18
     5The dynamics for the general case of this model, including non-traded

goods, are examined in Engel and Kletzer (1986).




                                    19
                                  References



Bazdarich, M., "Optimal Growth and Stages in the Balance of Payments,"

     Journal    International Economics 8 (August 1978): 425-443.

Buiter, W., "Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing in an

     Overlapping-Generations Model,"        Journal     Political Economy 89

     (August 1981): 769-797.

Clower, R. and M. Johnson, "Income, Wealth and the Theory of Consumption,"

     in J.N. Wolfe, ed., Value, Capital         Growth: Papers j Honor of Sir

     John Hicks (Chicago: Aldine, 1968).

Eaton J., "Foreign Public Capital and Economic Development," in H. Chenery

     and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook         Development Economics

     (Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming).

Engel, C. and K. Kletzer "International Borrowing to Finance Investment,"

    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 1865 (March 1986).

Ethier, W. "Higher Dimensional Issues in Trade Theory," in R. Jones and P.

    Kenen, eds., Handbook      International Economics (Amsterdam:

    North-Holland, 1984).

Feldstein, M., "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the

     Long run and the Short run," European Economic Review 21, (March

     1983): 129-151.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka, "Domestic Saving and International Capital

     Flows," Economic Journal 90: (June 1980), 314-329.

Fischer, S. and J. Frenkel, "Investment, the Two-Sector Model, and Trade in

    Debt and Capital Goods,"      Journal       International Economics 2

     (August 1972): 211-233.

                                     20
Frankel, J. "International Capital Mobility and Crowding out in the U.S.

     Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or of Goods

     Markets?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #

     1773 (December 1985).

Frenkel, J. and A. Razin, "Fiscal Policies in the World Economy," Journal

     of Political Economy 94 (June 1986): 564-594.

Nunes, L. "Optimal Capital Accumulation and External Indebtedness in a Two

     Sector Small Economy Model," University of Chicago, October 1983.

Obstfeld, M. "Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange-Rate Dynamics, and Optimal

     Asset Accumulation," Journal         Political Economy 89 (December

     1981): 1142-1161.

Obstfeld,   M.   "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and

     Measurement," Carnegie - Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy

     24 (Spring 1986): 55-104.

Persson, T. and L. Svensson "Current Account Dynamics and the Terms of

     Trade: Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Two Generations Later,"        Journal

        Political Economy 93 (February 1985): 43-65.

Ruff in, R. "International Factor Movements," in R. Jones and P. Kenen, eds.,

     Handbook of International Economics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1984).

Sachs, J. "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the l97Os,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 12 (1981): 201-282.

Summers, L. "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness," National Bureau

     of Economic Research Working Paper # 2007 (August 1986).

Uzawa, H. "Time Preference, the Consumption Function, and Optimum Asset

    Holdings," in J.N. Wolfe, ed., Value. Capital and Growth: Papers j Honor

     of Sir John Hicks (Chicago: Aldine, 1968).




                                     21
