                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH, CURRENCY OF INVOICING AND MARKET
                              SHARE

                                        Michael B. Devereux
                                            Ben Tomlin
                                             Wei Dong

                                        Working Paper 21413
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21413


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank Greg Bauer, Douglas Campbell, Andreas Fischer, Kim Huynh, Gregor Smith and numerous
seminar and conference participants for their comments. We also thank Beiling Yan and Danny Leung
at Statistics Canada for their help in preparing and interpreting the data, and Ian Hodgson and Monica
Mow for their research assistance. The results have been institutionally reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is revealed. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
no responsibility for them should be attributed to the Bank of Canada. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael B. Devereux, Ben Tomlin, and Wei Dong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Currency of Invoicing and Market Share
Michael B. Devereux, Ben Tomlin, and Wei Dong
NBER Working Paper No. 21413
July 2015
JEL No. F3,F4

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the impact of market structure on the joint determination of exchange rate pass-
through and currency of invoicing in international trade. A novel feature of the study is the focus on
market share of firms on both sides of the market—that is, exporting firms and importing firms. A
model of monopolistic competition with heterogeneous firms has the following set of predictions:
a) exchange rate pass-through should be non-monotonic and U-shaped in the market share of exporting
firms, but monotonically declining in the market share of importers; b) exchange rate pass-through
should be lower, the higher is local currency invoicing of imports; and c) producer currency invoicing
should be related non-monotonically and U-shaped to exporter market share, and monotonically declining
in importing firms’ market share. We test these predictions using a new and large micro data set covering
the universe of Canadian imports over a six-year period. The data strongly support all three predictions.


Michael B. Devereux                                 Wei Dong
Department of Economics                             Bank of Canada
University of British Columbia                      wdong@bank-banque-canada.ca
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Ben Tomlin
Bank of Canada
Ottawa
btomlin@bankofcanada.ca
1. Introduction


The relationship between exchange rates and goods prices has been one of the most discussed
and studied areas in international economics. A large part of the core theory of international
trade and macroeconomics depends on assumptions about how prices, both at the retail level and
“at the dock,” respond to changes in exchange rates. One central concept in both the theory and
empirical work on this topic is that of exchange rate pass-through. This pertains to the question
of how much of an exchange rate change is reflected in domestic currency goods prices (when
various controls are applied). There is a very large literature on exchange rate pass-through,
both at the level of the individual firm and at a more aggregate level of imports, with the robust
finding that pass-through to import prices is less than complete.1

     Fundamentally, the degree of aggregate pass-through will depend on the market power of
the firms involved in trade, since this will determine who will absorb movements in the exchange
rate.2 In this paper, we explore how pass-through is determined by the market share of the
firms on both sides of the trade transaction—the exporters and the importers. We develop a
model of monopolistic competition and trade that accounts for the decisions of both exporters
and importers, and that makes clear predictions about the relationship between exchange rate
pass-through, market share and the currency of invoice. We then test the predictions of the
model using unique micro data.

     A number of recent papers have linked pass-through with the market share of exporters.
Berman, Martin and Mayer (2012) and Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2014) find that under
certain conditions, pass-through monotonically decreases in exporter market share using French
and Belgian firm-level data, respectively. Feenstra, Gagnon and Knetter (1996) and Garetto
(2014) emphasize a U-shaped relationship between exporter market share and pass-through
supported by estimates on car-price data sets. Auer and Schoenle (2015) also show that the
response of import prices to exchange rate changes is U-shaped in exporter market share using
micro data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.3

    What distinguishes our paper from these existing micro studies is: (i) the development of a
model of exchange rate pass-through that accounts for market power on both sides of the trade
transaction; (ii) the use of an extremely large and disaggregated data set representing a wide
range of goods and information on both importers and exporters to test the predictions of the
model; (iii) the finding of not only a U-shaped relationship between pass-through and exporter
market share, but also of a negative relationship between importer market share and pass-

   1
     See, for example, Knetter (1989), Campa and Goldberg (2005), and Burstein and Gopinath (2013).
   2
     This perspective is developed in Dornbusch (1987) and more recently Atkeson and Burstein (2008).
   3
     Since micro price data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics do not include information on the sales of individual
firms, Auer and Schoenle infer market share indirectly from relative prices.


                                                         2
through; and (iv) the exploration of the role of the currency of invoice in these relationships. The
link between pass-through and importer market share is a particularly important contribution
to the literature: we show that while the distribution of market shares of exporters has changed
little over time, the market share of large importers increased over the sample period and this
may be related to observed variations in overall pass-through.

     In our model, exporters differ in cost efficiency (or productivity), which translates into
differences in their market shares in equilibrium. Importers also differ in size and, critically,
in their demand elasticity. An important building block in our model is that importers with a
larger cost advantage, and thus larger market share, have a higher elasticity of demand for the
product purchased from each exporter.

     The model predicts a U-shaped relationship between pass-through and exporter market
share. Very small or very large exporters (in terms of their share of the market) have little
concern over the impact of increasing their price on their share of the total market, and they
will pass-through most of any exchange rate movements into their sales price. Exporters in the
middle range, however, are more concerned with the effects of price changes on their share of
the market, and will tend to have lower rates of pass-through.4

     On the importer side, given the opportunity to invest (at a cost) in more flexible technologies,
high-productivity importers will have a higher elasticity of demand. The result is that exchange
rate pass-through is lower for sales to importers with a higher market share (or, equivalently,
those with high productivity, low cost structure and hence a higher elasticity of demand for
imported goods). The higher the elasticity of demand of the importer, the more an exporter’s
market share will vary if it passes through exchange rate shocks. Therefore, conditional on the
market share of the exporter, pass-through will be lower for sales to larger importers (with higher
market share).

     How does this relate to the determination of invoicing currency? Engel (2006) and Gopinath,
Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010) construct models where a firm’s desired or unrestricted rate of pass-
through (pass-through following a price change) will determine its choice of invoice currency.
The higher the desired pass-through, the more likely will the exporting firm be to choose its
own currency (or U.S. dollars, in most of our data) for invoicing, while firms desiring low pass-
through will be more likely to invoice in the importer’s currency (Canadian dollars in our study).
Since our focus is on unrestricted exchange rate pass-through (after a price change), our model
predicts a particular relationship between the market share of both exporters and importers on
the invoice currency. The model implies that the use of the U.S. dollar in invoicing should be
non-monotonic and U-shaped in its relationship to exporter market share, and negatively related

   4
   For constant-elasticity-of-substitution preferences, this point was originally made in Feenstra, Gagnon and
Knetter (1996), and more recently by Auer and Schoenle (2015).


                                                      3
to importer market share.

     We test these predictions on a highly disaggregated data set on Canadian import prices.
The data include the universe of Canadian imports over a six-year period from 2002 to 2008.
The rich nature of the data allows us to investigate how exchange rate pass-through differs for
different categories of imports, currencies of invoice and types of firms, as well as a number
of other features of import prices. We focus on nine product types that are representative of
nearly 40 percent of all Canadian imports (by value) in any given month, and we use unit values
(shipment value divided by the number of units) as a proxy for price. In order to overcome
some of the issues related to using unit values—in particular, errors in measuring quantities and
variation in products even within very narrowly defined product codes—we use a very specific
definition for a product. That is, products are specific to an importing firm, exporting firm, 10-
digit Harmonized System (HS10) product code, country of origin, country of export, currency
and unit of measurement.

    We start by measuring overall pass-through and find that it is approximately 59 percent—
that is, a 1 percent depreciation (appreciation) of the Canadian dollar is associated with a
0.59 percent increase (decrease) in import prices. We also derive estimates for each of the
nine products and find that there is significant variation in the degree of pass-through: from 82
percent for apparel to only 21 percent for vegetable products. Pass-through estimates for all other
products fall within this range. We note that the use of detailed micro data to estimate pass-
through overcomes many of the pitfalls associated with the use of aggregated data to measure
pass-through. This is of particular concern when measuring pass-through in Canada, since in
the construction of the Canadian import price index, some of the price data sampled are from
other countries (mainly the United States) and incorporated into the index based on arbitrary
assumptions regarding the degree of pass-through (Bailliu, Dong and Murray, 2010).

     We then look into the relationship between pass-through and market share. We find strong
evidence of a U-shaped relationship between pass-through and exporter market share, and a
downward-sloping relationship between pass-through and importer market share. In addition,
we look at the interactions between importers and exporters of the same and different size, and
find that the pass-through and exporter/importer market shares relationships still hold when we
explicitly control for the size of the trading partner. Moreover, as the theoretical model suggests,
we estimate rates of exchange rate pass-through that are substantially higher for U.S.-dollar-
and euro-priced goods than for Canadian-dollar-priced goods.

    Putting these two relationships together, we test a simple model of endogenous choice of
invoicing currency, using a logit specification. Consistent with the theory, our test results confirm
that there is also a U-shaped relationship between exporter market share and the probability of
invoicing in U.S. dollars, and that importers with larger market share have a higher probability


                                                 4
of paying in Canadian dollars.

     Finally, we explore how changes in market shares may be related to changes in overall pass-
through over time. Using rolling regressions, we track pass-through over time and, despite the
relatively short sample period, find large swings in pass-through. We then consider the role
of changes in market shares in influencing pass-through dynamics. While the distribution of
exporter market share changes very little over time (other than a slight increase in the market
share of larger exporters in the first year of the sample), the market share of the larger importers
increases substantially in the sample, and we conjecture that this relates to the decline in pass-
through observed in the latter half of the sample.

     In a broad sense, our paper contributes to the large empirical and theoretical literature on
the size of exchange rate pass-through and its other determinants. It is an almost universally
recognized fact that at all levels of aggregation, exchange rate pass-through is less than full.
Early studies by Krugman (1987) and Froot and Klemperer (1989) suggested this was due to
the presence of strategic forces leading firms to engage in “pricing-to-market.” Later literature
proposed that slow nominal price adjustment and local currency pricing may be responsible
for partial pass-through both at the import price level and the level of retail prices (Devereux,
Engel and Storgaard, 2004). Recently, many studies of exchange rate pass-through have availed
themselves of more detailed micro data sets of goods prices. However, it has been difficult to
obtain comprehensive matched data on currency of invoicing, market structure and goods prices.
Studies using U.S. micro data—for example, Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Gopinath, Itskhoki
and Rigobon (2010) and Auer and Schoenle (2015)—are very informative, but it is likely that the
United States may be quite a special case (albeit an important one) due to the central nature
of the U.S. dollar in international trade settlement and invoicing (Goldberg and Tille, 2008).
There is a growing literature using data for other countries. Fitzgerald and Haller (2013) look
at pass-through using Irish data, Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2014) make use of Belgian data,
and Cravino (2014) uses Chilean data.

     Our contribution to this literature is to show the relationship between market structure and
pass-through, stressing that market share of both exporting and importing firms is a crucial
feature in the joint determination of exchange rate pass-through and the currency of invoicing.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical discussion. Section 3
describes the data and provides summary statistics. In section 4, we present the empirical
model and test the predictions of the theoretical model. Section 5 provides a discussion of the
possible links between changes in market share over time and observed variations in pass-through.
Section 6 concludes.




                                                 5
2. Theoretical Discussion


     In this section we explore the determinants of exchange rate pass-through into import prices
in a model of monopolistic competition. This will help to frame the empirical analysis of the
following sections.

     Consider a model of an importing country where there are many different sectors (or mar-
kets). Within each sector there are a number of distinct sellers (exporters, or vendors), and a
separate number of distinct buyers (importers). Each exporter is assumed to produce and sell a
unique product, and some of each product is purchased by all the separate importers. Exporters
differ in cost efficiency and in equilibrium this will translate into differences in market share of
sales in the sector. Importers are assumed to be intermediaries who purchase a basket of goods
from exporters and with these produce a retail product for domestic final consumers (who are
not modelled here). Importers also differ in size, again due to differences in cost advantage. This
difference in cost also translates into differences in demand elasticity for importing firms. Our
maintained assumption is that importers with larger cost advantage have a higher elasticity of
demand for the product of each seller. The theoretical foundations for this assumption are devel-
oped in Appendix A, where we construct a simple model of sequential decision-making in which
importers can choose from a menu of technologies in advance, with each technology constituting
a means of producing the retail good using imported intermediate inputs, and technologies dif-
fer in their elasticity of substitution between intermediate inputs. When import prices are not
known in advance, a technology with a higher elasticity of substitution offers higher expected
profits to the retailer/importer. But the ex ante costs of choosing a technology are higher, the
higher the elasticity of substitution. Importers with higher exogenous productivity (or lower
costs) will choose more-elastic technologies. As a result, larger importers will have a higher ex
post elasticity of demand for each product.

     Assume that in each sector there are N products, each of which is sold by a unique exporter,
and M importing firms. Thus, there are N firms on the supply side of the market, M firms on
the demand side and N products sold within each market. Each exporter i ∈ N sells product
i to all M importers. We assume that N may be relatively small, so that exporters set prices
strategically. In addition, exporters can perfectly price discriminate, so they set a separate
price for each importer. Importers are assumed to be price takers in their input markets. Each
importer j has a demand for the imported intermediate good i which satisfies:

                                       xij = pij −ρj pj ρj −η Xj ,                             (2.1)

where pij is exporter i’s price for importer j, evaluated in importer’s currency, and pj is the




                                                   6
sectoral or market price index for importer j (also in importer currency).5 As we noted, it is
assumed that N is small enough that firm i takes into account the impact of its pricing decision
on the sectoral price index. In addition, as discussed above, we allow for the inner demand
elasticity ρj to be specific to the importer, while assuming that the elasticity of demand across
markets η is the same for all importers. As is usual, we assume that ρj > η, so that the
elasticity of demand for individual goods is greater than the elasticity of demand for the sectoral
composite good. In addition, we assume that ρj > 1 and η > 1. Finally, we allow for importers
to be different in total size or market share, as reflected in the scale factor Xj . As shown in
Appendix A, the distribution of importer market shares will be determined by the distribution
of productivity among importing firms in the production of goods for retail sale using the basket
of products that they purchase from exporters. The sectoral price index for importer j is defined
as
                                           " N        #( 1 )
                                             X 1−ρ 1−ρj
                                      pj =      pij j        .                                (2.2)
                                                  i=1


    Firm i’s production technology can be represented by a cost function in terms of the exporter
currency:
                                         c(yij , wi , ai ),                                 (2.3)
where yij represents sales to importer j, wi represents a vector of input costs and ai is a scalar
measure of technology. In addition, we will restrict attention to the case of constant returns to
scale, so that marginal cost is independent of sales. Thus,

                                       c(yij , wi , ai ) = yij φ(wi , ai ),                             (2.4)

and we assume that φ(wi , ai ) is increasing in all elements of wi , and φ00 (wi , ai ) ≤ 0.


2.1. Pass-Through and Market Shares

    If prices are fully flexible, the currency in which the firm sets its price is irrelevant. Thus,
without loss of generality, say the firm sets its price in the importer’s currency (local currency).
The exporter’s profit is then defined as
                                      M
                                      X                M
                                                       X
                                           pij xij −        yij ei φ(wi , ai ),                         (2.5)
                                       j                j


   5
    Here, we maintain the assumption of constant demand elasticity ρj . We also explored the exchange rate
pass-through implications under alternative specifications where the firm’s elasticity of demand was variable.
The implications for pass-through and the relationship between pass-through and buyer or seller market share
were similar to the results discussed below.




                                                        7
where ei is the exchange rate for product i (the importer currency price of a unit of exporter
currency), and in equilibrium xij = yij .

    If the exporter sets its price freely, its profit maximizing price is given by
                                                  ij
                                       pij =           ei φ(wi , ai ),                           (2.6)
                                               ij − 1

where ij is defined as the firm’s demand elasticity, given by
                                                                 1−ρj
                                    d log(xij )                  pij
                            ij = −             = ρj − (ρj − η)         .                        (2.7)
                                    d log(pij )                  pj

The share of firm i’s sales to importer j, relative to all of j’s purchases in the sector, is defined
as                              1−ρj
                                pij            pij xij
                                        = PN              ≡ θij (wi , ai ).                     (2.8)
                                pj            i=1 pij xij
Firm i’s share is negatively related to its price, relative to the price index of importer j. Under an
innocuous regularity condition, θij is negatively related to the firm’s input cost wi and positively
related to the firm’s productivity ai . Given this notation, we can define the elasticity of demand
for sales to importer j as (θij ) = ρj − (ρj − η)θij , and this elasticity is decreasing in the firm’s
market share, given that ρj > η.

     If the firm’s price is fully flexible, we can obtain the implied pass-through from the exchange
rate to its price as follows. Taking a log approximation from (2.6), we obtain the expression:

             d log pij     1          ω          X d log pkj           1      d log wi
                       =      +                       θkj          +      φ̂i          ,         (2.9)
             d log ei    1 + ω (1 + ω)(1 − θij ) k6=i     d log ei   1 + ω d log ei

where φ̂i ≡ φiφwi , and ω = − ddlog(p
                                  log(µ)
                                      ij )
                                           is the elasticity of the markup to the firm’s price. We can
calculate this elasticity as follows:

                                       (ρj − η)(ρj − 1)θij (1 − θij )
                                  ω=                                  .                         (2.10)
                                            (θij )((θij ) − 1)

     The predictions for exchange rate pass-through from (2.9) depend on the elasticity of the
markup, the extent to which firm i’s competitors for importer j face the same exchange rate
as firm i, and the extent to which firm i’s domestic cost is affected by changes in the exchange
rate. Focusing on the last item, we may decompose the term φ̂i ddlog   wi
                                                                    log ei
                                                                           in (2.9) in the following
way. We assume that changes in the exchange rate do not directly affect either the exporter
currency prices of inputs in the exporter’s country, the prices of local inputs into the good in
the importer’s currency or the price of imported intermediate goods that the exporter purchases
from third countries. Assume also that the share of local (importing country) inputs in the good


                                                     8
is γ1 , the share of third-country intermediate imported inputs is γ2 and the sensitivity of the
exchange rate of the country where intermediate inputs are purchased relative to the importing
country’s exchange rate is ϕ. It follows that
                                           d log wi
                                     φ̂i            = −(γ1 + γ2 ϕ).                           (2.11)
                                           d log ei

Then from (2.9), we have
                                      d log pij   1 − γ1 − γ2 ϕ
                                                =               .                             (2.12)
                                      d log ei       1+ω

      Since ρj > η, ω > 0, (2.12) implies that exchange rate pass-through is less than unity. This
is first due to the presence of ‘local’ inputs, as measured by γ1 , and second due to intermediate
imported goods whose currencies track those of the importing country currency as captured by
the terms γ2 ϕ. But even for γ1 = γ2 ϕ = 0, pass-through would be less than unity because the
firm’s optimal markup depends on its market share, captured by the ω > 0 term. A rise in the
firm’s price reduces its market share, and since a fall in market share means a higher demand
elasticity, an exchange rate shock will reduce the firm’s optimal markup.

    The magnitude of exchange rate pass-through is itself a function of the exporter’s market
share. From (2.10), we have that
                                             2
                             dω     η(η − 1)θij − ρj (ρj − 1)(1 − θij )2
                                  =                                      .                    (2.13)
                             dθij          (θij )2 ((θij ) − 1)2

If θij is close to zero, this is negative, while for θij close to unity, it is positive. Hence, the
relationship between pass-through and exporter market share is non-monotonic. Intuitively, for
θij equal to zero or unity, the firm is either infinitesimal relative to the market, or is a monopoly
firm in the sector, and the markup is a constant, determined only by the elasticity of demand. In
between these two extremes, the firm’s markup is endogenous, and increasing in θij . Exchange
rate pass-through depends not on the markup itself, but on the elasticity of the markup ω, which
is itself a function of the ‘elasticity of the elasticity’ of demand for the firm’s good in sector j.
For very low θij , the elasticity of the markup with respect to price is increasing in θij . As the
firm moves from being an infinitesimal part of the market to having some non-negligible share of
sales, it will become more concerned with the effect of its pricing on its market share, and thus
will limit its price response to exchange rate increases, since its markup elasticity is increasing
in θij . But as θij increases further, the firm has a higher and higher share of the market and
becomes less concerned with the impact of its price changes on its market share. In this range,
the elasticity of the markup is decreasing in θij , and so exchange rate pass-through is declining
in θij . Hence, the relationship between exchange rate pass-through and exporter market share
is theoretically ambiguous.

    How does pass-through depend on the size of the importing firm j? Formula (2.10) does

                                                     9
not depend on the size of sales, since we have assumed that exporters produce with constant
returns to scale.6 But pass-through will in general depend on the own elasticity of demand ρj .
As discussed above, our maintained hypothesis is that larger importers have a higher elasticity
of demand. How does this affect the degree of exchange rate pass-through? Again using the
definition of (2.10), we may establish that

                                        (ρj − 1)2
                                                                      
                          d log ω                                1   1
                                   =Γ             − θij (θij (1 − ) + ) ,               (2.14)
                          d log ρj      (ρj − η)2                η   η

where Γ > 0.7

     Since we have assumed that ρj > η > 1, and 0 ≤ θij ≤ 1, the expression in square brackets
on the right-hand side of (2.14) is positive. Hence, ω is increasing in ρj for all values of θij
between 0 and 1, and therefore exchange rate pass-through is decreasing in ρj . Thus, exchange
rate pass-through is systematically lower for sales to importers with a higher elasticity of demand.
The intuition for this is clear. When the firm raises its price in response to an exchange rate
shock, its concern for a reduced market share will limit the degree of pass-through. But the
firm’s market share will fall more, the higher is the elasticity of demand. Hence, while a high
elasticity of demand does not in itself lead to lower pass-through, the combination of a high
elasticity and strategic price adjustment with variable market share implies a lower exchange
rate pass-through.

     If, as we have discussed above, importing firms that have a larger share of the market have
higher elasticity of demand, then (2.14) implies that exchange rate pass-through should be lower,
the larger the importing firm’s share of the market. Thus, we have a set of joint predictions
concerning exchange rate pass-through and market share. Holding the importer market share
constant, the relationship between pass-through and exporter market share should be U-shaped,
declining for low market shares, and increasing for high market shares. On the other hand, for
a given exporter market share, a rise in the importer’s market share should lead to a decline in
exchange rate pass-through. In our empirical analysis below we see that these predictions are
supported.
                                                                                                1
     Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the exchange rate pass-through term 1+ω        (for
clarity of exposition, we assume that γ1 = γ2 ϕ = 0) and the firm’s share of market j, θij , assuming
that ρj = 5 and η = 2 (this is the low-elasticity scenario). As described above, exchange rate
pass-through begins at unity when θij = 0, but falls to around 0.7 for intermediate values of θij .
As θij → 1, pass-through becomes complete again. It is important to note that the fact that

   6
     When exporters face increasing marginal cost of production, pass-through will be less than unity, since a rise
in price will coincide with a fall in marginal costs. If the elasticity of marginal cost is increasing in production,
then pass-through will be lower for larger importing firms in this case as well.
   7     η(ρj −η)2 θij (1−θij )
     Γ=       ((−1))2         .


                                                         10
                                             1


                                            0.9


                                            0.8
               Exchange Rate Pass-Through




                                            0.7


                                            0.6


                                            0.5

                                                       Low elasticity (ρ = 5)
                                            0.4        High elasticity (ρ = 12)


                                            0.3
                                                  0            0.2                0.4              0.6    0.8   1
                                                                                  Exporter Market Share


                                                  Figure 1: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share


pass-through is essentially complete for infinitely small market-share firms and for monopoly
firms is a result of assuming that γ1 = γ2 ϕ = 0. However, in reality it is likely that these
parameters are greater than 0, and therefore pass-through for extreme values of θij will not
necessarily be complete.

     Figure 1 also illustrates the relationship between pass-through and θij for a higher elasticity,
ρj = 8. Again, for θ = 0 or 1, pass-through is unaffected. But in intermediate ranges of θij ,
pass-through may fall quite dramatically as a result of the higher demand elasticity. In Figure
1, the lowest value of exchange rate pass-through falls from 0.7 in the initial case of ρj = 5 to
just below 0.4 when ρj = 8.

     In this discussion, we have taken the price of other firms in the industry as given in evaluating
the degree of exchange rate pass-through for a particular firm i. In Appendix B, we show that
these results are robust to an extension to an industry equilibrium where other competing firms
increase their prices, even if their costs are not directly affected by the exchange rate shock.8

     How do these results relate to the measure of exchange rate pass-through that can be ob-
tained from the data? Equation (2.9) is a comparative static expression from an optimal pricing
relationship in a static model. But in repeated observations over a firm’s sales to a particular

   8
     See Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2015) for a recent examination of strategic complementarities in price
setting across firms using micro data in an open economy environment.


                                                                                        11
market, the empirical equivalent to measured pass-through based on (2.9) is the regression coef-
ficient of the firm’s log price on the log exchange rate. This measures the relationship between
the firm’s price and the exchange rate, holding all other controls fixed. Thus, we can equate the
empirical equivalent of the left-hand side of (2.9) with

                                     cov(∆ log pijt , ∆ log eit )
                                                                  .
                                         var(∆ log eit )

2.2. Sticky Prices and the Choice of Invoicing Currency

     As we discuss below, our data on import prices includes the currency in which the transaction
is invoiced, whether it is U.S. dollars, Canadian dollars or the currency of a third country. If
prices are fully flexible, it should not matter in which currency the transaction is invoiced, since
the exporting firm can adjust its price in the importer’s currency or in its own currency to
achieve its desired markup over costs. With preset prices, however, exchange rate pass-through
will depend a lot on the currency of invoicing. If prices are set in the producer’s currency (PCP),
then pass-through is high, since final-goods prices in the importing country will adjust one-for-
one with exchange rates. But if prices are set in the local currency (LCP), the pass-through is
much lower.

     As we make more clear below, our measure of exchange rate pass-through is akin to being
conditional on a price change. Hence, by construction, we do not observe pass-through that
is triggered purely by exchange rate movements without any price adjustments undertaken by
the producing firms. In this case, it might seem that the invoicing currency would be irrelevant
to the measured degree of exchange rate pass-through. But if, in fact, sellers are subject to
some short-term price rigidity, then the invoicing currency will matter, even for the degree of
pass-through that takes place after a price change.

     Engel (2006) shows a close relationship between the determinants of pass-through for the
firm with flexible prices, and the choice of currency of price-setting for the sticky-price firm. In
particular, he shows that a firm that would desire a large exchange rate pass-through elasticity
under flexible prices is more likely to choose PCP if it must set the nominal price in advance.
Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010) extend Engel’s result to a model of Calvo staggered
pricing. They show that the critical determinant of the currency of pricing is what they define
as “medium run pass-through,” which measures the pass-through of exchange rate changes to a
firm’s price after it has an opportunity to adjust its price.

    The implication of these theories is that the causality in the empirical relationship between
currency of invoicing and exchange rate pass-through should be in the reverse direction. A firm
observed to have higher exchange rate pass-through is more likely to invoice transactions in its
own currency (PCP), while a firm with low pass-through is more likely to invoice in Canadian

                                                  12
dollars. Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010) show that if a firm’s short-run price flexibility
is constrained by a Calvo price adjustment process, then it will follow LCP (PCP) when the
empirical exchange rate pass-through coefficient is less than (greater than) 0.5. Thus, in terms
of our notation, we should anticipate that a given firm will invoice in local currency when

                                      cov(∆ log pijt , ∆ log eit )
                                                                   < 0.5.                                 (2.15)
                                          var(∆ log eit )

     The empirical implication of this condition is that sectors or goods with pass-through below
0.5 should be characterized by Canadian dollar invoicing, whereas those with pass-through higher
than 0.5 should have transactions invoiced in the currency of the exporting country. In general,
we will find this prediction supported in our data.9 From a broader perspective, condition (2.15)
implies that there should be a significant difference in pass-through measures between Canadian-
dollar invoiced goods and non-Canadian-dollar invoiced goods. This prediction is also strongly
supported by our estimates.

     In Figure 2 we illustrate how the relationship between pass-through and currency choice
will also depend on the market shares of firms involved in trade. We see that for exporters of
all market shares trading with low-elasticity importers, transactions will always be priced in the
producer’s currency (or U.S. dollars). However, for transactions with bigger, more-productive
and hence higher-elasticity-of-demand importers, there are exporters with certain market shares
that will opt to price their goods in the destination market currency. That is, their desired
pass-through will be low enough that (2.15) will hold.

     The interesting implication is that there will be a U-shaped relationship between the prob-
ability of PCP and exporter market share, and an overall negative relationship between the
probability of PCP and importer market share (assuming, in both cases, that at least some
importing firms have a high enough ρ). We test these predictions in the data and find strong
support for both. For very high market-share importers trading with very high market-share ex-
porters, we would expect transactions to be priced in the producer’s currency, which could mean
the relationship between the probability of PCP and importing firm market share is non-linear.
However, we find little empirical evidence in support of this in the data.

   9
    While the expression (2.15) indicates 0.5 as the cut-off threshold for the relationship between pass-through
and the currency of invoicing, it is based on an assumption that short-term price stickiness represents the only
factor determining the choice over currency of invoice. In reality, there are likely many legal and institutional
features of trade relationships that impact on the invoicing decision. As a result, we should not take the 0.5
threshold as an exact prediction in the empirical investigation.




                                                       13
                                              1
                                                                                            Low elasticity (ρ = 5)
                                                                                            High elasticity (ρ = 12)
                                             0.9


                                             0.8
                Exchange Rate Pass-Through




                                             0.7


                                             0.6
                                                       Producer currency pricing


                                             0.5


                                             0.4       Local currency pricing



                                             0.3
                                                   0         0.2                0.4              0.6               0.8   1
                                                                                Exporter Market Share


             Figure 2: Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Market Share and Currency Choice


3. Data

3.1. Customs Data

     We use data from the Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA) that contain information
on every single commercial import/shipment into Canada from September 2002 to June 2008.10
The data, collected by the CBSA and housed at Statistics Canada, contain information on the
total value of each shipment, the number of units shipped, the 10-digit Harmonized System (HS)
product code for the good, an importing firm identifier, an exporting firm/vendor identifier, the
country in which the good was produced, the country from which the good was finally exported
directly to Canada, and several other pieces of information that are important for the analysis
of exchange rate pass-through.

   As a proxy for prices, we use unit values defined as total shipment value divided by the
number of units.11 The shipment values are reported in the currency of invoice, and if this

  10
    This data set is similar to the Argentine import customs data used by Gopinath and Neiman (2014).
  11
    There are several issues that arise from using unit values as a proxy for prices, such as the fact that even
though the 10-digit HS codes are quite fine, there may still be more than one distinct product in each code,
and therefore observed price changes may be due to compositional changes within the 10-digit HS code, rather
than changes in the true, underlying prices of individual goods. Moreover, there may be measurement errors in
the number of units. These issues are discussed by Berman, Martin and Mayer (2012) and Amiti, Itskhoki and
Konings (2014), who use similar data. In section 3.2, we provide a very specific definition of a product that can


                                                                                      14
is different than Canadian dollars, a Canadian-dollar value is reported using the value of the
bilateral exchange rate at the time the good crossed the border. While goods come across the
border on a daily basis, we are not provided with an exact date that a given shipment crossed
the border and are provided only with the month in which the import entered Canada. In the
empirical analysis below, for shipments priced in Canadian dollars, we match the unit values with
the monthly bilateral exchange rate between Canada and the country of export. Therefore, for
goods priced in non-Canadian dollars, we have a transaction-specific (or day-specific) exchange
rate, and for those priced in Canadian dollars, we have a monthly bilateral exchange rate. In
the next subsection, we explain how we convert these transaction data into monthly data for the
analysis of exchange rate pass-through.

     As for the importing firm identifier, we are provided with a scrambled business number (for
confidentiality reasons) that allows us to track a single Canadian buyer over time. Aside from
this, we have limited information about the buyer other than the province in which it is located.
On the exporter side, we have a vendor identifier, which allows us to track a single exporter
over time. What we do not know is whether this vendor is a producer or an intermediary—the
identifier is built from the company name provided on the customs sheet, which refers to the
company ultimately responsible for shipping the good to the border.

     Along with reporting the number of units shipped, the data set reports what the units are
for each shipment. Examples of the unit of measurement include “number,” “kilograms” and
“litres.” When tracking a unit price over time, we take into account the unit of measurement.

    Finally, the data set provides a value for duty code, which, among other things, lets us
know whether a reported import represents a transaction among affiliated companies (intrafirm
trade). For our analysis, we drop all of these imports, since we want to focus on interfirm trade,
and the model presented above reflects this fact.12


3.2. Panel Design: Defining Monthly Prices

     To measure exchange rate pass-through, it is important that we have a set of goods whose
prices we can track over time. In our data, we can observe many imports of the same good in the
same month, and these 10-digit HS (HS10) goods can arrive in Canada from different countries
and be purchased by different companies in Canada. Therefore, in the raw data there is no way
to track the price of a single good over time. To create a price that can be tracked over time
and used to analyze pass-through, we combine price observations in order to define a good price
that is specific to an importing firm (f ), exporting firm (v), HS10 product (pr), country of origin

be tracked over time that addresses these issues, to some extent, but the empirical results that we present should
be interpreted with the understanding of these possible data limitations.
  12
     See Neiman (2010) for an analysis of pass-through and intrafirm trade.


                                                       15
(o), country of export (ex), currency (c), unit of measurement (u) and time (t). For clarity of
exposition, let s = {f, v, pr, o, ex, c, u}. We define the price of good s in month t as

                                            Pst = Σnl=1 (αlst · Plst ),                                  (3.1)

where l is an individual transaction (or import) and αlst is a weight, defined as the relative
shipment size to total shipments of the good s. That is,
                                                     Shipmentlst
                                          αlst =    n               ,                                    (3.2)
                                                   Σl=1 Shipmentlst

where Shipmentlst is the number of units in each shipment and n is the total number of imports
of good s in a single month.

     In addition, since we have a transaction-specific exchange rate for those goods priced in
currencies other than the Canadian dollar (the exchange rate can vary depending on what day
of the month a good crosses the border), we can create a st-specific exchange rate in a manner
similar to the way we created a st-specific price. For those goods priced in Canadian dollars,
there is no implied exchange rate in the data. We therefore match these observations with the
monthly bilateral exchange rate between the Canadian dollar and the currency of the exporting
country. With this definition of a st-specific price, we now have “collapsed” or “condensed”
data for each product that we use in the empirical analysis of exchange rate pass-through. In
what follows, we refer to the raw data as shipment data, and the monthly condensed data as
product-level data. We can also use the value of the shipments (in Canadian dollars) to create
weighted statistics.


3.3. Summary Statistics

     In any given month, we observe approximately five million shipments (we have data for 71
months and the total data set has just under 400 million observations). However, for many of
these shipments, either the number of units in the shipment or the unit of measurement is not
available. Both of these pieces of information are needed to calculate the unit value and create
a time series for a single good. For this reason, we select a subset of products representing a
wide range of goods that have this information reported for at least 85 percent of the observed
shipments.

     The nine product groupings or sectors, along with information on the currency of invoice,
are presented in Table 1. The products range from commodities (e.g. vegetable products),
to light manufacturing goods (e.g. textiles), to heavy manufacturing goods (e.g. industrial
machinery).13 As for the currency of invoice, overall, 88.0 percent of weighted imports and 86.0

 13
      In Table 1, the products are defined as a range of HS2 codes. However, within these ranges, some specific


                                                        16
percent of the shipments are invoiced in U.S. dollars. For Canadian dollars, these numbers are
8 and 4.5 percent, and they are 2.9 and 5.6 percent for euro-priced goods, respectively. The
high U.S.-dollar share of overall imports is in line with what has been found in other data sets
that contain information on the currency of invoice. Across the nine product categories, we see
that there is some variation in the currency of invoice. For example, in terms of the total value
of imports, at one extreme only 64.6 percent of food and beverage imports are priced in U.S.
dollars (with a significant portion, 33.3 percent, priced in euros), while at the other end 93.3
percent of vegetable product imports are priced in U.S. dollars.

                           Table 1: Summary Statistics — Currency of Invoice
                                      Currency of Invoice (%)   Currency of Invoice (%)
                                            (by value)              (by shipments)
                            HS Code   USD CAD          EUR      USD CAD         EUR          Obs.
    Overall                    —      88.0   8.0         2.9    86.0     4.5     5.6      37,397,388
    Vegetable products        07-14   93.3    6.0        1.1    95.9     2.1     0.8       6,075,397
    Food and beverage         16-22   64.6    1.6        33.3   74.6     5.8    13.9       3,091,614
    Chemical products         28-35   86.9    9.7        1.6    83.3     12.4    1.5       2,955,658
    Textiles                  50-60   82.1   12.2        4.5    89.5     3.6     5.6       3,488,820
    Apparel                   61-62   88.3    6.5        3.6    66.9     6.3    14.8       6,681,865
    Footwear                   64     83.1    4.4        11.9   78.6     5.8    13.8       856,652
    Metal products            72-81   91.1    6.9        1.7    93.2     2.5     2.2       6,093,213
    Industrial machinery       84     88.7    6.3        3.9    93.1     3.9     1.9       5,198,218
    Consumer electronics       85     86.1   11.2        1.0    93.6     2.1     1.8       2,955,951


     Given that we have both importing and exporting firm identifiers in our data, we can calcu-
late import market shares for both groups. To do this, we must decide the level of aggregation
at which we define market share. After experimenting with a number of definitions, we decided
that defining market share at the six-digit HS (HS6) level was the suitable level of aggregation.
That is, either for exporters or importers, we define market share as a given firm’s share of the
import market, in terms of value, within a given HS6 product category. Therefore, a single firm
can have multiple market shares if they export or import multiple products (across the HS6
classifications). Our definition of market share is also calendar-year specific, and so a firm’s
market share can vary over time.

     In Table 2, we present the share of overall imports accounted for by firms in different market
share quintiles. More specifically, based on each firm’s share of the importer market at the HS6
level, we place them into quintile bins (that is, all firms with market share between 0 and 20
percent are assigned to the first quintile bin, those with 20 to 40 percent in the second quintile
bin, and so on). We then calculate the total value of imports accounted for by the firms in the

HS2 and HS4 products are dropped due to too many missing observations.


                                                    17
different quintile bins. Both in terms of value and number of products imported (product level),
importers and exporters in the first quintile of the market share distribution account for the
majority of imports. However, in terms of value, the other quintiles account for a non-negligible
portion of imports—for example, importers in the third, fourth and fifth quintiles collectively
account for nearly 20 percent of imports.

                           Table 2: Currency of Invoice by Market Share
     Import Market               Value Weighted                             Product Level
     Share Quintile     Share of    Currency of Invoice (%)     Share of      Currency of Invoice (%)
      Importers       Imports (%) USD CAD           EUR       Imports (%)     USD CAD         EUR
           1             66.8       89.6    6.2      2.9         95.8         85.3    6.3       5.9
           2             13.6       89.3    7.6      2.5          2.0         85.8    6.9       6.0
           3              7.7       71.7   21.0      6.5          1.7         34.0   32.1      29.6
           4              4.7       78.5   19.6      1.2          0.3         64.4   27.4       6.0
           5              7.3       93.3    4.4      0.5          0.1         87.7    8.3       3.0

       Exporters
          1              76.2       87.2    8.1      3.5         98.2         84.2   6.8       6.4
          2              12.2       91.4    6.8      1.2          1.2         87.0   10.3      1.9
          3              4.5        87.9    9.7      1.2          0.4         85.7   11.7      1.8
          4              2.6        90.2    8.8      0.8          0.1         89.8   6.7       2.7
          5              4.6        90.4    7.4      0.5          0.0         84.4   11.8      3.0



      Table 2 also reports the currency of invoice by market share quintile. For exporters, the
share of imports in U.S. dollars is fairly constant across the market share quintiles, falling within
87 and 91 percent, and the share of Canadian-dollar- and euro-priced goods varies very little,
as well. What is interesting is the relationship between the market share of importers and the
currency of invoice. In terms of value, only about 6 percent of imports by importers in the
first quintile of market share are priced in Canadian dollars. However, 21 percent of the value
of imports by the third quintile are priced in Canadian dollars, and roughly 20 percent for the
fourth quintile. This number drops to 4 percent for the fifth quintile. There is a similar pattern
for the product-level measures of imports. In the next section, we take these stylized facts into
account when testing the implications of the model.


4. Empirical Analysis

4.1. Exchange Rate Pass-Through

    We start the empirical analysis by obtaining a measure of overall pass-through, and pass-
through estimates for each product/sector. To do so, we use the following micro-price pass-
through regression:

                                                   18
                                                             0
                                   4τ pst = c + βe 4τ est + Zst γ + st ,                               (4.1)

where 4τ pst = ln(Pst )−ln(Psτ ) is expressed in Canadian dollars and τ represents the last period
in which this price is observed (we have a very specific definition of a good price, and a good
will not necessarily be imported every period). Similarly, 4τ est is the cumulative change in the
log of the nominal exchange rate over the duration for which subsequent imports of good s are
observed. Zst includes controls for the cumulative change in the foreign consumer price level,
the Canadian consumer price level, Canadian GDP, and fixed effects for every s product and
month t. Note that this is a similar set of control variables to that used by Gopinath, Itskhoki
and Rigobon (2010), and given that we are looking at cumulative changes in variables over time,
this set-up is similar to the medium-run pass-through regressions in that paper. Finally, st is
an error term.

     Table 3 presents the results for overall pass-through and for each of the nine products/sectors,
individually, with and without weights. That is, we run the regressions using the product-level
data, weighting the observations by the total value of monthly shipments for each product s—
weighted results—and without value weights—unweighted results.14 The overall estimate of
exchange rate pass-through (pooling all products together) is approximately 59 percent using
value weights, and 48 percent without weights.

     These estimates offer valuable insights into the overall degree of pass-through to import
prices in Canada. The Canadian aggregate import price index is constructed in such a way that
some of the price data are sampled from other countries (mainly the United States). The strong
assumptions regarding the degree of pass-through made in this process can create a mechanical
relationship between aggregate prices and the exchange rate, resulting in an upward bias on any
reduced-form pass-through estimates.15 Our estimates are not subject to such a bias, since we
work with transaction-level data.

     In addition to the overall pass-through estimates, we also see that there is a significant
amount of variation across the products/sectors. At one extreme, in terms of value-weighted
results, the pass-through coefficient for apparel is 0.826 and significant at the 1% level. At the
other end, the pass-through coefficient for vegetable products is 0.214, and it, too, is significant at
the 1% level. The other pass-through point estimates fall within this range, with pass-through for
footwear and industrial machinery exhibiting high pass-through at 0.744 and 0.752, respectively,
and metal products at the lower end with a point estimate of 0.422. Most of these results are

  14
     Table C.1 in Appendix C presents the pass-through estimates for all the products pooled together, along
with the coefficients on the other variables.
  15
     For details on Statistics Canada assumptions regarding pass-through, see http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/13-
604-m/13-604-m2009062-eng.htm#Note5.



                                                     19
in line with the finding that for many other countries, pass-through is incomplete. However, the
amount of variation across products that we estimate is surprising.

                                 Table 3: Exchange Rate Pass-Through Estimates
                                                  Product Level               Value Weighted
                                                  β̂e       (s.e.)             β̂e      (s.e.)            Obs.
                  Overall                     0.484***        (0.004)      0.593***       (0.027)      7,993,402
                  Vegetable products           0.298***       (0.009)      0.214***       (0.037)       959,319
                  Food and beverage            0.454***       (0.011)      0.552***       (0.076)       585,693
                  Chemical products            0.419***       (0.010)      0.642***       (0.088)       642,768
                  Textiles                     0.546***       (0.011)      0.671***       (0.034)       606,482
                  Apparel                      0.625***       (0.007)      0.826***       (0.026)      1,528,634
                  Footwear                     0.587***       (0.018)      0.744***       (0.037)       175,342
                  Metal products               0.302***       (0.006)      0.422***       (0.043)      2,090,899
                  Industrial machinery         0.662***       (0.009)      0.752***       (0.064)       975,483
                  Consumer electronics         0.653***       (0.013)      0.710***       (0.099)       428,782


Note: The pass-through coefficients for the specific products are obtained using interaction terms, and therefore there is only one
set of coefficients for the other explanatory variables. Each regression includes HS10 product and time fixed effects. We restrict the
sample to price changes within the -100% to +100% range. The standard errors have not been clustered. We experimented with a
number of different levels of clustering (different levels of HS good, as well as clustering at the importer and exporter levels), and
the level of significance for the estimates of interest did not change.




4.2. Exchange Rate Pass-Through and the Currency of Invoice

     We next test some of the implications of the model. We start with pass-through and the
currency of invoice. As documented in Table 1, there is some variation within products/sectors
when it comes to the currency of invoice. The model predicts that pass-through rates will be
associated with different currency types: exporters that desire lower pass-through to the import
price will price in Canadian dollars (CAD); those that desire higher pass-through will price in
foreign currency. To test these hypotheses, we use a similar set-up as in (4.1), but we introduce
dummy variables for whether a specific product is priced in Canadian dollars (DCAD ), U.S.
dollars (DU SD ), or euros (DEU R ), and include a full set of interaction terms with the exchange
rate:



                4τ pst =c + α1 DCAD + α2 DU SD + α3 DEU R + β1 4τ est + β2 [4τ est · DCAD ]
                                                                              0
                                                                                                                               (4.2)
                             + β3 [4τ est · DU SD ] + β4 [4τ est · DEU R ] + Zst γ + st .


The coefficient β1 will pick up the degree of pass-through for goods priced in currencies other
than Canadian and U.S. dollars, and euros (this is understood to be a very small set of goods).

                                                                 20
Pass-through to Canadian-dollar-priced goods will be βC = β1 + β2 , to U.S.-dollar-priced goods
it will be βU = β1 + β3 and to euro-priced goods it will be βE = β1 + β4 .

     Table 4 presents the results of the estimation. Note that these results are from product
level regressions (unweighted), to better reflect the assumptions and mechanisms presented in
the model.16 The first set of columns shows the estimates and the standard errors, while the
last three show the difference between the estimates and indicate whether that difference is
statistically significant. The results are generally in line with the predictions of the model.
For all products/sectors, pass-through is higher for U.S.-dollar-priced goods than for Canadian-
dollar-priced goods, and in all but one case (vegetable products) the difference between the two
estimates is both large and statistically significant. The largest difference between the two pass-
through rates is for footwear, where the pass-through estimate for U.S.-dollar goods is 0.702
and for Canadian-dollar goods it is 0.078 (and not significant). For most products/sectors the
rate of pass-through is also higher for euro-priced goods than for Canadian-dollar-priced goods.
For example, in food and beverage products, the pass-through estimate for euro goods is 0.684,
which is larger and significantly different from the Canadian-dollar estimate.

                                    Table 4: Pass-Through and Currency Choice
                                   CA Dollar            US Dollar                 Euro                       Difference
       Product                    βC      (s.e.)       βU      (s.e.)        βE          (s.e.)   βC - βU    βC - βE      βU - βE
       Overall                 0.137***    (0.01)   0.502***     (0.01)   0.497***       (0.01)   -0.37***   -0.36***       0.01
       Vegetable products      0.300***    (0.04)   0.325***     (0.01)   0.547***       (0.06)    -0.07     -0.25***     -0.22***
       Food and beverage         0.020     (0.03)   0.481***     (0.02)   0.684***       (0.03)   -0.46***   -0.66***     -0.20***
       Chemical products       0.128***    (0.04)   0.459***     (0.02)   0.521***       (0.06)   -0.32***   -0.39***       0.06
       Textiles                 0.096**    (0.05)   0.587***     (0.02)   0.484***       (0.04)   -0.49***   -0.39***     0.10***
       Apparel                 0.123***    (0.02)   0.623***     (0.01)   0.484***       (0.02)   -0.50***   -0.36***     0.14***
       Footwear                  0.078     (0.06)   0.702***     (0.02)   0.562***       (0.04)   -0.62***   -0.48***     0.14***
       Metal products          0.193***    (0.03)   0.451***     (0.01)   0.255***       (0.04)   -0.26***     -0.06      0.20**
       Industrial machinery    0.211***    (0.04)   0.597***     (0.01)   0.589***       (0.06)   -0.39***   -0.38***       0.01
       Consumer electronics    0.169***    (0.06)   0.620***     (0.02)   0.740***       (0.08)   -0.45***   -0.57***      -0.12


Note: The pass-through coefficients for the different products are obtained using interaction terms, and therefore there is only one
set of coefficients for the other explanatory variables. Each regression includes HS10 product and time fixed effects. We restrict the
sample to price changes within the -100% to +100% range. The standard errors have not been clustered. We experimented with a
number of different levels of clustering (different levels of HS good, as well as clustering at the importer and exporter levels), and
the level of significance for the estimates of interest did not change.




    Given that the U.S. dollar is the most common currency in Canadian imports, it is not
surprising that the coefficient estimates for U.S.-dollar transactions are closest to the overall
pass-through estimates presented in Table 3. Nevertheless, there is some variation in currency
within products/sectors.

  16
    The model outlines the micro mechanisms that influence firm pricing behavior. The unweighted regressions
are better suited to capture these mechanisms, since the estimates reflect the decisions of any given firm, rather
than putting extra weight on firms with high values of imports, as does the weighted regression set-up.


                                                                 21
4.3. Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share

     We next test the other predictions of the model: there exists a U-shaped relationship be-
tween exporter market share and exchange rate pass-through, and a monotonically decreasing
relationship for importer market share. Exporting firms with low market share are usually small
firms that charge a small markup. As a result, they have little room to adjust their markup,
and hence their price, in the face of exchange rate movements. For this reason, they must pass
movements in the exchange rate on to the importing firm, meaning pass-through will be high.
As market share increases, so do firm size and markups. This gives the exporting firm more
room to adjust its markup and price to market, to maintain market share, which implies lower
pass-through. However, once firms have sufficient market share, they no longer need to adjust
their foreign currency price to maintain market share, and therefore pass-through increases. This
all results in a U-shaped relationship between pass-through and exporter market share. For im-
porters, the larger the firm (in terms of market share), the higher the elasticity of demand and
the lower the pass-through. To test these hypotheses, we run the following regression:

                                                                             2       0
    4τ pst = c + αM Sht + β0 4τ est + β1 [4τ est · M Sht ] + β2 [4τ est · M Sht ] + Zst γ + st ,   (4.3)

where M Sht refers to the market share (as defined in section 3.3) of either an exporter or
importer h (i.e. h ∈ {f, v}) at time t. This term, along with a squared term, is interacted
with the exchange rate to capture the degree of curvature in the pass-through–market share
relationship.

     The results are presented in Table 5. The coefficient estimates for β0 , β1 and β2 can be
used, along with varying market shares, to map out the pass-through–market share relationship.
In this set-up, the coefficient on the cumulative log change in the exchange rate, β0 , represents
the degree of pass-through if market share is zero. We start, in column (I), by including only a
single interaction term for exporter market share. The coefficient on the exchange rate–market
share interaction term is negative and significant at the 10% level, suggesting some evidence
of a negative relationship between exporter market share and pass-through. In column (II), we
include an interaction term between the exchange rate and market share squared. The coefficient
on the linear interaction terms is negative and significant at the 1% level, while the coefficient
on the non-linear interaction term is positive and significant at the 5% level. This is evidence of
a U-shaped relationship.

     For importers, there is strong evidence of a negative relationship between pass-through and
market share. In column (III), the coefficient on the linear interaction term is negative and
significant at the 1% level. In column (IV), we include a non-linear term for importers just to
be consistent with what was done on the exporter side. We see that the coefficient on the linear
interaction term is positive, but not statistically significant, and the coefficient on the non-linear
term is negative and significant. We take this as further evidence that the negative relationship

                                                   22
                                       Table 5: Market Share and Pass-Through
                                                        (I)            (II)          (III)          (IV)           (V)
             Exchange rate                           0.486***       0.487***      0.488***       0.486***       0.489***
                                                      (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)
             Exporter market share                  -0.007***      -0.007***                                     -0.005*
                                                     (0.003)        (0.003)                                      (0.003)
             ER·(Exporter market share)               -0.099*      -0.290***                                    -0.224**
                                                      (0.056)       (0.111)                                      (0.113)
             ER·(Exporter market share)2                            0.402**                                      0.390*
                                                                    (0.201)                                      (0.202)
             Importer market share                                                -0.005***      -0.005**        -0.004*
                                                                                   (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
             ER·(Importer market share)                                           -0.122***        0.078        -0.111***
                                                                                   (0.034)        (0.078)        (0.036)
             ER·(Importer market share)2                                                         -0.397***
                                                                                                  (0.140)
             Constant                                0.003**        0.003**        0.003**        0.003**        0.003**
                                                     (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
             Obs.                                   7,993,402      7,993,402      7,993,402      7,993,402      7,993,402
             R2                                       0.003          0.003          0.003          0.003          0.003

Note: Each regression includes HS10 product and time fixed effects. We restrict the sample to price changes within the -100% to
+100% range. The standard errors have not been clustered. We experimented with a number of different levels of clustering
(different levels of HS good, as well as clustering at the importer and exporter levels), and the level of significance for the estimates
of interest changed very little.




is monotonic. Finally, in column (V) we include both exporter and importer market share in
the same regression and find that the results hold. That is, we observe a U-shape response for
exporters and a decreasing relationship for importers.

     To get an idea of the magnitude of these relationships, in Figure 3 we use the coefficients from
columns (II) and (III) to plot market share against pass-through for importers and exporters.
We see in this figure that there is a U-shaped relationship for exporters—and that pass-through
is roughly in the 0.4 to 0.6 range depending on exporter market share—and a downward-sloping
relationship for importers—where pass-through goes from just below 0.5 for small market share
importers to below 0.4 for large market share importers. Note that for the exporter pass-through–
market share relationship, the fact that the y-axis intercept is less than 1 provides some evidence
that either γ1 > 0 or γ2 ϕ > 0, or both.

     So far, we have not controlled for the market share of the trading partner. The coefficient
estimates presented above are meant to reflect the effect of increasing the market share of either
an importer or exporter, holding all else constant, including the market share of their trading
partner. However, the coefficients are estimated off of information on exporters (importers)


                                                                  23
                                           0.7



                                                      Exporter Market Share (Column II, Table 5)
              Exchange Rate Pass-Through
                                           0.6
                                                      Importer Market Share (Column III, Table 5)




                                           0.5




                                           0.4




                                           0.3
                                                 0           0.2              0.4                  0.6   0.8   1
                                                                                    Market Share


                                                 Figure 3: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share



trading with importers (exporters) of varying market shares. In Table 6, we present results for
when we hold the market share of the trading partner relatively constant. More specifically,
we look at pass-through across exporters (importers) of different market shares trading with
importers (exporters) within quintiles of the market share distribution. We focus mainly on the
case where the trading partner falls within the first quintile of the market share distribution.

      When holding the importer market share quintile constant at the first quintile, we see that
as we increase the market share of the exporter, pass-through at first increases (from 0.486 to
0.582 from the first to second quintile), then drops to 0.438, before eventually increasing to 1.232
for the fifth quintile. While not completely U-shaped, there is some evidence of a U shape, which
is in line with the predictions of the model. When holding the exporter market share constant at
the first quintile, we see that as we increase importer market share, exchange rate pass-through
generally decreases (there is a slight increase from the first to the second quintile, but these
coefficients are not statistically different from each other). This accords with the prediction of
the model that the relationship between importer market share and pass-through is negative.


4.4. Market Share and the Currency of Invoice

    Our model makes the further prediction that exporting firms that prefer lower pass-through
to import prices will choose to invoice in the currency of the destination country, while those
that prefer higher pass-through will choose their own currency or the U.S. dollar. Furthermore,


                                                                                    24
                                  Table 6: Cross-Market Shares and Pass-Through
                                                                       Importer Market
                                                                        Share Quintile
                                                      1              2          3               4            5
                                           1     0.486***       0.489***      0.430***      0.256***      0.282**
                                                  (0.004)        (0.030)       (0.028)       (0.072)      (0.121)
                                                [7,559,207]     [132,492]     [121,261]     [14,458]      [4,817]
                                           2     0.582***       0.514***
                                                  (0.047)        (0.063)
                    Exporter Market              [60,047]       [35,954]
                     Share Quintile        3     0.438***                     0.649***
                                                  (0.096)                      (0.123)
                                                 [16,082]                     [10,130]
                                           4     0.785***                                     0.131
                                                  (0.164)                                    (0.168)
                                                  [4,955]                                    [4,441]
                                           5     1.232***                                                  0.277
                                                  (0.269)                                                 (0.178)
                                                  [1,500]                                                 [3,503]

Note: Off-diagonal (other than when either the exporter or importer market is in the first quintile) estimates are excluded, because
the regressions have very few observations and therefore the coefficients are insignificant and difficult to interpret. Each regression
includes HS10 product and time fixed effects.




we show that this is related to the market share of firms. On the one side, as small exporters
increase their market share, they are more likely to price in the destination market currency; but
at a certain point, when market share is large enough, an increase in market share makes it more
likely for them to price in the producer currency. This is a reflection of the mechanisms that
determine the U-shaped pass-through and market share relationship. On the other side, holding
the market share of the exporter constant, an increase in importer market share will invariably
lower the degree of pass-through and hence increase the chances that imports are invoiced in the
local (destination market) currency.

    We have some initial evidence, from Table 2, that importers with larger market share are
more likely to pay in Canadian dollars (the exception being those firms in the top quintile, where
the share of goods priced in Canadian dollars drops). To test these hypotheses more formally,
we use a logit model to estimate how market share affects the probability of invoicing in different
currencies. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

                                                                      exp(vst )
                                                Pr(U SDst ) =                     ,                                             (4.4)
                                                                    1 + exp(vst )

where
                                                                                   0
                                       vst = c + β∆τ est + αM Sht + Zst γ + st .
U SDst is a variable that is equal to one if a good is invoiced in U.S. dollars, and zero if the price

                                                                 25
is set in Canadian dollars (because these two currencies account for over 90 percent of shipments,
for clarity we restrict the analysis to them). Again, M Sht refers to the market share of either
the exporter or importer at time t. The set of control variables, Zst , is the same as in (4.1).

     Table 7 presents the results from the logit regressions.17 In columns (I) and (II), we in-
clude only exporter market share in the regressions, and find that when only the linear term
is included, the estimated coefficient is negative and statistically significant, indicating that the
higher the market share of the exporter, the lower the probability of it being priced in U.S.
dollars. To test for non-linearity, in column (II) we include a squared exporter market share
term. And while the coefficient on the linear term remains negative and statistically significant,
the coefficient estimate on the squared term is positive and significant, indicating that the non-
linear relationship also applies to currency choice. It suggests that as small market share firms
increase their market share, they become more likely to price in Canadian dollars. At a certain
point, when market share is large enough, an increase in market share leads to an increase in
the probability of pricing in U.S. dollars. This result is consistent with the market share and
pass-through results and supports the predictions of the model.

     Column (III) presents the results for importer market share and we see that the coefficient
on market share is negative and significant. This means that the larger the market share of
any given importer, the more likely that importer is to pay in Canadian dollars. This result is
consistent with the predictions of the model and is reflected, in part, in Table 2. However, the
data presented in Table 2 also suggest that importers with very high market share (in the fifth
quintile) primarily pay in U.S. dollars. In column (IV) of Table 7, we test for any further evidence
of this non-linearity by including a squared importer market share term in the regression, but
find that the linear and squared terms are both negative, implying a monotonic relationship
between importer market and currency of invoicing.

     It is possible that the very high market share importers are more likely to be trading with
very high market share exporters, who are at the upper right-hand side of the U-shaped pass-
through curve and are more likely to price in U.S. dollars (regardless of the market share of their
trading partner). There is evidence of this in Table 6: looking at the number of observations in
the regression results in the vertical column 5 (the fifth quintile of the importer market share),
very large importers are almost as likely to transact with an exporter in the fifth quintile (there
are 3,503 monthly transactions) as they are with small exporters in the first quintile (there are
4,817 transactions). Alternatively, we can see that smaller market share importers are much
more likely to trade with small market share exporters than with exporters of similar market

  17
    Because our definition of a product includes the currency in which it is priced, there is no variation in
currency over time for individual products. Therefore, we rely primarily on cross-sectional variation to identify
the relationship between currency choice and market share.



                                                       26
share. For example, there are 121,261 transactions between importers in the third quintile and
exporters in the first quintile, compared to 10,130 transactions between importers and exporters
that are both in the third quintile.

                          Table 7: Market Share and Currency of Invoice (logit model)
                                                   (I)           (II)          (III)         (IV)           (V)
                 Exchange rate                 -9.502***     -9.503***      -9.481***     -9.485***      -9.493***
                                                (0.054)       (0.055)        (0.055)       (0.055)        (0.055)
                 Exporter market share         -1.668***     -4.543***                                   -4.272***
                                                (0.019)       (0.047)                                     (0.048)
                 (Exporter MS)2                               5.387***                                   5.319***
                                                               (0.088)                                    (0.087)
                 Importer market share                                      -0.898***     -0.170***      -0.387***
                                                                             (0.015)       (0.035)        (0.017)
                 (Importer MS)2                                                           -1.241***
                                                                                           (0.054)
                 Constant                      3.302***       3.345***      3.299***       3.281***      3.355***
                                                (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.020)
                 Obs.                          7,290,235     7,290,235      7,290,235     7,290,235      7,290,235
                 pseudo-R2                       0.103         0.104          0.102         0.102          0.104

Note: The dependent variable, U SDst , is equal to one if a good is priced in U.S. dollars, and zero if priced in Canadian dollars.
Each regression includes HS2 product and time fixed effects. We restrict the sample to price changes within the -100% to +100%
range.




    Finally, in column (V) we include the market share of both exporters and importers in the
same regression. We find that the results hold: there is a U-shaped relationship between exporter
market share and the probability of pricing in U.S. dollars, whereas importer market share is
negatively related to the probability of pricing in U.S. dollars (or, alternatively, importer market
share is positively related to the use of Canadian dollars for invoicing).


5. Discussion: Market Share and Pass-Through Over Time

     There is a literature on the evolution of exchange rate pass-through to prices. In particular,
several studies have looked into whether exchange rate pass-through to import prices may have
declined in recent years in industrialized countries (Marazzi and Sheets, 2007; Bouakez and Rebei,
2008; Dong, 2012). In this section, we explore how changes in market shares over time may be
related to changes in aggregate pass-through over time. We start by running weighted rolling
regressions to get an estimate of pass-through over time. Specifically, we run the regression (4.1)
on 12-month windows, moving up one month at a time. Our price-change data set covers 70
months; therefore, the rolling-window method allows us to derive 58 pass-through estimates. We
present the value-weighted pass-through estimates in Figure 4, with the dates on the horizontal

                                                                 27
axis referring to the point at which the start of the rolling window is January of the given year.
The large swings in pass-through over a relatively short period of time are striking. At the start
of the sample period, pass-through is just over 50 percent. By around 2004, pass-through has
increased to just under 80 percent. Pass-through then declines and hovers around 50 percent
from 2006 onwards.

                1                                                                                            25%

              0.9

              0.8
                                                                                                             20%
              0.7

              0.6

              0.5                                                                                            15%

              0.4

              0.3
                                                                                                             10%
              0.2

              0.1

                0                                                                                            5%


                    Exchange Rate Pass-Through (LHS)                  Importer Market Share (3-5 quintiles, RHS)
                    Exporter Market Share (3-5 quintiles, RHS)


               Figure 4: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share Over Time




     Also in Figure 4, we present the share of the total value of imports accounted for by importers
and exporters that fall within the third to fifth quintiles of the market share distribution. Again,
for comparison purposes, these numbers are calculated by applying the same rolling windows used
in the pass-through regressions. The third to fifth quintiles were selected for the importers to
reflect the point at which there is strong evidence that pass-through is lower for larger importers.
We can see that the share of imports accounted for by larger importers increased from about
16 percent at the start of the sample to almost 21 percent by 2005, before decreasing slightly at
the end of the sample to 19 percent. While there is not a perfect coincidence of the increase in
market share of large importers and the decrease in measured pass-through, the general trends
suggest that the larger the market share of large importers, the lower is overall pass-through.

    As for exporters, given the fact that there is a U-shaped relationship between pass-through
and market share, it is unclear how to best group exporters. Nevertheless, we add together
the market share quintiles three through five to be consistent with what we have done on the
importer side. Figure 4 shows that the share of imports accounted for by larger exporters (in


                                                                 28
terms of market share) increased slightly in about the first year of the sample—from roughly
10 to 12 percent—but then stayed relatively flat. The increase at the start of the sample could
be associated with the initial increase in overall pass-through if market share is shifting toward
larger exporters that are located on the upward-sloping section of the U-shaped relationship
between pass-through and market share.

    In general, our estimates from Tables 5 and 6 suggest that changes in market share alone
are not enough to explain the large observed changes in exchange rate pass-through over time.
Nevertheless, the general trends in both importer and exporter share do suggest that they may
have played a role in overall pass-through.


6. Conclusions

     In this paper, we have developed a model of trade pricing where pass-through of exchange
rates to import prices and the choice of currency invoicing depends on the market structure,
and in particular the market share of both exporting and importing firms. The model implies
that both pass-through and currency invoicing should be non-monotonically related to exporter
market share, in a U-shaped relationship, while pass-through and currency of invoicing should
be strictly negatively related to importer market share.

     Our detailed micro data allow us to measure the import market share, by value of shipment,
of all exporting and importing firms in Canada over a six-year period, as well as the unit price and
currency of invoice for each of these transactions. The predictions of the model for exchange rate
pass-through, and the relationship between both pass-through and invoicing patterns to exporter
and importer market share, are strongly supported by our empirical tests. The implications of
the results suggest that industry composition and market structure are critical ingredients in
understanding exchange rate pass-through. More generally, trends that are visible regarding
the concentration of importer size and market share in the Canadian data may have important
implications for the sensitivity of domestic prices to exchange rate fluctuations in the future.


Appendix A. A Model of Elasticity Choice

     Here we sketch out a simple framework to motivate the argument that importing firms may
have differences in their technologies for producing retail goods, and can choose among different
technologies in advance, subject to a cost. Technologies differ with respect to the elasticity
of substitution between imported retail intermediates. We assume that there is uncertainty
over intermediate-good prices, so that a greater ability to substitute between intermediates will
increase expected profits for retailers. We assume that there are two periods. In period 0, the
importer may, at a cost, choose the elasticity of substitution of its technology. In period 1,

                                                29
given the technology, and realized intermediate prices, the importer purchases intermediates,
repackages them using its technology, and sells them to retail consumers.

     Consider period 1 first. To simplify matters, assume that there are just two inputs into the
production of retail goods. Thus an importer purchases from two separate exporters inputs x1
and x2 , at prices p1 and p2 . The importer is a price taker in its input market, so takes the prices
p1 and p2 as given. The importer then packages the intermediate goods into a retail good for
final sale according to the technology:
                                                             11
                                       1 1− 1         1 1− 1  1− ρ
                                            ρ              ρ
                               y = A v ρ x1 + (1 − v) ρ x2         .                           (A.1)


     The elasticity of substitution across imported inputs is ρ. The parameter A is a measure of
the importer’s technology.

    Given this, the importer’s cost function is
                                    1−ρ               1 y
                                    vp1 + (1 − v)p21−ρ 1−ρ .                                   (A.2)
                                                          A

     Assuming that the importer is a monopolist in retail with demand elasticity λ, then the
                   λ
price is a markup λ−1 over marginal costs, and equilibrium profits can be written as
                                                       1−λ
                                              1−ρ 1−ρ 1
                                 1−ρ             1
                              ∆ vp1 + (1 − v)p2              ,                                 (A.3)
                                                      A

where ∆ > 0.

     For a given ρ, importers with higher productivity will have lower prices and higher retail
sales, which implies that they will have a higher share of the market for the purchase of each
imported input.

    In period 0, prices p1 and p2 are not known, so the importer’s expected profit is written as
                                                                                   1−λ
                                                                             1  1
                                               vp11−ρ            v)p1−ρ
                                                                          1−ρ
                      E0 Π(ρ, A) = E0 ∆                 + (1 −      2                      .   (A.4)
                                                                                A

Here we explicitly account for the fact that expected profits will depend on the importer’s
elasticity of substitution across intermediate imports and on its productivity.

     Assume that the cost that the importer incurs for choosing an elasticity of substitution ρ is
as follows:
                                       C(ρ) = ξρ2 + κ.                                      (A.5)




                                                    30
    In period zero, the importing firm will then choose ρ to maximize:

                                     Maxρ E0 Π(ρ, A) − ξρ2 − κ,                                  (A.6)

where we have assumed there is no discounting.

     Using standard theory, we can show that the expected profits function is convex in p1 and
p2 . This is a familiar result from the theory of production—the firm can always adjust inputs
in response to variations in input cost in order to do better than responding linearly, so the
cost function is concave in the input prices, which implies that the profit function is convex
in input prices. But then the expected profit function becomes more convex, the higher is the
elasticity of substitution. Hence, expected profits are increasing in ρ. Since expected profits are
also increasing in A, this leads to the result that the optimal ρ is greater for firms with higher
A. The implication is that more-productive firms, or firms that can repackage goods for retail
more productively, will have a higher final retail sales level, and therefore a higher import share
of any particular intermediate input good. They will also have a more-elastic technology for
substitution across different intermediate import goods.

     Figure A.1 gives a simple illustration of the determination of optimal ρ for a high A firm
and a low A firm. It is assumed that p1 is certain, but p2 is uncertain at period 0. Firms share
a similar technology adoption cost given by (A.5). This is represented by the cost-of-adoption
curve. Both firms have expected profit functions increasing in ρ, but the more-productive (high
A) firm’s expected profit always lies above that of the less-productive firm. As a consequence,
the optimal ρ is always higher for the more-productive firm. In this environment, we would
then expect that firms with a higher market share should have a higher elasticity of substitution
across intermediate inputs.


Appendix B. Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Industry Equilibrium


     In the main text, we examined the relationship between market share and pass-through of
a single firm when the exchange rate changes. But in an industry equilibrium, we would expect
that other firms would increase their prices, even if their costs are not directly affected by the
exchange rate, since a rise in the price of firm i will affect the relative price of their export good
in market j. To incorporate this, we now allow for all other N − 1 firms in the industry to adjust
their prices to firm i’s price change, but assuming that they are not directly affected by the
exchange rate. We assume that all firms in the industry besides firm i are symmetric, so they
                    1−θ
have market share N −1ij . Their price change following a currency i depreciation is determined
by the condition:
                           d log pkj           ωk          X d log pzj
                                     =                          θzj          .                    (B.1)
                            d log ei   (1 + ωk )(1 − θkj ) z6=k     d log ei


                                                  31
                                              Elasticity of Substitution




                          Figure A.1: Choice of Elasticity of Substitution


We see that because there is no direct effect of the exchange rate on firm k’s costs, for any firm
k 6= i, then prices of firm k will only adjust to the extent that firm i’s pass-through is non-zero,
and firm k’s pass-through will depend on firm i’s overall market share. Hence it must be that
for θij close to zero, or close to unity, pass-through for firm k will be zero. In the first case, firm
i has complete pass-through, but is so small that it has a negligible effect on other firms’ prices.
In the second case, firm i has most of the market, and the other firms are so small that their
concern with market share is negligible (i.e. ωk will be very small). This suggests, then, that
any rival firm k will also have a non-monotonic relationship between their price response and
firm i’s market share, but going in the other direction; pass-through rises for θij between zero
and unity, but is zero at the boundaries.

     Figure B.1 illustrates this result for N = 2, so there are only two firms in the industry.
The first point to note from the figure is that will still obtain the essence of the results from
Figure 1 in the main text. Even when rival firms respond, there is still a substantial U-shaped
relationship between pass-through and market share for the firm experiencing the exchange rate
shock. The scale of the pass-through response is approximately the same as in the case without
a response from rival firms. This is shown by the comparison in Figure B.1 of the case with
and without price adjustment on the part of firms k. The second point to note in Figure B.1
is that all other firms will have an inverse U-shaped relationship between pass-through and θij .
Their pass-through is highest for intermediate values of θij . We note also that the relationship
between firm i’s pass-through and firm k’s pass-through has distinctly separate phases. For low
levels of θij , firm i and firm k’s pass-through move in opposite directions in response to a rise

                                                      32
in i’s market share—thus, we can think of price responses as being strategic substitutes. For
intermediate levels of θij , both firm i and firm k’s pass-through is declining in θij , so there is a
situation of strategic complementarity. Finally, for θij close to unity, firm i’s pass-through has
passed its minimum in θij and is rising, while firm k’s pass-through continues to decline in θij ,
so that again pass-throughs are strategic substitutes.




                               
                              
                                                                    
                                                          
                                                




                                                  Market Share




       Figure B.1: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share with Two Firms (N = 2)




     Figure B.2 shows the joint process of firm i and other firms’ pass-through when there are
four firms in the industry, so that N = 4. In this case, the pass-through response of other firms
has the same characteristic as in the two-firms case, but for identical elasticities of demand, the
quantitative response of the other firms is significantly smaller. In this case, the relationship
between pass-through and θij is essentially the same as in Figure 1 in the main text, where we
ignored the response of other firms in the market.

     Finally, Figure B.3 returns to the N = 2 case, but as in Figure 1, illustrates the pass-
through response for the baseline case and the high-elasticity case. Again, we see that firm
i’s pass-through will be reduced in the case of a large (high-elasticity) importing firm. But,
interestingly, the results for pass-through of other firms go in the opposite direction. That is,
in selling to a large importer, there should be a higher price adjustment for firms not directly
affected by the exchange rate shock than in the case of a smaller importer. While this implication
may seem surprising, it is quite intuitive. With a higher demand elasticity, firms in an industry
will have prices that are closer to one another. So a cost shock that leads to an increase in one
firm’s price will be more closely imitated by other firms, the higher is the elasticity of demand.


                                                   33
                                               Market Share




      Figure B.2: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share with Four Firms (N = 4)



Given the relationship between size and elasticity, this leads to the implication that pass-through
for non-directly affected firms will be higher, the larger the market share of importers.




                                               Market Share




                   Figure B.3: Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Market Share




                                                34
                                Table C.1: Overall Exchange Rate Pass-Through
                                                      Value-Weighted             Product Level
                                                     Estimate   (s.e.)         Estimate   (s.e.)
                            Exchange rate (β)        0.592***        (0.027)   0.484***    (0.004)
                            Exporter CPI               0.038         (0.097)   0.073***    (0.016)
                            Canadian CPI             1.233***        (0.318)   0.311***    (0.041)
                            Canadian GDP              0.641**        (0.250)   0.735***    (0.033)

                            Obs.                    7,993,402                  7,993,402
                            R2                        0.017                      0.003

Note: Each regression includes product and time fixed effects. We restrict the sample to price changes within the -100% to +100%
range.




Appendix C. Overall Pass-Through Estimates


    Table C.1 presents all the coefficient estimates from the overall pass-through regressions.
The coefficient estimates on the cumulative changes in exporter CPI, Canadian CPI and GDP
are positive, which is as expected.




                                                                35
References

Amiti, M., Itskhoki, O., and Konings, J., 2014. Importers, exporters, and exchange rate discon-
   nect. American Economic Review, 104(7):1942-1978.

Amiti, M., Itskhoki, O., and Konings, J., 2015. International shocks and domestic prices: how
   large are strategic complementarities? Working paper.

Atkeson, A. and Burstein, A., 2008. Trade costs, pricing-to-market, and international relative
    prices. American Economic Review 98(5):1998-2031.

Auer, R., and Schoenle, R., 2015. Market structure and exchange rate pass-through. Working
   paper.

Bailliu, J., Dong, W., and Murray, J., 2010. Has exchange rate pass-through really declined?
     Some recent insights from the literature. Bank of Canada Review (Autumn):1-8.

Berman, N., Martin, P., and Mayer, T., 2012. How do different exporters react to exchange rate
   changes? Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(1):437-492.

Bouakez, H., Rebei, N., 2008. Has exchange rate pass-through really declined? Evidence from
   Canada. Journal of International Economics 75(2):249-267.

Burstein, A., and Gopinath, G., 2013. International prices and exchange rates. Handbook of
    International Economics, 4th Edition.

Campa, J., and Goldberg, L., 2005. Exchange rate pass-through into import prices. Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 87(4):679-690.

Cravino, J., 2014. Exchange rates, aggregate productivity and the currency of invoicing of
    international trade. Working paper.

Devereux, M. B., Engel, C., and Storgaard, P. E., 2004. Endogenous exchange rate pass-through
    when nominal prices are set in advance. Journal of International Economics, 63(2):263-291.

Dong, W., 2012. The role of expenditure switching in the global imbalance adjustment. Journal
   of International Economics, 86(2):237-251.

Dornbusch, R, 1987. Exchange rates and prices. American Economic Review, 77(1):93-106.

Engel, C., 2006. Equivalence results for optimal pass-through, optimal indexing to exchange
   rates, and optimal choice of currency for export pricing. Journal of European Economic
   Association, 4(6):1249-1260.

Feenstra, R., Gagnon, J., and Knetter, M., 1996. Market share and exchange rate pass-through


                                              36
    in world automobile trade. Journal of International Economics, 40(1-2):187-207.

Fitzgerald, D. and Haller, S., 2013. Pricing-to-market: evidence from plant-level prices. Review
    of Economic Studies, 81(2):761-786.

Froot, K. A. and Klemperer, P. D., 1989. Exchange rate pass-through when market share
    matters. American Economic Review, 79(4):637-654.

Garetto, S., 2014. Firms’ heterogeneity and incomplete pass-through. Working paper.

Goldberg, L. S. and Tille, C., 2008. Vehicle currency use in international trade. Journal of
    International Economics, 76(2):177-192.

Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O., and Rigobon, R., 2010. Currency choice and exchange rate pass-
   through. American Economic Review, 100(1):306-336.

Gopinath, G. and Neiman, B., 2014. Trade adjustment and productivity in large crises. Ameri-
   can Economic Review, 104(3):793-831.

Gopinath, G. and Rigobon, R., 2008. Sticky borders. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):531-
   575.

Knetter, M., 1989. Price discrimination by U.S. and German exporters. American Economic
   Review, 79(1):198-210.

Krugman, P., 1987. Pricing to market when the exchange rate changes. In Arndt, S. and Richard-
   son, J., editors, Real Financial Linkages among Open Economies, pages 49-70. MIT Press,
   Cambridge.

Marazzi, M. and Sheets, N., 2007. Declining exchange rate pass-through to U.S. import prices:
   the potential role of global factors. Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(6):924-
   947.

Neiman, B., 2010. Stickiness, synchronization, and pass-through in intrafirm trade prices. Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics, 57(3):295-308.




                                              37
