                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY OR ISOLATION? NETWORK EFFECTS OF A RANDOMIZED
                  HOUSING LOTTERY IN URBAN INDIA

                                           Sharon Barnhardt
                                              Erica Field
                                             Rohini Pande

                                         Working Paper 21419
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21419


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




The authors are from the Indian Institute of Management - Ahmedabad, Duke University, and Harvard
University. For Financial and field support, we thank the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0752792),
The US Department of Labor ILAB (DOL ILAB), the Centre for Microfinance (CMF) at IFMR, the
Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and Government, the Real Estate Academic Initiative at Harvard
University and the Exxon Mobil Foundation under the Closing the Global Gender Gap Initiative in
Economic Participation (hosted by the Women and Public Policy Program at Harvard University).
We thank Susanna Berkouwer, Sarah Bishop, Isabelle Cohen, Manasee Desai, Janaki Kibe, Keshubhai,
Marie-Pascale Grimon, Vanya Pasheva, and Divya Varma for excellent research assistance, Avdhut
Fadanwis and Sachin Srivastava for data management, and DOL ILAB staff for detailed comments
on an earlier draft. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sharon Barnhardt, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Moving to Opportunity or Isolation? Network Effects of a Randomized Housing Lottery in
Urban India
Sharon Barnhardt, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande
NBER Working Paper No. 21419
July 2015
JEL No. C93,H42,O12

                                             ABSTRACT

A housing lottery in an Indian city provided winning slum dwellers the opportunity to move into improved
housing on the city’s periphery. Fourteen years later, relative to lottery losers, winners report improved
housing farther from the city center, but no change in family income or human capital. Winners also
report increased isolation from family and caste networks and lower access to informal insurance.
We observe significant program exit: 34% of winners never moved into the subsidized housing and
32% eventually exited. Our results point to the importance of considering social networks when designing
housing programs for the poor.


Sharon Barnhardt                                           Rohini Pande
Indian Institute of Management - Ahmedabad                 Kennedy School of Government
Vastrapur                                                  Harvard University
Ahmedabad 380015                                           79 JFK Street
INDIA                                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
barnhardt@post.harvard.edu                                 and NBER
                                                           rohini_pande@harvard.edu
Erica Field
Department of Economics
Duke University
Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
emf23@duke.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21419
    Across the globe, urbanization continues at a rapid pace. Between 1990 and 2011, urban

population more than doubled from 1.5 to 3.6 billion, with much of this growth concentrated in

the developing world. Yet, far too often the urban experience remains of poor quality – nearly

a billion individuals live in urban slums typified by inadequate physical infrastructure, high

population density and confined quarters – raising widespread concern that urban slums are not

way-stations on the road to better living, but rather poverty traps (UN-HABITAT, 2010; Marx

et al., 2013).1 Recent evidence from U.S. housing programs also emphasizes the importance of

neighborhood quality (Chetty et al., 2015).

    Governments throughout the developing world – including Indonesia (Some et al., 2009),

China (Day and Cervero, 2010), Brazil (Dasgupta and Lall, 2009), Thailand (Viratkapan and

Perera, 2006), Kenya (BBC, 2009), Nigeria (BBC, 2012) and India (studied here) – have

responded with low-income housing opportunities on city peripheries (UN-HABITAT, 2003;

Warah, 2004). While suburbanization o↵ers the benefits of residential improvements and cleaner,

safer environs, it entails the loss of the major advantages of urbanicity, including access to public

services, short and a↵ordable commutes, and proximity to ethnic enclaves (Lall et al., 2008).

Evidence of the net value of these housing programs remains scarce mainly because those who

anticipate particularly high benefits or very low costs of relocation are typically over-represented

among households that opt into a suburban housing program (Field and Kremer, 2006; Bayer

et al., 2008; Marx et al., 2013). It is wholly possible that, despite voluntary program take-up, the

net benefits of relocating are negligible, implying low social returns to such housing programs.

And absent adequate opportunity to experiment with suburban living, it is not obvious that

slum dwellers who sign up for housing programs are even made weakly better o↵ by moving.

    In this paper, we provide the first experimental evidence from a developing country on the

long-run impacts of a typical government housing program for slum dwellers. The program we

evaluate was o↵ered by the city government of Ahmedabad, the capital city of the Indian state of

Gujarat, in partnership with the Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), a leading trade

union for poor women. The 497 program participants were informal-sector, piece-rate workers
1
    By definition, a slum household lacks one or more of: secure tenure, durable housing, a sufficient living area
    of two persons or less per room, access to safe water, and access to sanitation (UN-HABITAT, 2003)




                                                       2
drawn from city slums.2 Almost a quarter received the opportunity to move into improved

housing in a neighborhood on the city’s periphery (from now on, Colony A), roughly 7.5 miles

from the center. Housing units were o↵ered at a monthly cost well below market: the estimated

subsidy per unit was more than 50% of the lease value.

    The major advantage of the program we evaluate is random unit assignment via a lottery,

which provides a rare source of exogenous variation in residential location akin to Moving to

Opportunity (MTO) and housing voucher experiments in U.S. cities. A second advantage is

our ability to evaluate relatively long-run program e↵ects: 14 years after housing units were

assigned, we successfully tracked and interviewed 89% of original lottery applicants. A third is

that the nature and value of the program is very similar to India’s ongoing government housing

program – the A↵ordable Housing in Partnership scheme – which aims at constructing up to one

million subsidised housing units (Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 2011).3

Finally, understanding the impact of lottery-allocated housing is, in itself, policy relevant given

widespread use of lotteries to allocate subsidized low income housing in India.4

    We find that, fourteen years after housing allocation, slum-dwellers who won the opportunity

to relocate to objectively higher-quality housing in a safer and cleaner location were no better

o↵ on a variety of socio-economic measures than those who lost the lottery. In particular, the

economic well-being of lottery winners and losers was similar in terms of current income, labor

force participation, household health, and child outcomes.

    Furthermore, we observe significant program exit: One-third of winners chose not to move to
2
    These particular piece rate workers were engaged in producing unfiltered cigarettes, or beedis. Over 1.4
    million Indian women are beedi workers, making it one of the largest female, informal-labor sectors (Office
    of the Registrar General, Census Commissioner, 2001).
3
    India’s first large scale housing mission – the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (2005-
    2012) - sanctioned 1.5 million dwellings. (http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=102645) Since
    the launch in 2013 of Rajiv Awas Yojana Scheme and A↵ordable Housing in Partnership Scheme more
    than 140,000 new dwellings have been sanctioned (Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation,
    2014). Under the AHP scheme, the central government provides a subsidy of |75,000 per unit for municipal
    governments and partners to build large A↵ordable Housing Projects and o↵er the units at an a↵ordable
    price to households with income below |100,000 (Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 2013).
4
    The Scheme Guidelines for A↵ordable Housing in Partnership stipulate that allottees “should be made
    following a transparent procedure e.g. through draw of lottery preferably computerized based on detailed
    guidelines approved by SLSMC [State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee]” (Ministry of Housing
    and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 2013). Other government agencies like the Delhi Development Authority
    (DDA) and Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority periodically sell flats via lottery. In
    2010, the DDA received 1.1 million applications for 16,000 flats and in 2014 it again received over 1 million
    applications for a sale of 25,040 flats (Anand, 2014; Press Trust of India, 2014).



                                                       3
Colony A. Even more surprising, a further 32% moved in but then returned to centrally located

slums within ten years, forgoing the indefinite future stream of highly subsidized rent and tenure

security that public housing o↵ers. While some of those who left Colony A recovered partial

value via illegal rentals, by all accounts the full private value of the apartment was unrecovered

since tenure security was not transferable to an illegal occupant.

   Much of the potential economic value of public housing programs in low-income settings arises

from the government’s ability to provide security of tenure, but this requires that participants

abide by lease agreements and not revert to illegal occupancy. In the case of Colony A, since a

high fraction of winners either abandoned the unit or were delinquent on their lease agreements

(or both), winners failed to gain greater tenure security. Consistent with this, we observe similar

housing expenditures (net of revenues) across winners and losers, suggesting that most winners

simply “gave up” the house.

   The absence of socioeconomic improvement among winners, the high exit rate, and continued

tenure insecurity all suggest negligible long-run economic value of this fairly expensive public

program. These results are stark given that lottery participants organized the housing movement

and hence represent a group of particularly motivated potential beneficiaries. Furthermore,

as home-based workers, they were presumably more indi↵erent than most slum dwellers to

residential location. Hence, our findings are arguably an upper bound on the self-targeting that

a typical public housing scheme can hope to achieve.

   What ultimately made most participants deem relocating to Colony A undesirable? The only

negative program e↵ects we detect are reduced ties to participants’ social networks, including

family. Relative to lottery losers, winners live significantly further from their adult children and

see them less often. Moreover, they are less likely to know someone they can rely on for borrowing

needs (6 to 9 percentage points less, depending on the item lent/borrowed) and have, on average,

known such a person for nearly three fewer years, which indicates that the act of moving out

of the slums severed risk-sharing ties. In qualitative interviews, movers report difficulty in

maintaining network links outside of Colony A. Correspondingly, they are less likely to rely on

informal insurance: losers, but not winners, report receiving informal transfers through their




                                                 4
social networks in the event of a shock. Hence, geographic isolation appears to imply significant

economic and social costs.

    The restructuring of social networks to include links to new neighbors is also evident in the

fact that winners are equally likely to rely on neighborhood networks for borrowing and lending

needs.5 Within-Colony A risk-sharing arrangements, though, were likely weaker than those

within city slums because they were newer and involved greater sub-caste diversity. Conversely,

winners report higher neighborhood-level collective action, suggesting that geographic isolation

– or the greater network closure and support it implies – enabled cooperation around local public

goods.6 However, winners participated less in the city-wide Beedi Workers’ Union.

    Other negative e↵ects of relocating away from the city center such as increased commuting

costs and distance from school and health clinics were insignificant. Given this, we interpret

program exit as reflecting the socio-economic costs of lower contact with existing network mem-

bers. Consistent with this interpretation, in qualitative interviews several of those who moved

into Colony A but eventually left stated that isolation proved too costly.

    Ours is the first experimental evaluation of a low-income housing program in a developing

country. Urban housing for the poor is a fast-emerging priority for city governments in the

developing world, but there is little evidence to guide policy discussions. Our findings are

consistent with housing research in the US: 10-15 years after assignment, MTO program studies

find similar employment, wage, and earning patterns among program winners and losers.7 Our

null findings are also consistent with other public housing opportunity studies in large North

American cities (Oreopolous, 2003; Jacob, 2004; Jacob and Ludwig, 2012). In their setting,

as in ours, one of the key reasons for limited program e↵ects is the failure of households to

ultimately relocate to better neighborhoods when given the opportunity. Results from our

setting demonstrate that unwillingness of slum populations to relocate appears to be driven by
5
    Within-neighborhood network ties are typically the strongest (Festinger et al., 1963; Abu-Ghazzeh, 1999;
    Sacerdote and Marmaros, 2006).
6
    Greater closure implies a more interconnected network (Coleman, 1988, 1990). Jackson et al. (2012) define
    support as a measure of pairs of friends that have another friend in common. They find evidence from rural
    India that support increases with geographic proximity and is positively related to favor exchange.
7
    Adult winners had better mental and physical health. Long-term child health was not a↵ected overall,
    though young women report fewer health problems (Ludwig et al., 2013). Recent work does find long-run
    improvements in economic outcomes of children under 13 at time of relocation (Chetty et al., 2015)




                                                     5
an interest in maintaining social networks, which may also explain some of the patterns found

in U.S. housing programs.

    To the best of our knowledge, we also provide the first long-run experimental analysis of geo-

graphic isolation on risk-sharing and informal insurance in any context.8 The idea that housing

mobility programs change social networks is also evident in the MTO program: treatment house-

holds reported more college-educated friends and greater exposure to more a✏uent peers, but

for youth there was a significant decline in the fraction who report at least one close friend, and

male youth in the treatment group were less likely than those in the controls to see friends from

their original neighborhood (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011). There is no direct evidence from MTO

on changes in risk-sharing capacity.9

    These findings contribute a new angle to a large and growing literature on the economic

benefits of urbanicity (Glaeser, 2011) that is likely to be particularly important in developing

country contexts, and can help explain why slum relocation programs are so politically fraught.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the study context,

the dataset and empirical strategy. Section II examines the impact of the housing program on

residential location and socio-economic well-being. We conclude this section with an analysis of

the network costs of relocation. Section III concludes.



I    Background and Data

Below we describe the sample of slum dwellers in Ahmedabad who entered the housing lottery

and the housing program, our survey design and empirical strategy.
8
    While some non-experimental papers have noted the mixed success of slum relocation programs (Viratkapan
    et al., 2004), much of the focus has been on commuting costs (Takeuchi et al., 2008). An exception is
    Kapoor et al. (2004), who estimate models of location choice in urban India and find significant relocation
    costs in terms of disruption of religious and linguistic networks. There are few quantitative estimates of
    the significance of neighbor e↵ects in developing countries. Montgomery and Hewett (2005) and Barnhardt
    (2009) are exceptions, but neither examine changes in the risk-sharing capacity of networks.
9
    Studies with college housing arrangements have focused on social interactions extensively. Ward (2006)
    examines housing isolation, social networks and time investment choices among Harvard undergraduates and
    finds that students in a location farther from where campus life is centered participate the same amount,
    but invested more in local networks, which became denser.




                                                      6
A     Slum Dwellers in Ahmedabad

With roughly 6.4 million residents, Ahmedabad is India’s sixth most populous urban area and

the largest city in Gujarat, one of India’s fastest-growing and most industrialized states (Office

of the Registrar General, Census Commissioner, 2011). Yet, in the early 2000s the urban poverty

rate in Ahmedabad was roughly 1.4 times the Indian average at 34% (Cities Alliance, 2002).

The economic mainstay of the city’s poor remains informal sector employment, with women

involved in home-based, piece-rate work making up a significant fraction (Unni and Rani, 2000).

     Housing for the urban poor in Ahmedabad originated in the eastern half of the city near

textile mills (Field et al., 2008) and was usually segregated by caste (Gillion, 1968). The decline

of textile mills, which began in the 1960s and accelerated in the 1980s, significantly increased

informal sector employment among these workers (Breman, 2004). Today, their living arrange-

ments largely consist of slums that are organized along ethnic lines (Hall, 1980) and are located

close to the city’s commercial center (Bhatt, 2003).


B     The Housing Lottery

The housing scheme we evaluate was organized by the Self Employed Women’s Association

(SEWA) Union, a collection of trade groups with a membership of over 500, 000 women in

Gujarat (SEWA, 2009). The SEWA beedi roller trade group was formed in 1978.10 Within the

informal sector, the beedi industry is one of the few regulated by law — The Beedi and Cigar

Workers Act (1966). As the Act provides for government housing subsidies for beedi workers,

the Union advocated for a subsidized group housing program. In interviews, Union officeholders

described their key motivations as reducing housing costs and improving tenure security, both

of which were believed to contribute to school dropout among beedi workers’ children.

     In cooperation with multiple government agencies, SEWA launched a housing lottery for

beedi workers in 1987.11 Union members with a monthly income of less than |700 (US$11.28
10
     Beedi rollers typically work at home on a piece-rate basis for agents who supply raw materials and then sell
     finished product to beedi companies. The pay rate in 2007 was about one dollar (|40-42 converted into 2007
     USD) for 1,000 rolled beedis (roughly one day of work).
11
     SEWA’s website describes their contribution: “...the Housing and Urban Development Corporation
     (HUDCO) [provided] loans, Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority (AUDA) [identified] a piece of land
     under the scheme allocating land for the economically weaker sections and [built] the houses, the Beedi



                                                       7
currently) were eligible to participate, and all 497 eligible women entered the lottery. They came

primarily from two caste groups, Koshti (35%) and Padmasali (41%), while Muslims (10%) were

the third largest group. SEWA leaders conducted the drawing of the 110 winners at a public

gathering on International Housing Day in 1987.

     After the lottery, the Union worked with the Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority

(AUDA) to construct homes. The largest hurdle was finding suitable land. Six years later,

AUDA built the houses on vacant government land situated 7.5 miles from the city center. The

units were single-story rowhouses of approximately 200 square feet situated back-to-back with

a narrow alley running in between.

     Winners received a significant housing subsidy on Colony A units. The construction cost of

a unit was |45,000 (Dayal, 2001), and the winner paid a initial deposit of |900. She then paid

|124 (about US$2 currently) in monthly rent. This rate was guaranteed for 20 years and was

less than half the average rent reported by losers in our survey.12


C     Data Collection

Conducting a follow-up survey involved the daunting task of tracking participants two decades

after the lottery took place. Fortunately, the official list of lottery winners – which included

participant name and address in Colony A – was available through SEWA Union. We obtained

the names and addresses of lottery losers from multiple sources. First, the SEWA Union office

maintained a list of 297 lottery losers (out of 387) who had indicated an interest in entering a

future housing lottery. Second, a former SEWA employee provided a participant subset list that
     Workers Welfare Fund [provided] subsidies...the Gujarat Government’s Ministry of Labour [sponsored] the
     scheme, SEWA [mobilized] the beedi workers, and SEWA Bank undertook the responsibility of collecting
     repayment of the loans.”
12
     Authors’ calculations are available on request. Subleasing colony A units was forbidden but family members
     could occupy the residence. Failure to pay monthly rent resulted in the occupant losing the legal right to
     remain in the property. A unique program feature was that rent-to-own agreements with the government
     gave participants the opportunity to become homeowners after 20 years, but only under the unlikely scenario
     that all 110 winners remained in the colony and made regular monthly payments over the 20-year period.
     As expected, the colony failed to achieve zero delinquency/out-migration (a large fraction never even moved
     in), and so ultimately no one was given a title to the property and even tenants who made regular payments
     continue to be charged monthly rent to occupy the unit today. Since this outcome was predictable, it arguably
     is correct to treat the contract as a standard lease agreement.




                                                        8
included names of an additional 26 lottery losers.13 In addition to names and addresses, this list

of 109 participants also had a handful of baseline characteristics (1987 address, marital status,

husband’s occupation, and the incomes of the participant, husband and household) that we use

in the following subsection as part of a randomization check. Finally, we undertook tracking

interviews with the listed lottery participants in an attempt to identify the remaining 64 (17%)

lottery losers. Ultimately, we obtained an additional 30 names (47% of missing) as referrals from

women who were in the lottery, and their participation was verified upon contact (from now on,

“referrals list”). Hence, the names of only 34 out of 387 lottery losers – or 9% of losers and 7%

of all lottery participants – remain unidentified.

     After constructing the participant list, we tracked and surveyed 443 participants (or a family

member, in cases of death or mental illness), giving a response rate of 96% of the 463 participants

who could be named (89% of the original 497 participants). No one refused the survey. Table

I of the Online Appendix shows identical attrition rates of 4% across winners and losers drawn

from the 463 listed participants, and similar rates of mortality and proxy surveying among the

443 participants found. In subsection D we provide a randomization check for our tracked and

surveyed sample to show that attrition from the set of named participants and inclusion on the

participant list are uncorrelated with observable characteristics.

     Our survey occurred between May and October 2007, 20 years after the housing lottery and

14 years after lottery winners obtained possession of Colony A units. We asked respondents

about household demographics, various socio-economic indicators, and the health, schooling,

marital status, and current occupation of their children. We collected detailed data on their

residential location and mobility over the last 20 years and obtained a full employment history for

the participant and her husband. A neighborhood and networks module asked respondents about

their social interactions with immediate neighbors and adult children, risk-sharing mechanisms

(in terms of exposure to major city-level shocks in the last six years and the coping mechanisms

they used to deal with them), and collective action undertaken over the last three years. We

also collected GPS coordinates for participants’ 1987 and 2007 residential locations.
13
     In particular, two out of ten pages of the full list of all lottery participants were found by the employee.
     Those two pages contained 109 names, 26 of which were lottery losers not already found on the other list.




                                                       9
     In 2011, a real estate agent valued a subset of current lottery winner and loser residences

(sampling and valuation procedure is in Section A) and we conducted qualitative fieldwork with

randomly selected 21 participants from four strata: five losers, four winners who never moved

into Colony A, six winners who moved into Colony A but subsequently moved out, and six

winners who still lived there. We used semi-structured interviews to probe respondents on how

their housing mobility opportunities a↵ected their socioeconomic well-being and their networks.


D     Descriptive Statistics

Our analysis sample encompasses the 443 tracked and surveyed lottery participants. In Table I

we use baseline (1987) data to provide descriptive statistics and a randomization balance check.

Panel A considers participant demographics. At the time of lottery, average participant age

was 28, 88% were married and had, on average, 2.6 children. Beedi -rolling is a caste-based

occupation, and the two main beedi -rolling castes, Padmasali and Koshti, make up over 75%

of the sample. Participants typically rolled beedis at home and 12% of participants’ husbands

were tailors, a home-based occupation. However, close to half (46%) of participants’ husbands

worked in a mill or factory located close to the city center. Participants were spread across

18 neighborhoods, with half of the women living in the inner-city neighborhoods of Amraiwadi

(11%), Bapunagar (15%), Dhudeshwar (12%) and Rakhial (13%).

     Panel B presents residential characteristics. To reduce data-mining concerns, we group

outcomes into three thematic indices: urbanicity, property rights, and amenities. Each index

is the simple average of z-scores for component outcomes and is balanced at baseline across

treatment and control.14 The urbanicity index includes distance (in miles) from home to city

center, time to walk to nearest school and time to walk to nearest hospital. The average

respondent lived 2.3 miles from the city center (measured as a straight line) and a 17-minute

walk to the nearest school (Online Appendix Table II).

     The property rights index includes home ownership in 1987, years of home ownership prior

to 1987, whether possessed an official title, and whether title was in the participant’s name.

Interpretations of reported ownership are ambiguous because many of the residential structures
14
     Online Appendix Table II reports regressions for index components.


                                                     10
in city slums are illegal, and occupants frequently claim ownership absent official documentation.

Sixty-three percent report that someone in their household owns the property (with average

ownership being seven years) and 50% report having documentation. Just under 10% state that

the documentation is in their names.

     Finally, the amenities index includes whether the 1987 house had a separate kitchen, a private

toilet, and a water connection, and whether it was safe for a woman to walk in the neighborhood

after 10 pm. The majority of women (84%) claim to live in a safe neighborhood by this measure.

     We also asked respondents their reasons for choosing their 1987 residence. Over 30% report

that they chose their location to be near family, and another 12% state that neighborhood

resources drove their location choice. Only 3% named price as the main factor.15 For the

arguably random subset list of 109 lottery applicants recovered from a former SEWA employee,

we also have baseline income information, which we present in Panel C.

     Comparing baseline characteristics across winners and losers shows that both household types

were similar at the time of the lottery in nearly all observable dimensions. However, Muslims are

over-represented in the loser category by 6.8 percentage points (Table I).16 To further investigate

whether Hindus were possibly favored in the housing draw, we regressed respondent perception

of whether the lottery was conducted fairly on respondent religion and find no di↵erence across

Hindu and Muslim participants (though, unsurprisingly, winners are more likely to perceive the

lottery as having been fair).17 We interpret Muslim underrepresentation among the winners as

a random occurrence, but do present all experimental estimates with and without a dummy

indicator of participant religion or caste.

     In Online Appendix Table I we further examine the balance of respondent characteristics for

the participant subsample and the probability of finding households by baseline characteristics.18

Among the participant subset, winners and losers are balanced on all characteristics available

in the original lottery listing, including marital status and husband’s job (if married). We
15
     The remaining respondents listed either “other” or “for marriage” as the main factor.
16
     The p-value is 0.54 for an F-test of the joint significance of winner estimate across all 11 Table I variables.
     Online Appendix Table I, Panel B shows that, on marital status, home distance to city center, and husbands’
     occupation, winners and losers among the subset of 109 look identical to the full sample.
17
     Results available upon request.
18
     Found and surveyed are the same here, as the response rate among located participants was 100%.




                                                        11
also investigate if our tracking procedure introduced imbalances by looking for statistically

significant di↵erences in the fraction of participants found across winners and losers, conditional

on individual characteristics. Only the fraction of Koshti caste participants is higher for winners

(100% found) than for losers (95% found). For the participant subset, we observe no di↵erences

in fraction found conditional on marital status and husband’s occupation (see Panel D).


E     Empirical Strategy

The use of a lottery to randomly allocate the subsidized housing opportunity on the city periph-

ery to participants allows us to cleanly identify its impact. Therefore, throughout the empirical

analysis, we estimate intent-to-treat e↵ects using the following reduced-form specification:


                                Yi = ↵ +   0    · winneri + Xi ·   + ✏i                             (1)


where Yi is an outcome of interest for individual i, and winneri indicates that they were o↵ered

housing in Colony A. We report estimates with and without a set of controls Xi , which includes

ethnic identity indicators for whether the household is Muslim, Koshti caste, or Padmasali

caste (omitting all other caste groups), a variable indicating whether the participant’s name

was referred by another member (rather than gathered from a Union list), and whether the

participant’s information was reported by proxy because she had died or was unable to answer

due to mental illness.

     When the unit of observation is a child, we cluster standard errors at the participant level.



II     Results

In Table II we examine how winning the lottery influenced subsequent residential mobility

including program take-up, and Tables III to IV investigate long-term economic outcomes. In

every table, each row reports the coefficient    0   from regressions of the form presented in equation

1. We report estimates from regressions first without controls and with them.




                                                     12
A     Program Take-up

The first row of Table II reveals that, although all winners signed the lease agreement, only

66% report moving into Colony A (60 percentage points more than losers). In 2007, the average

amount of time spent in Colony A was just over six years for winners (Row 2). Fourteen years

after program implementation, relative to losers, only 34% of winners still lived there (Row 3).

     Figure I plots the distribution of years spent in Colony A for the sample of winners. Approx-

imately 60% of participants who moved in stayed on the property for at least 10 years, and 85%

stayed at least five years. Hence, it is reasonable to anticipate significant relocation impacts on

at least 85% of the movers, or over half of the winners. This also implies that the ITT estimates

of program impact will be substantially diluted.

     While low, take-up of Colony A housing exceeds that in comparable U.S. experiments, where

observed lease rates among households o↵ered location-restricted vouchers range between 19%

and 48% (Rubinowitz and Rosenbaum, 2000; Kling et al., 2007; Ludwig et al., 2012; Jacob and

Ludwig, 2012). This includes a Chicago housing programs which o↵ered previously unassisted

households a significant financial gain via housing subsidies(Jacob and Ludwig, 2012).19

     The subsidy value could potentially be recovered through illegal sale or lease of the unit

for those who did not occupy the housing – and indeed the majority of winners who either did

not move into Colony A or subsequently exited report selling or subletting their unit on the

informal market. However, tenure security was not transferable, preventing full value recovery

on the illegal market. Consistent with this, the magnitude of these (illegal) profits, are small

and insignificant (section C).

     A major program objective was to reduce the frequency of residential turnover, which was

believed to constrain children’s schooling attainment. In qualitative interviews, winners consis-

tently stated that Colony A provided tenure security and permanence that rental housing on

the private market lacked and most winners recognized and appreciated the subsidized rent.

One winner who still lives in Colony A said: “[Tenure security] is very important. Otherwise,
19
     Jacob and Ludwig (2012) report lower voucher take-up than in our setting despite the absence of residential
     location restrictions and a $369 gain in monthly disposable income for the average participant. In Colony A,
     we estimate that SEWA o↵ered units at a subsidy of at least 50% (Section B) and anecdotally the increase
     in tenure security was also high, although we cannot observe it precisely in our survey data.



                                                       13
... the landlord could say at any time leave the house. Every year we might have had to change

houses.” Another said, “I was [previously] paying 500 rupees as rent in Hatkeshwar but now I

only pay 124 rupees as a monthly installment.”

     To evaluate housing turnover, we collected data on all residences between 1987 (when they

entered the lottery) and 2007 (when participants answered the survey). Table II, Row (4) shows

that only 29% of participants resided in the same house at both points, and this number does not

vary between winners and losers. Row (5) shows that, in part because so many winners moved

into and then out of Colony A, average residential mobility is ultimately no lower among winners,

with the average household reporting just over two relocations. Correspondingly, children of

winners and losers report switching schools a comparable number of times (unreported).

     The take-up results suggest that non-monetary costs – net of the rent received from illegal

occupants – of moving from slum housing in the city center or remaining in Colony A were

prohibitively large for the 66% of winners who sacrificed the stability, tenure security, and

subsidized rent o↵ered by the housing program. Given that these winners chose to participate

in the lottery when the only unknown feature was exact location of the housing development,

we can presume that opt-out occurred because the di↵erence between where they expected it to

be and where it was actually built greatly changed its private value.

     This interpretation is further supported by the fact that, in the open-ended survey question

asked of winners who left Colony A, 76% of those that provided an answer named some aspect of

geographic isolation as their primary reason for leaving Colony A.20 Furthermore, 31% of these

individuals list “proximity to friends and family” as the major reason for choosing their current

location, relative to only 3% of those who remained in Colony A. Below we evaluate the nature

of these costs that ultimately led the housing program to fail.


B     Urbanicity and Housing Quality

Figures II and III show the evolution of participants’ residential patterns. In 1987, winners and

losers were equally concentrated in central Ahmedabad, but over the next 20 years we observe

increasing sprawl. By 2007, lottery participants cover a larger geographic area with a distinct
20
     The answer to this question was missing in 29 cases.


                                                      14
cluster of winners in Colony A (Figure III).

     We quantify this pattern by matching the administrative ward of participants’ current resi-

dences with 2001 census data. Table III, Rows (1) and (2) show that, while no less likely to have

left the city, winners are significantly more likely to have left the city center for less dense sub-

urban environs – they live in wards with roughly 30% lower population density. In Row (3) we

explore this further via the urbanicity index, and again lottery winners report significantly lower

urbanicity. Online Appendix Table III Panel A reports index components. Winners, on average,

reside an additional mile away from the city center compared to losers, with a corresponding

increase in the distance to health centers and schools. This is particularly striking given that

distance to Colony A was the main predictor of program take-up among winners (unreported).

     The amenities index (Table III Row 4) suggests that winners gain a 0.2 standard deviation

improvement in housing amenities.21 Since winners and losers report similar value of housing

improvements between 1987 and 2007 (Row 5), the di↵erence presumably reflects higher quality

housing not di↵erential investment choices.

     Consistent with this pattern, Rows (6)-(8) of Table III show di↵erences in reported reasons

for moving between 1987 and 2007. Losers more often report choosing current residence for

proximity to family or friends (33% versus 24% for winners) or local resources (29% versus

17%), while winners are more likely to choose residence for its price (34% versus 9% for losers),

which presumably reflects the subsidized Colony A rent. Aggregating housing data between

1987 and 2007 shows that, relative to losers, winners report living significantly fewer years in

places chosen for proximity to family or amenities (Rows 9 and 10).

     To monetize neighborhood and housing quality di↵erences, in 2011 two real estate agents

valued 109 houses covering 25% of losers and 22% of winners.22 Row (11) presents the mid-point

of the range of assigned housing values per neighborhood as a measure of neighborhood hous-

ing quality. Consistent with the previous evidence that Colony A’s geographic isolation o↵set
21
     Winner housing had more durable walls and roof, and access to a private toilet (in Online Appendix Table
     III Panel B).
22
     In each of five city areas that individually accounted for at least 5% of surveyed participants, we selected
     neighborhoods with at least three participants and valued participant homes. In Colony A, instead of valuing
     all nearly-identical homes , we valued 20% of the homes inhabited by lottery participants. This implied a
     slightly lower winner proportion in the sample.




                                                       15
economic gains of higher value housing, we observe similar housing prices across neighborhoods

where winners reside and where losers reside.


C    Economic Well-being

Table IV examines measures of economic well-being. Fourteen years after obtaining possession

of Colony A housing, we observe strikingly few di↵erences between lottery winners and losers,

including key characteristics that have the potential to be influenced by residential location.

Panel A, Row (1) shows that winning the lottery leaves the adult labor supply index una↵ected.

(Online Appendix Table III reports index components.) On average, participants and their

husbands work 40 hours per week, and the only observable di↵erence is that winners are less

likely to hold a second job (though the incidence of a second job is very low). We also do not

observe di↵erences on labor supply cost index. Reflecting the labor supply patterns, total and

individual household members’ labor incomes are virtually identical across groups (Panel A),

with no visible di↵erence in patterns of consumption, savings, or borrowing (Online Appendix

Table IV).

    While the absence of employment e↵ects on participants may reflect the home-based nature

of work, the absence of employment e↵ects for husbands is more surprising given increased

distance from the city center. The latter is suggestive of those with job opportunities in the city

moving out of or failing to move into Colony A. In our qualitative interviews women typically

stated that, while fixed beedi rates meant that moving to Colony A left their own earnings

unchanged, the lack of nearby low-skilled local jobs and the resulting increase in commuting

costs a↵ected husband and children. One resident who left Colony A after three years said:

      [My husband] was working at a public distribution system shop that was in Rakhial.

      He continued working there, in the same shop, even after we moved to Colony A.

      He used to ride his bicycle to work — it would take him one hour to get there. The

      commute was very difficult for him...Sometimes he would fall sick from exhaustion.

    Winners and losers also report similar housing expenses and income between 1993 and 2007,

despite the highly subsidized rent in Colony A and the fact that several winners rented out or


                                                16
sold their homes. We calculate housing costs net of income as the sum of monthly rent paid

minus any income made from the lease or sale of property over the period. The point estimates

indicate a small reduction in housing costs from winning the lottery, which primarily comes from

a non-trivial increase in income from the sale or lease of housing either inside or outside Colony

A that is o↵set by a small increase in monthly rent over the 14-year period (Table IV, Panel

A).23

     Likewise, after 14 years lottery winners and losers report similar wealth and well-being. The

Asset Index values are virtually identical, as are demographics and adult and child human capital

investment. Panel B shows that winners and losers face similar post-lottery fertility patterns and

we also observe similar health outcomes across the two groups. Levels of educational attainment

for children are similar in winner and loser households (7.5 years of schooling, on average), and

both groups report similar school transportation costs.

     Nonetheless, the qualitative data points to some adverse impacts for winners that led to pro-

gram exit. A poignant example was o↵ered by a winner who moved out after a few years24 “My

son got sick and had a very high fever which reached his brain. There were no medical facilities

or proper doctors in Colony A who could help him. So, we decided to move to Bapunagar. Since

then we have not been living in Colony A.” Likewise, said the winner whose husband had to

commute too far in Colony A: “The children were always getting sick. It was too tiring...In [our

old neighborhood] Rakhial, schools and markets were all much closer. In Colony A everything

was far away — taking the children to school took half an hour.” The absence of adverse human

capital e↵ects on average despite the fact that half of winners spent a significant amount of time

in Colony A indicates that those who would have been negatively impacted by the move exited

Colony A relatively quickly.

     Tenure security was also una↵ected. In terms of home-ownership rates, ultimately none of

the winners managed to purchase their home in Colony A by the end of the lease period (2013),
23
     Increase in winners’ rental and sales income comes both from leasing or selling properties where they resided
     prior to the lottery, and from the illegal sale or lease of their Colony A unit. As of 2007, 15% of lottery
     winners report renting out the Colony A unit and 34% had illegally sold it. While Colony A rent was lower
     than average rental cost of units outside of Colony A, a significant number of those outside of Colony A
     report not paying rent at some point.
24
     Regression estimates show that winners live farther from health facilities.




                                                       17
so the program failed to increase rates of home ownership.25 Furthermore, while in theory public

housing o↵ers high tenure security through a standard lease arrangement, since two-thirds of the

units were being occupied illegally at follow up, and the vast majority of winners still occupying

their units were no longer making regular lease payments (both of which are grounds for losing

occupancy rights in public housing), tenure security in Colony A was ultimately no stronger

than that of illegal settlements in the slums.26


D      Social Capital

Low program take-up and high program exit suggests that costs outweighed potential program

benefits, and our analysis and interviews suggest that these costs were linked to geographic

isolation. Since a key consequence of geographic isolation is reduced social ties, we next examine

how relocation influenced participants’ social networks and access to informal insurance.


D.1      Informal Insurance

To examine the borrowing and lending value of social networks, we consider four questions

concerning whom participants borrow from and to whom they lend various items.27

     Among losers, 93% belong to one or more borrowing/lending networks (Table V). This

number is nearly 10 percentage points lower for winners, and winners also report knowing such

a person for three fewer years. Consistent with the interpretation that relocation to Colony

A severed network ties, among those with network links, Online Appendix Table V Panel A

shows that the person winners and losers are as likely to depend on (or support) the most

belongs to the same neighborhood (63%), implying that relocation led winners to reorganize

their borrowing networks. Table V Row (4) shows that insurance networks, for both winners

and losers, most often (66%) consist of members from the same caste, suggesting that both
25
      A significant fraction of both occupants and non-occupants stopped making monthly installments prior to
      completing the lease agreement, such that the opportunity for ownership was forfeited by all.
26
      Administrative data from the bank indicate that ultimately only 11 winners occupied and made regular lease
      payments on their unit.
27
      The four questions are: Who is the person you trust enough to lend |50 for 24 hours? Who is the person
      you would ask to borrow |50 from for 24 hours? Who is the person you would go to if you needed to borrow
      kerosene or rice for one day? In case of a health emergency, whom would you go to for borrowing |500?
      Online Appendix Table II presents regressions estimating these borrowing and lending outcomes individually.




                                                       18
location and community matter.

     Data on transfers in the event of shocks provides direct evidence regarding informal insurance.

In the six years preceding our survey Ahmedabad experienced several city-wide shocks including

an earthquake in 2001, communal riots in 2002, and a viral epidemic (chikungunya) in 2006.

Ninety-six percent of respondents report personal damages (on average 30 days of work lost per

event) from at least one of these events and the likelihood, number, and severity (in terms of

work days lost) is similar across winners and losers (Online Appendix Table V, Panel F).

     Risk-sharing in response to these shocks is very limited, and – consistent with the evidence

from hypothetical questions about availability of informal insurance – the incidence is signifi-

cantly lower among lottery winners. Lottery losers report receiving an average of |71 (Table V,

Row 2) in informal transfers in the event of a shock while lottery winners report no informal

help. Thus, in both real and hypothetical scenarios, winners rely less on friends and family for

help in the event of shocks.

     All three types of shocks – natural disasters, riots and disease epidemics – are geographically

concentrated and likely to hit a large fraction of network members simultaneously. This may

also contribute to why lottery winners – or those who are much more likely to have relocated to

Colony A – have weak informal insurance networks. If their networks are more locally dense and

geographically isolated, then their ability to share risks might be particularly compromised.28


D.2      Social Interaction

To understand the potential mechanisms through which informal insurance provision is lower

in the suburbs, Panel B of Table V reports experimental estimates of the e↵ect of winning the

housing lottery on social interactions. We first look at family interaction. In Row (1) of Panel

B we see that adult children on average live significantly farther away from lottery participants

(non-resident children live an average of 1.3 miles away among lottery winners and 0.7 miles

away among lottery losers). As seen in Row (2), distance between mothers and children results
28
      An alternative explanation is that winners have greater access to formal insurance, but this is not supported
      by survey data: 9% of losers received help from the government, an NGO or a religious organization following
      a shock, and among winners this fraction is lower by 6 percentage points without controls (p<.05) and by 4
      percentage points (p<.1) with controls (Online Appendix Table V, Panel F).




                                                        19
in less frequent interaction. Winners are 5% less likely see an adult child at least monthly.

   This pattern is consistent with the idea that greater average distances to employment op-

portunities and neighborhood resources discourage adult children from staying in their parents’

neighborhood. Indeed, the fact that adult sons’ contribution to household income is comparable

across winners and losers suggests that they are sacrificing geographic proximity to the family

in order to maintain steady income and employment.

   Social isolation from immediate family members is a key relocation cost for winners. That

said, we observe a compensating increase in social interaction with neighbors. Our survey asked

respondents about socialization (via conversation, drinking tea together, or sharing a meal) with

four neighboring households (left, right, across and behind their houses). The average respondent

has 2.7 immediate neighbors, and this number is comparable across winners and losers (not

shown). We estimate regressions where the unit of observation is defined as a respondent-

neighbor pair and cluster standard errors by respondent.

   Interaction with immediate neighbors is high, and significantly more for those encouraged to

relocate: 95% of pairs have socialized and this number is 3 percentage points higher for winners.

This is striking given that Colony A neighbors are 24% less likely to be from the same caste

(Panel B, Row 4). Geographic isolation and greater occupational homogeneity (Panel B, Row

5) are strong countervailing forces encouraging neighbor interaction.

   These patterns help explain lower risk-sharing capacity among neighbors in Colony A. First,

less connectedness (by virtue of being more likely to belong to a di↵erent caste and having known

one another for less time) could lower their ability to maintain otherwise optimal insurance

agreements. Second, they are more likely to share the same occupation and so are more subject

to correlated income shocks.

   In qualitative interviews, as well, several respondents described the social costs of geographic

isolation. Poor transportation and the low prevalence of mobile phones in the 1990s increased

the sense of isolation from the caste network. Many respondents who subsequently moved out

reported feeling “scared” and “lonely” — especially since their husbands worked long hours in

the city. The husband of one winner who left Colony A started his comments by saying, “The




                                               20
whole area was deserted and lonely — you could die there and no one would know it.” The

fact that moving to Colony A increased distance from their relatives heightened the sense of

loneliness, and left many feeling socially disjunct from their community (caste) and family. He

continued, “When we were living in Colony A we were very cut o↵ from everyone. No one was

inviting us to any functions.”

     In contrast, losers described their main network as caste-based. One loser who lives east of

the old city explained, “There is a sense of community here — but it is along caste lines. People

from our caste help us, but not others.”


D.3      Collective Action

In Panel C we turn to collective action. Each respondent was asked about her participation in

activities to benefit the community over the last three years.29 Nineteen percent of losers report

contributing to community public goods over the last three years, and this percentage almost

doubles among winners.

     Winners’ higher propensity to cooperate with neighbors may be the flip side of reduced

risk-sharing: denser local networks can facilitate cooperation around public goods with highly

localized benefits. Put di↵erently, public goods that only benefit those living nearby may be

easier to provide when networks are geographically concentrated.30 The most common public

goods provided were precisely of this nature: gutters, road maintenance, temples, and local

celebrations. In addition, 91% of community public goods involved contributions from all or

most members of the community. It is likely that such unanimity is harder to achieve in more

di↵use networks.31

     Finally, we collected information on city-wide collective action – specifically, participation

in the beedi worker union that all participants belonged to at the time of the lottery. Twenty
29
      The specific question asked was, “What activities or problems have you worked on with your neighbors to
      benefit the community in the past three years?” The most common answers were: nothing, gutters, something
      for temple or mosque, wedding for a neighbor, funeral for a neighbor.
30
      Reasons include (i) individuals may value a given public good more if a higher fraction of her network
      members benefit from that good, and (ii) enforcing informal agreements to contribute may be easier when
      more beneficiaries can monitor and punish a potential beneficiary.
31
      For example, the likelihood that one of the potential beneficiaries is unconnected to others in the network is
      greater if networks are less dense, so it will be harder to enforce that individual’s contribution to the project.




                                                          21
years later, unionization rates are similar across winners and losers (86% and 88%, respectively).

However, while 47% of losers report having attended a union meeting during the previous year,

this number is 18 percentage points lower among winners.

     Overall, the patterns suggest that, likely due to geographic isolation, winners invested less in

collective action across neighborhoods and maintaining social ties with the broader community

of beedi workers and substituted toward less costly local ties. Unfortunately, the high degree of

spatial correlation in the major economic shocks such as floods, earthquakes, and riots, rendered

these more localized networks less valuable in terms of providing informal insurance.


E     Mobility versus Income E↵ects

Thus far we have interpreted the ITT results (changes in social interactions, informal insurance

and collective action) as being driven by program compliers – specifically, the two-thirds of

winners who moved to Colony A, and in some instances, by the one-third of winners who still

live there. However, it is possible that some of the patterns reflect changes in long-run outcomes

experienced by non-movers via the income e↵ect associated with selling or renting subsidized

housing. Distinguishing between these two possibilities is important for extrapolating our results

to settings with di↵erent compliance rates, or where enforcement of lease agreements is possible.

     Since the set of movers are clearly a non-random sample of winners, it is difficult to rigorously

establish that program e↵ects are disproportionately concentrated among them. However, three

facts point to this being the case. First, as shown in Table 6, in regressions run on only the

winner sample, in which outcomes are regressed on indicators of whether the respondent ever

moved to Colony A and whether the respondent still lives in Colony A, all of the significant ITT

program e↵ects are concentrated among the subset of movers, and in many cases only among

current Colony A residents. In these regressions, the coefficient estimate on a dummy indicator

of having moved to Colony A generates a point estimate that is significantly larger if not more

statistically significant than we observe in the ITT analysis, although we cannot rule out that

movers are ex ante di↵erent than non-movers in these dimensions.32
32
     The only exception is Panel C Row (1). Winners report more borrowing contacts, but these contacts are
     also less likely to belong to the same caste and may, therefore, be less valuable.




                                                   22
   Second, the estimated magnitudes of the ITT program e↵ects are small enough to justify

e↵ect sizes up to three times as large (if concentrated among Colony A residents). For instance,

it is plausible that distance to non-co-resident children increases from 2 to 5.5 miles. In fact, if

only one third of them live at home, and the rest return to the city center – which is 7.5 miles

from Colony A – then our ITT estimate makes sense.

   Third, given that we in general find only negative e↵ects of the program, it is unlikely

that income e↵ects are responsible for the patterns. For instance, there is no clear reason that a

modest positive income shock would cause adult children to live farther away from their parents,

or reduce ability to rely on network members for help.



III    Conclusion

Even among a group of slum dwellers who lobbied hard for the opportunity to move into public

housing outside of the slums, ultimately very few found it optimal to leave the city center.

Fourteen years after housing assignment, only 34% remained in public housing and the majority

had returned to the slums. Evidence from other housing mobility programs suggests that the

Colony A program was not an outlier. For instance, a survey we conducted in 2007 of participants

in another housing program in Ahmedabad (where beneficiaries were again chosen by lottery)

showed that only 46% of winners or their relatives were living in the unit they won just two and

a half years after winning it.

   The main policy lesson is that it is very hard to make public housing relocation programs

sufficiently attractive for the poor in developing countries to opt in, so this may rarely be the

optimal policy response to housing concerns of slum populations. While we cannot rule out the

possibility that reductions in labor income or schooling access played a role in program exit,

a major constraint appears to be the severance of social ties and the resulting loss of informal

insurance that accompanied relocation, which was too costly to make even highly subsidized

public housing in the suburbs worthwhile for most participants in our setting.

   While policy-makers typically acknowledge costs of relocation programs such as increased

commuting times or distance to health and education facilities, such costs can in theory be



                                                23
remedied with better public transportation or targeted suburban infrastructure. The destruction

of social capital that comes from reshu✏ing slum households is a welfare loss that cannot be so

easily rebuilt. Although new ties may be formed eventually, slum relocation programs as they

are normally envisioned destroy economically valuable social capital by severing links that may

have evolved and strengthened in the neighborhood over decades and that likely result from the

optimal sorting of individuals into enclaves.

   Our findings suggest that alternative policies such as neighborhood-wide relocation programs

may be more appropriate for slum-dwellers. Alternatively, slum upgrading programs that do not

try to move people at all may be a less wasteful approach to public housing policy in developing

countries.




                                                24
References

Abu-Ghazzeh, T. M. (1999). Housing Layout, Social Interaction, and the Place of Contact in

  Abu-Nuseir, Jordan. Journal of Environmental Psychology XIX, 41–73.

Anand, S. (2014). Delhi’s DDA House ‘Lottery’: What to Know. September 1. http://tinyurl.

  com/odhgkv5 [Accessed: June 28, 2015].

Barnhardt, S. (2009). Near and Dear: Evaluating the Impact of Neighbor Diversity on Inter-

  Religious Attitudes. Ph. D. thesis, Harvard University.

Bayer, P., S. L. Ross, and G. Topa (2008). Place of work and place of residence: Informal hiring

  networks and labor market outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116 (6), 1150–1196.

BBC (2009). Kenya begins huge slum clearance. September 16. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/

  hi/africa/8258417.stm [Accessed: June 29, 2015].

BBC (2012). Lagos Makoko slums knocked down in Nigeria. July 17. http://www.bbc.com/

  news/world-africa-18870511 [Accessed: June 29, 2015].

Bhatt, M. R. (2003). Understanding slums: Case studies for the global report on human settle-

  ments 2003: The case of ahmedabad, india.

Breman, J. (2004). The making and unmaking of an industrial working class: sliding down the

  labour hierarchy in Ahmedabad, India. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2015). The E↵ects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods

  on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. Technical report,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cities Alliance (2002). Sewa banks housing microfinance program in india. Shelter Finance for

  the Poor Series 4iii.

Coleman, J. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.




                                              25
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of

  Sociology 94, S95–S120.

Dasgupta, B. and S. V. Lall (2009). Assessing benefits of slum upgrading programs in second-

  best settings. In S. V. Lall (Ed.), Urban Land Markets: Improving Land Management for

  Successful Urbanization. Springer.

Day, J. and R. Cervero (2010). E↵ects of residential relocation on household and commuting

  expenditures in Shanghai, China. International journal of urban and regional research 34 (4),

  762–788.

Dayal, M. (2001). Towards Securer Lives: SEWA’s Social-security Programme. Orient Black-

  swan.

Festinger, L., S. Schachter, and K. Back (1963). Social Pressures in Informal Groups: A Study

  Of Human Factors in Housing. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Field, E., M. Levinson, R. Pande, and S. Visaria (2008). Segregation, Rent Control, and Riots:

  The Economics of Religious Conflict in an Indian City. American Economic Review 98,

  505–510.

Field, E. M. and M. Kremer (2006). Impact evaluation for slum upgrading interventions, Vol-

  ume 3. World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management, Thematic Group on

  Poverty Analysis, Monitoring and Impact Evaluation.

Gillion, K. (1968). Ahmedabad; a Study in Indian Urban History. University of California Press.

Glaeser, E. (2011). Triumph of the City:How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter,

  Greener, Healthier, and Happier. Penguin Press.

Hall, D. (1980). A spatial analysis of urban community development policy in India, Volume 1.

  New York: Research Studies Press Ltd.

Jackson, M. O., T. Rodriguez-Barraquer, and X. Tan (2012). Social capital and social quilts:

  Network patterns of favor exchange. The American Economic Review , 1857–1897.


                                              26
Jacob, B. (2004). Public Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence from Public

  Housing Demolitions in Chicago. American Economic Review 94, 233–258.

Jacob, B. and J. Ludwig (2012). The E↵ects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply: Evidence

  from a Voucher Lottery. The American Economic Review 102.

Kapoor, M., S. Lall, M. Lundberg, and Z. Shalizi (2004). Location and Welfare in Cities:

  Impacts of Policy Interventions on the Urban Poor. World Bank Policy Research Working

  Paper (No. 3318).

Kling, J., J. B. Liebman, and L. F.Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E↵ects.

  Econometrica 75, 83–119.

Lall, S. V., M. K. Lundberg, and Z. Shalizi (2008). Implications of alternate policies on welfare

  of slum dwellers: evidence from Pune, India. Journal of Urban Economics 63 (1), 56–73.

Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. C. Kessler, J. R. Kling, and L. San-

  bonmatsu (2012). Neighborhood e↵ects on the long-term well-being of low-income adults.

  Science 337 (6101), 1505–1510.

Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. C. Kessler, J. R. Kling, and L. San-

  bonmatsu (2013). Long-term neighborhood e↵ects on low-income families: Evidence from

  moving to opportunity. The American Economic Review 103 (3), 226–31.

Marx, B., T. Stoker, and T. Suri (2013). The Economics of Slums in the Developing World.

  Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (4), 187–210.

Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (2011). Toward more inclusive cities... http:

  //mhupa.gov.in/ray/01-MoHUPA-Brochure-20English.pdf [Accessed: June 30, 2015].

Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (2013). A↵ordable Housing in Partnership:

  Scheme Guidelines. http://mhupa.gov.in/W_new/AHP_23_09_2013.pdf [Accessed: June 30,

  2015].




                                               27
Montgomery, M. and P. Hewett (2005). Urban Poverty and Health in Developing Countries:

  Household and Neighborhood E↵ects. Demography 87 (42), 397–425.

Office of the Registrar General, Census Commissioner (2001). Census of India. New Delhi:

  Government of India.

Office of the Registrar General, Census Commissioner (2011). Rural-urban distribution. In

  Provisional Population Totals, Paper 2, Volume 1. New Delhi: Government of India.

Oreopolous, P. (2003). The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood. Quarterly

  Journal of Economics 118, 1533–1575.

Press Trust of India (2014). DDA Housing Scheme: Unsuccessful Applicants May Get Refund

  by December 24. December 17. http://tinyurl.com/pw7p7yt [Accessed: June 28, 2015].

Rubinowitz, L. S. and J. E. Rosenbaum (2000). Crossing the Class and Color Lines: From

  Public Housing to White Suburbia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sacerdote, B. and D. Marmaros (2006). How Do Friendships Form?         Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 121 (1), 79–119.

Sanbonmatsu, L., J. Ludwig, L. Katz, L. Gennetian, G. Duncan, R. Kessler, E. Adam, T. Mc-

  Dade, and S. T. Lindau (2011). Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration

  Program. Final Impacts Evaluation. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,

  Office of Policy Development and Research.

SEWA (2009). SEWA’s structure. http://www.sewa.org/About_Us_Structure.asp [Accessed:

  June 29, 2015].

Some, W., W. Hafidz, and G. Sauter (2009). Renovation not relocation: the work of Paguyuban

  Warga Strenkali (PWS) in Indonesia. Environment and Urbanization 21 (2), 463–475.

Takeuchi, A., M. Cropper, and A. Bento (2008). Measuring the welfare e↵ects of slum improve-

  ment programs: The case of Mumbai. Journal of Urban Economics 64, 65–84.



                                               28
UN-HABITAT (2003). The challenge of slums: global report on human settlements 2003. Lon-

  don: Earthscan.

UN-HABITAT (2010). State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011 - Cities for All: Bridging the

  Urban Divide. Nairobi: United Nations Human Settlements Programme.

Unni, J. and U. Rani (2000). Urban informal sector: Size and income generation processes in

  Gujarat. National Council of Applied Economic Research Reports. (2).

Viratkapan, V. and R. Perera (2006). Slum relocation projects in Bangkok: what has contributed

  to their success or failure? Habitat International 30 (1), 157–174.

Viratkapan, V., R. Perera, and S. Watanabe (2004). Factors contributing to the development

  performance of slum relocation projects in Bangkok, Thailand. International Development

  Planning Review 26 (3), 231–260.

Warah, R. (2004). Slums and Housing in Africa. UN Chronicle 40 (4), 19, 28.

Ward, B. A. (2006). Essays on the Economics of Social Interaction. Ph. D. thesis, Harvard

  University.




                                               29
                                  Table I: Baseline (1987) Characteristics
                                                  Winner Non-Winner Mean                            N
Panel A - Demographics

Age                                                    1.06            28.21                       430
                                                     (1.14)            [9.95]
Muslim                                              -0.07⇤⇤             0.12                       443
                                                     (0.03)            [0.32]
Padmasali Caste                                        0.07             0.39                       443
                                                     (0.06)            [0.49]
Koshti Caste                                          -0.04             0.37                       443
                                                     (0.05)            [0.48]
Married                                               -0.05             0.88                       443
                                                     (0.04)            [0.33]
Widowed, divorced, or separated                        0.04             0.09                       443
                                                     (0.04)            [0.28]
Number children born                                  -0.02             2.58                       443
                                                     (0.25)            [2.17]
Husband is employed                                   -0.04             0.99                       344
                                                     (0.03)            [0.11]
Husband had a mill or factory job                      0.09             0.49                       344
                                                     (0.06)            [0.50]
Husband had a tailoring job                           -0.05             0.13                       344
                                                     (0.04)            [0.34]
Panel B - Residences

Urbanicity Index                                       0.06            -0.01                       443
                                                     (0.07)            [0.65]
Property Rights Index                                 -0.01            -0.01                       443
                                                     (0.08)            [0.75]
Amenities Index                                       -0.05             0.00                       427
                                                     (0.07)            [0.63]
Chose location to be near family or friends            0.06             0.30                       443
                                                     (0.05)            [0.46]
Chose location for resources                          -0.01             0.12                       443
                                                     (0.04)            [0.33]
Chose location for price                               0.01             0.03                       443
                                                     (0.02)            [0.18]
Panel C - Income (subset)

Participant’s Income (INR per month)                 -15.65           268.15                       109
                                                    (19.75)          [108.28]
Husband’s Income (INR per month)                     43.65            334.31                       109
                                                    (39.10)          [203.91]
1. Each row of the Winner column reports the coefficient from an OLS regression where the explanatory variable is
whether the respondent won the lottery.
Robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. Sample size less than 443 is due to missing observations, except for Panel A variables for husband since only
366 participants were married in 1987 and for Panel C, which is for the participant subset.
3. The Urbanicity Index consists of miles from house to city center, minutes walking to nearest hospital and school.
4. The Property Rights Index consists of whether they owned their home in 1987, how many years pre-1987 they
owned their home, whether they owned the title and whether title was in the participant’s name.
A participant owns a house if someone in their household owns the house.
5. The Amenities Index consists of whether the participant: could walk outside at night up to 10 PM,
had a private toilet, a separate kitchen, and water tap in the house.



                                                        30
                                         Table II: Program Take-up
                                                       Winner         Non-winner                                    N
                                            No Controls With Controls   Mean
Respondent’s family ever lived in Colony A     0.60⇤⇤⇤       0.60⇤⇤⇤     0.06                                      443
                                                (0.05)        (0.05)    [0.24]
Years respondent lived in Colony A             6.08⇤⇤⇤       6.03⇤⇤⇤     0.39                                      443
                                                (0.59)        (0.60)    [1.99]
Respondent’s family lives in Colony A          0.28⇤⇤⇤       0.28⇤⇤⇤     0.06                                      443
                                                (0.05)        (0.05)    [0.24]
Lives in same house as before lottery            -0.07         -0.05     0.29                                      443
                                                (0.05)        (0.05)    [0.45]
Number of houses lived in since 1987              0.02         -0.00     2.16                                      443
                                                (0.12)        (0.12)    [1.11]
1. Each row of Winner columns reports the coefficient from an OLS regression where the explanatory variable is whether the
respondent won the lottery. Robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. The set of controls comprises individual indicator variables for whether participant is Muslim, Koshti caste or Padmasali caste
(other castes omitted), whether participant was identified by referral, and whether a familymember responded to the survey.




                                                               31
                                Table III: Current Housing and Neighborhood Quality

                                                              Winner          Non-winner                              N
                                                   No Controls With Controls      Mean
Lives in Ahmedabad in 2007                              -0.01          0.00        0.97                              443
                                                       (0.02)         (0.02)      [0.18]
Ward level population density                      -7375.10⇤⇤⇤    -7902.76⇤⇤⇤   29802.07                             386
                                                    (1432.47)      (1412.91)   [10641.24]
Urbanicity Index                                     -0.34⇤⇤⇤       -0.36⇤⇤⇤      -0.01                              443
                                                       (0.07)         (0.07)      [0.61]
Amenities Index                                       0.20⇤⇤⇤        0.21⇤⇤⇤      -0.00                              443
                                                       (0.05)         (0.05)      [0.46]
Total value of housing improvements made (INR           -3.94          -2.29      27.94                              443
1000s)                                                 (4.13)         (4.00)     [58.51]
Chose current location to be near family/friends      -0.11⇤⇤         -0.09⇤       0.33                              418
                                                       (0.05)         (0.05)      [0.47]
Chose current location for resources                   -0.09⇤        -0.12⇤⇤       0.29                              418
                                                       (0.05)         (0.05)      [0.46]
Chose current location for price                      0.26⇤⇤⇤        0.25⇤⇤⇤       0.09                              418
                                                       (0.05)         (0.05)      [0.28]
Years lived in house to be close to family/friends   -2.13⇤⇤⇤       -1.86⇤⇤⇤       6.30                              442
                                                       (0.70)         (0.72)      [7.38]
Years lived in house to be close to resources        -1.69⇤⇤⇤       -2.21⇤⇤⇤       4.44                              442
                                                       (0.63)         (0.65)      [6.79]
Mid price of houses in area according to real         119.73         192.64      591.69                              109
estate agent (INR 1000s)                             (156.14)       (154.10)    [633.21]
1. Each row of Winner columns reports the coefficient from an OLS regression where the explanatory variable is whether the
respondent won the lottery. Robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. The set of controls is the same as in Table II.
3. Ward-level population density was obtained from Census data in 2001, and was only avaible for households still living in
Ahmedabad in 2007.
4. The Urbanicity Index consists of miles from house to city center, number of houses in the neighborhood, and minutes walking
to nearest hospital and school.
5. The Amenities Index consists of whether the participant could walk outside at night up to 10 PM, whether the house had a
durable wall, roof, and floor; and whether they had a private toilet, a separate kitchen, and water tap in the house.
6. Choosing a house for its resources includes the following reasons: to be close to a school, work, for its location or for the
area and neighbors.




                                                             32
                                              Table IV: Economic Well-Being

                                                             Winner           Non-winner                            N
                                                    No Controls With Controls   Mean
Panel A - Income & Wealth

Adult labor supply index                                -0.04             -0.04              0.00                  414
                                                       (0.08)            (0.08)             [0.71]
Adult labor supply cost index                            0.13              0.11             -0.01                  414
                                                       (0.10)            (0.10)             [0.71]
Participant currently rolls beedis                      -0.03             -0.03              0.75                  414
                                                       (0.05)            (0.05)             [0.43]
Total household income (INR 100s per                    -2.93             -3.22             42.05                  414
month)                                                 (3.16)            (3.18)            [27.22]
Participant income (INR 100s per month)                 -0.52             -0.66              4.55                  414
                                                       (0.56)            (0.55)             [4.03]
Husband income (INR 100s per month)                     -0.86             -0.73             10.83                  414
                                                       (1.52)            (1.55)            [13.36]
Income from sons (INR 100s per month)                   -1.75             -2.13             22.95                  414
                                                       (2.64)            (2.67)            [24.72]
Income from daughters (INR 100s per                      0.58             0.57               1.19                  414
month)                                                 (0.51)            (0.49)             [3.83]
Net housing revenue since 1993 (INR                      7.12            10.33             -13.14                  439
1000s)                                                 (6.16)            (6.30)            [70.43]
Asset Index                                             -0.00             0.01              -0.00                  443
                                                       (0.04)            (0.04)             [0.41]
Panel B - Human Capital

Fertility since 1987                                    -0.13             -0.08              1.08                  443
                                                       (0.14)            (0.14)             [1.35]
Health Index                                            -0.01             -0.03             -0.00                  443
                                                       (0.07)            (0.07)             [0.56]
Child’s years schooling completed                       -0.51             -0.17              7.54                 1491
                                                       (0.40)            (0.35)             [3.51]
Child’s mean home-school transport cost                 -0.19              0.74              2.76                 1041
for most recent school (INR per day)                   (1.09)            (1.06)            [10.34]
1. Each row of Winner columns reports the coefficient from an OLS regression where the explanatory variable is whether the
respondent won the lottery. Robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. Controls same as Table II. Regressions at the child level include child’s gender as a control and participant-clustered SEs.
3. The Adult Labor Supply Index consists of whether the participant and husband work, number of hours worked, and whether
participant has a part-time job. The Adult Labor Supply Cost Index consists of whether participant has a job outside the home,
and for the husband, whether his job required a commute, minutes taken to get to work, and money spent to go to work.
4. Income questions exclude deceased and incapacitated participants, whose families were not asked these questions.
The sample for questions about husbands and children excludes 6 lottery participants who were never married.
The sample for participant’s work also excludes deceased and incapacitated participants. The sample for husband’s work
history excludes 63 participants whose husbands have not been in the household since before the lottery.
5. Net housing revenue was calculated from the amount reported made from selling or leasing houses minus the reported
amount paid on mortgages and leases.
6. The Asset Index consists of whether the household owns each of the following: color television, motorcycle, rickshaw, bicycle,
kerosene stove, ceiling fan, almirah, radio and mobile phone.
7. The Health Index consists of participant’s current health status, months during which participant had health problems,
participant has a persistent health problem, number of disease symptoms experienced by the participant in the last 30 days,
and number of physical activities with which the respondent has health difficulties, as well as if anyone in the household required
medical treatment in the past year, number of times someone was sick in past year, if anyone had a health problem, number of
breathing/coughing/backache problems participant has, if husband has breathing/coughing/backache/alcoholism problems,
and if any child has beedi-related health problem.



                                                                33
                                                Table V: Social Capital

                                                                  Winner           Non-winner                      N
                                                         No Controls With Controls   Mean
Panel A - Informal Insurance

Has someone for any of four lending and                     -0.09⇤⇤           -0.10⇤⇤            0.93             414
borrowing categories                                         (0.04)            (0.04)           [0.26]
Amount of informal transfer received in event              -70.77⇤⇤          -79.05⇤⇤           70.77             403
of shock (INR)                                              (28.52)           (32.03)         [500.88]
If has someone from one of the four lending                -3.25⇤⇤⇤           -2.89⇤⇤           20.04             374
or borrowing categories, years known                         (1.24)            (1.27)          [11.72]
Percent of people lend/borrow with who are                    -0.03             -0.00            0.65             375
from same caste                                              (0.06)            (0.05)           [0.45]
Panel B - Social interaction

Miles from child’s house to mother’s in                     0.66⇤⇤⇤          0.63⇤⇤⇤            0.71             1159
Ahmedabad (if 16 and over)                                   (0.18)           (0.14)           [1.52]
Participant sees this child at least monthly                 -0.04⇤            -0.03            0.92             1278
(if 16 and over)                                             (0.03)           (0.03)           [0.27]
Ever socialize with neighbor                                0.03⇤⇤            0.03⇤⇤            0.95             1209
                                                             (0.01)           (0.01)           [0.21]
Neighbor is same caste (same religion if                    -0.08⇤⇤          -0.08⇤⇤            0.34             1220
Muslim)                                                      (0.04)           (0.04)           [0.47]
Someone in neighbor’s house rolls beedis                     0.12⇤⇤          0.12⇤⇤⇤            0.29             1210
                                                             (0.05)           (0.04)           [0.45]
Panel C - Collective Action

Neighbors have worked together to solve a                   0.19⇤⇤⇤          0.17⇤⇤⇤            0.19              414
common problem in the last three years                       (0.05)           (0.05)           [0.39]
Days spent working together in previous year                2.92⇤⇤            2.73⇤⇤            1.66              413
on most recent project                                       (1.39)            (1.37)          [5.67]
Amount spent in previous year on most recent               221.75⇤⇤          205.94⇤          291.69              409
project (INR)                                              (103.96)          (110.06)        [1104.25]
Most or all people in the neighborhood                      0.20⇤⇤⇤           0.18⇤⇤⇤           0.17              410
contributed money for the project                            (0.05)            (0.05)          [0.38]
Attended any Beedi Union meeting in past year              -0.22⇤⇤⇤          -0.18⇤⇤⇤           0.47              443
                                                             (0.05)            (0.05)          [0.50]
1. Each row of Winner columns reports the coefficient from an OLS regression where the explanatory variable is whether
the respondent won the lottery. Robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. Controls same as Table II. Regressions at the child level include the child’s gender as a control
and participant-clustered SEs. The immediate neighbor from same caste outcome excludes the caste and religion covariates.
3. Sample excludes participants who are dead or incapacitated. For immediate neighbors, sample consists of the four neighbors
living left, right, front, and behind participants. 1220 neighbors reported. The number of neighbors was balanced across
winners and non-winners. For these regressions, standard errors are clustered at the participant level.
4. “Has someone for lending or borrowing needs” combines whether they have (i) someone to borrow Rs. 50
from, (ii) someone you would lend Rs. 50 (iii) someone from whom you can borrow rice or cooking oil, and
(iv) someone from whom you could borrow Rs. 500 for a health emergency.
5. Recent shocks asked about are communal riots, earthquake, and outbreak of the chikangunya virus.




                                                            34
                                Table VI: Heterogeneity of Impact for Winners

                                                           Lives in Used to Live  Mean if never                  N
                                                          Colony A in Colony A lived in Colony A
Panel A - Housing and Income

Years lived in Colony A                                    12.08⇤⇤⇤        7.19⇤⇤⇤               0.00           105
                                                             (0.67)         (0.70)              [0.00]
Chose current location for price                            0.79⇤⇤⇤          -0.03               0.09            98
                                                             (0.08)         (0.07)              [0.29]
Urbanicity Index                                           -0.75⇤⇤⇤        -0.29⇤⇤               0.01           105
                                                             (0.12)         (0.14)              [0.52]
Amenities Index                                               0.09           -0.04               0.19           105
                                                             (0.09)         (0.10)              [0.42]
Total monthly household income (INR 100s per                  0.72           -3.02              39.84            96
month)                                                      (6.43)          (7.20)             [26.75]
Panel B - Social Interactions

Neighbors have worked together to solve a                   0.57⇤⇤⇤           0.07               0.16            96
common problem in the last three years                       (0.10)         (0.10)              [0.37]
Attended beedi union meeting in past year                     -0.15          -0.05               0.31           105
                                                             (0.10)         (0.11)              [0.47]
Someone in neighbor’s house rolls beedis                    0.45⇤⇤⇤          -0.08               0.25           291
                                                             (0.08)         (0.08)              [0.43]
Participant sees this child at least monthly                -0.09⇤           -0.04               0.93           290
(if 16 and over)                                             (0.05)         (0.05)              [0.26]
Miles from child’s house to mother’s in                      0.71⇤           -0.23               1.15           254
Ahmedabad (if 16 and over)                                   (0.43)         (0.42)              [1.79]
Panel C - Informal Insurance

Has someone for any of four lending and                      0.22⇤⇤           0.12               0.72            96
borrowing categories                                         (0.09)         (0.11)              [0.46]
If has someone from one of the four lending                   -3.44          -4.38              19.55            80
or borrowing categories, years known                         (2.51)         (2.89)             [10.09]
Percent of people lend/borrow with who are                  -0.28⇤⇤          -0.07               0.75            80
from same caste                                              (0.12)         (0.12)              [0.41]
1. We report OLS regressions with robust SE in ( ), standard deviations in [ ]. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01
2. For regressions at the child level and the neighbor level standard errors are clustered at the participant level.




                                                              35
                     Figure I: Years Spent in Colony A (only Winners)




       40
       30
Number Winners
    20 10
       0




                 0                   5                     10               15
                     Years Winner Lived in Colony A between 1993 and 2007




                                           36
Figure II: Housing Locations 1987




Figure III: Housing Locations 2007




               37
