                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ON THE DESIRABILITY OF NOMINAL GDP TARGETING

                                             Julio Garín
                                            Robert Lester
                                              Eric Sims

                                        Working Paper 21420
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21420


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We are grateful to Tim Fuerst and seminar participants at the University of Notre Dame, the 2015
Midwest Macroeconomics Conference, the Banco Central del Uruguay, the Universidad ORT Uruguay,
the NGDP Targeting Conference, and the CEF2015 Conference for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Julio Garín, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
On the Desirability of Nominal GDP Targeting
Julio Garín, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 21420
July 2015
JEL No. E31,E47,E52,E58

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the welfare properties of nominal GDP targeting in the context of a New Keynesian
model with both price and wage rigidity. In particular, we compare nominal GDP targeting to inflation
and output gap targeting as well as to a conventional Taylor rule. These comparisons are made on
the basis of welfare losses relative to a hypothetical equilibrium with flexible prices and wages. Output
gap targeting is the most desirable of the rules under consideration, but nominal GDP targeting performs
almost as well. Nominal GDP targeting is associated with smaller welfare losses than a Taylor rule
and significantly outperforms inflation targeting. Relative to inflation targeting and a Taylor rule,
nominal GDP targeting performs best conditional on supply shocks and when wages are sticky relative
to prices. Nominal GDP targeting may outperform output gap targeting if the gap is observed with
noise, and has more desirable properties related to equilibrium determinacy than does gap targeting.


Julio Garín                                         Eric Sims
Terry College of Business                           Department of Economics
University of Georgia                               University of Notre Dame
310 Herty Drive Room 520                            723 Flanner Hall
Athens, GA 30602                                    South Bend, IN 46556
jgarin@uga.edu                                      and NBER
                                                    esims1@nd.edu
Robert Lester
Dept. of Economics, Colby College
Diamond, 3rd floor, 5230 Mayflower Hill
Waterville, Maine 04901
rblester@colby.edu
1     Introduction
    What rule should a central bank follow in the formation of monetary policy? Despite
extensive research about this topic, it remains an unsettled question. Although nominal
output targeting has recently received attention in the popular press and within policy circles,
it has not been scrutinized within the context of the quantitative frameworks commonly used
by central banks. The objective of this paper is to study the desirability of nominal GDP
targeting within the context of a New Keynesian model with both price and wage rigidity. In
particular, we compare the welfare properties of nominal GDP targeting to two other popular
targeting rules – inflation and output gap targeting – as well as to a conventional Taylor rule.
    Although there is some disagreement on which type of rule central banks should follow,
economists agree on several principles in the design of monetary policy. First, rules are
preferred to discretion. Rules allow agents to better anchor expectations which improves the
inflation-output gap tradeoff. This is true in models of either ad hoc Phillips curves as in
Barro and Gordon (1983) or in micro-founded Phillips curves as in Woodford (2003). Second,
the policy objectives of central banks should be understandable to the public. As argued by
Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), this requires the central bank to be more accountable. Even
if monetary policy follows some strict rule, forming expectations is difficult if households
do not understand the rule. Third, the central bank faces information constraints which
should be taken into account in the formation of monetary policy. Responding to precisely
measured variables is superior to responding to imprecisely measured variables or variables
that are hypothetical constructs of a model. Finally, a desirable monetary policy rule ought
to support a determinate equilibrium.
    In the micro-founded welfare loss function from the simplest version of the New Keynesian
model, a central bank ought to care about stabilizing both price inflation and the output gap
(defined as the gap between the equilibrium level of output and the hypothetical equilibrium
level of output which would obtain if prices were flexible). Inflation and output gap targeting
are therefore easily motivated as potentially desirable policy rules. In a version of the model
where only prices are sticky, the so-called “Divine Coincidence” (Blanchard and Gali (2007))
holds, and either targeting rule fully implements the flexible price allocation. In other words,
stabilizing inflation also stabilizes the output gap, and vice-versa. Given that the output
gap is a hypothetical model-based construct, whereas inflation is easily observed at high
frequencies, inflation targeting is therefore often touted as a highly desirable and easily
implemented policy rule.
    Inflation targeting may be less desirable in versions of the model in which the Divine
Coincidence does not hold. Erceg et al. (2000) consider a version of the model in which


                                               1
both prices and nominal wages are sticky, the combination of which breaks the equivalence
between inflation and gap stabilization and renders it impossible for the central bank to
fully implement the flexible price and wage allocation. For plausible parameterizations of the
parameters governing price and wage stickiness, they find that inflation targeting tends to
perform poorly from a welfare perspective. Output gap targeting, in contrast, does very well,
coming close to implementing the flexible price and wage allocation.
    Although nominal GDP targeting has recently gained attention as potential policy rule in
the popular press and within policy circles, it has received relatively little attention within
the context of the type of models in widespread use at central banks and among academics.
Whereas inflation targeting focuses on nominal variables and gap targeting on real variables,
nominal GDP targeting simultaneously targets both nominal and real variables. And unlike
output gap targeting, it does not require the central bank to observe the hypothetical flexible
price and wage level of output.
    In Section 2 we study the merits of nominal GDP targeting relative to other policy
rules using a standard parameterization of the sticky price and wage New Keynesian model
developed by Erceg et al. (2000). We evaluate different rules on the basis of the average
welfare loss relative to a hypothetical flexible price and wage allocation. Like Erceg et al.
(2000), we find that output gap targeting does well, producing very small welfare losses that
come close to implementing the flexible price and wage allocation. Nominal GDP targeting
does almost as well as gap targeting. It is associated with smaller welfare losses than a
conventionally parameterized Taylor rule and significantly outperforms inflation targeting.
Nominal GDP targeting performs best in a relative sense when wages are sticky relative to
prices and conditional on supply shocks. These results are consistent with the intuition laid
out by Sumner (2014) in a textbook aggregate supply / aggregate demand model.
    We consider a more elaborate medium scale version of the model in Sections 3 and 4. In
addition to price and wage stickiness, the model features investment and capital accumulation,
several sources of real inertia, and a number of different shocks. In Section 4, the parameters
of the model are estimated using Bayesian methods to fit recent US data. The results of the
medium scale model echo those from the small scale model. Output gap targeting produces the
lowest welfare losses relative to the hypothetical flexible price and wage allocation. Nominal
GDP targeting does almost as well, significantly bettering both an estimated Taylor rule
as well inflation targeting. As in the small scale model, nominal GDP targeting performs
best when wages are sticky relative to prices and conditional on supply shocks, although the
relative desirability of nominal GDP targeting conditional on supply and demand shocks is
not as stark as in the small scale model.
    Though we find output gap targeting to be the best performing of the different policy


                                              2
rules under consideration, there are some reasons to be weary of actually implementing
gap targeting as a policy rule. These reasons relate back to some of the basic principles of
desirable monetary policy which are highlighted at the beginning of the Introduction. First,
as a hypothetical model construct, gap targeting may be difficult to successfully communicate
to the public, even if the central bank can observe the flexible price and wage level of output
with precision. Second, it may be difficult for the central bank to observe the flexible price
and wage level of output, particularly in real time. This point has been made by Orphanides
(2001), Orphanides and van Norden (2002), and Orphanides (2003). Third, gap targeting
may result in equilibrium indeterminacy. This point has been made in the context of sticky
price New Keynesian models with positive trend inflation in Hornstein and Wolman (2005),
Ascari and Ropele (2009), and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011).
    We consider in Section 4 a couple of different exercises to address some of these points in
the context of the estimated medium scale model. In one, we assume that the central bank
observes the flexible price and wage level of output with noise, and compute the amount
of noise which would equate the welfare losses associated with targeting the mis-measured
gap and targeting nominal GDP. We find that if the noise in the observed flexible price
and wage level of output is more than about one-third the volatility of the actual flexible
price and wage level of output, then nominal GDP targeting produces a lower welfare loss
than does gap targeting. In a second exercise, we suppose that the central bank adjusts its
perceived flexible price and wage level of output to the actual flexible price and wage level
of output slowly. If the central bank adjusts slowly enough, then gap targeting can result
in significant welfare losses relative to nominal GDP targeting. Third, we investigate the
determinacy properties of gap targeting when trend inflation is positive. We find that if trend
inflation is greater than about 0.2 percent annually, then gap targeting results in equilibrium
indeterminacy. Because in the long run the level of output is independent of monetary policy,
nominal GDP targeting is equivalent to a price level target in the long run, and therefore
supports a determinate equilibrium for any level of trend inflation.
    Our paper is related to a large literature on optimal monetary policy. The relative merits
of nominal GDP targeting versus inflation targeting have been recently revived by Billi
(2014) and Woodford (2012), who discuss the rules within the context of the zero lower
bound. Cecchetti (1995) and Hall and Mankiw (1994) show in counterfactual simulations that
nominal GDP targeting would lower the volatility of both real and nominal variables. Neither
of these latter two papers have a structural model to conduct welfare analysis. Mitra (2003)
studies nominal GDP targeting in a small scale New Keynesian model with adaptive learning.
Jensen (2002) compares inflation and nominal GDP targeting in a linearized New Keynesian
model with price stickiness and Kim and Henderson (2005) compare the two rules in a model


                                              3
of wage and price stickiness. While both of these papers include structural models similar to
our own, Jensen (2002) does not include wage stickiness and Kim and Henderson (2005) uses
one period ahead price and wage contracts rather than the more common staggered price
and wage contracts. Moreover, Mitra (2003), Jensen (2002), and Kim and Henderson (2005)
do not analyze nominal GDP targeting in a medium scale model like Smets and Wouters
(2007) or Justiniano et al. (2010) which are extensively used in central banks. Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2007) study optimal policy rule coefficients for a Taylor rule in a sticky price New
Keynesian model with capital. They find that it is optimal to respond strongly to inflation
and not at all to output, though they do not allow the central bank to target the output gap
and their model does not feature wage rigidity. Sims (2013) studies the relative merits of a
Taylor rule responding to the output gap or output growth.


2     The Basic New Keynesian Model
    We begin by studying a textbook New Keynesian model featuring both wage and price
rigidity along the lines of Erceg et al. (2000). This model is a special case of the medium scale
model we study in the next section. In the subsections below we briefly describe the problems
of each type of agent in the model and discuss equilibrium and aggregation. We then use the
model to develop some intuition for the relative benefits of different monetary policy rules.
The full set of conditions characterizing the equilibrium are presented in Appendix A.


2.1    Households
    There exist a continuum of households indexed by h ∈ [0, 1]. These households are
monopoly suppliers of differentiated labor, Nt (h). There exists a labor aggregating firm
which bundles differentiated labor input into an aggregate labor input, Nt , which is sold to
firms at real wage wt ; wt (h) denotes the real wage paid to household h. The technology
which bundles labor intput is given by:
                                                                    w
                                          1            w −1       w −1
                              Nt = (∫         Nt (h)    w     )           , w > 1.         (1)
                                      0


The parameter w measures the degree of substitutability among different types of labor.
Profit maximization by the labor aggregating firm gives rise to a downward sloping demand
curve for each variety of labor and an aggregate real wage index:
                                                                     −w
                                                   wt (h)
                                    Nt (h) = (            )                Nt                (2)
                                                    wt

                                                       4
                                                        1
                                       wt1−w = ∫           wt (h)1−w dh.                     (3)
                                                    0

    Households are not freely able to adjust their wage each period. In particular, each
period there is a 1 − θw probability, θw ∈ [0, 1), that a household can adjust its wage. This
probability is independent of when a household last adjusted its wage. As in Erceg et al.
(2000), we assume there exists state-contingent securities which insure households against
idiosyncratic wage risk. We also assume that preferences are separable in consumption and
labor. Combined with perfect insurance, this means that households will make identical
non-labor market choices. We therefore suppress formal dependence on h in writing the
problem of a particular household with the exception of labor market variables.
    The problem of a particular household can be written:
                                                  ∞
                                                                             Nt (h)1+η
                              max              E0 ∑ β t νt {ln Ct − ψ                  }
                       Ct ,Bt ,wt (h),Nt (h)      t=0                         1+η

subject to
                                 Bt                                   Bt−1
                          Ct +      ≤ wt (h)Nt (h) + Πt + (1 + it−1 )                          (4)
                                 Pt                                    Pt
                                                                  −w
                                                   wt (h)
                                        Nt (h) ≥ (        )             Nt                     (5)
                                                    wt
                       ⎧   #
                       ⎪ wt (h)
                       ⎪                                        if wt (h) chosen optimally
              wt (h) = ⎨                                                                   .   (6)
                       ⎩ (1 + πt ) wt−1 (h)                     otherwise
                       ⎪
                       ⎪          −1


    The discount factor is given by β ∈ (0, 1), ψ is a scaling parameter on the disutility from
labor, and η represents the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. The exogenous
variable νt is a preference shock common to all households. Constraint (4) is a standard flow
budget constraint. A household enters the period with a stock of nominal bonds, Bt−1 , and
can choose a new stock of bonds, Bt , which pay out nominal interest rate it in period t + 1.
Consumption is denoted by Ct and the price of goods is Pt . Real profit distributed from firms
is Πt . Constraint (5) requires that household labor supply meets demand. Wage-setting is
described by (6). With probability 1 − θw the household chooses a new real wage, denoted
by wt# (h). With probability θw the household is unable to adjust its nominal wage, so the
real wage it charges in period t is its period t − 1 real wage divided by the gross inflation
rate between t − 1 and t, where 1 + πt = Pt /Pt−1 . Optimization gives rise to a standard Euler
equation for bonds that is the same across all households. It is straightforward to show that
all households given the opportunity will adjust to a common wage, wt# .




                                                            5
2.2    Production
   Production takes place in two phases. There exist a continuum of producers of differ-
entiated output indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], Yt (j). Differentiated output is transformed into final
output, Yt , by a competitive firm using the following technology:
                                                                        p
                                           1            p −1          p −1
                             Yt = (∫           Yt (j)    p
                                                                 dj)           , p > 1.    (7)
                                       0


The parameter p measures the degree of substitutability among differentiated output. The
price of the final output is Pt and the prices of differentiated output are denoted by Pt (j).
Profit maximization by the competitive firm gives rise to demand for each differentiated
output and an aggregate price index:
                                                                        −p
                                                         Pt (j)
                                     Yt (j) = (                 )              Yt           (8)
                                                          Pt
                                                             1
                                           1−p
                                     Pt           =∫             Pt (j)1−p .               (9)
                                                         0

   The production function for producer j is given by:

                                           Yt (j) = At Nt (j).                             (10)

The exogenous variable At is a productivity shock common across all producers of differentiated
output. These firms are not freely able to adjust their price in a given period in an analogous
way to household wage-setting. In particular, each period there is a 1 − θp probability,
θp ∈ [0, 1), that a firm can adjust its price, which we denote by Pt# (j). Otherwise it charges
its most recently chosen price:

                             ⎧   #
                             ⎪ P (j)
                             ⎪                           if Pt (j) chosen optimally
                    Pt (j) = ⎨ t                                                    .      (11)
                             ⎩ Pt−1 (j)                  otherwise
                             ⎪
                             ⎪

   Regardless of whether a firm can adjust its price, it will choose labor input to minimize
cost, subject to the constraint of producing enough to meet demand, given by (8). Solving
the cost minimization problem reveals that all firms face the same real marginal cost, given
by mct = wt /At . Firms given the opportunity to adjust their price will do so to maximize the
expected presented discounted value of profit returned to households. It is straightforward to
show that all updating firms will choose a common reset price, Pt# .




                                                             6
2.3     Exogenous Processes
   There are two exogenous variables in the model, the productivity shock, At , and the
preference shock, νt . We assume that these both follow stationary AR(1) processes with
non-stochastic means normalized to unity:

                                     ln At = ρA ln At−1 + σA εA,t                          (12)
                                      ln νt = ρν ln νt−1 + σν εν,t .                       (13)

The autoregressive parameters, ρA and ρν , lie between zero and one. The innovations, εA,t
and εν,t , are drawn from standard normal distributions. These innovations are scaled by σA
and σν , which measure the standard deviations of the innovations.


2.4     Market-Clearing and Aggregation
    Market-clearing requires that bond-holding is zero at all times, Bt = 0, and that the sum
of labor demanded by producers of differentiated output equals total labor supplied by the
labor aggregating firm. Integrating the flow budget constraints of households along with the
definition of firm profits gives the aggregate resource constraint Yt = Ct . The price and real
wage indexes can be written without reference to household or firm subscripts as:


                          1−p                #,1−p                   1−
                         Pt      = (1 − θp )Pt               + θp Pt−1 p                   (14)
                        wt1−w = (1 − θw )wt#,1−w + θw (1 + πt )w −1 wt−1
                                                                        1−w
                                                                             .             (15)

   Integrating over the demand curves for differentiated output, (8), gives rise to an aggregate
production function:

                                                            At Nt
                                                  Yt =                                     (16)
                                                             vtp
where the variable vtp is a measure of price dispersion given by:

                                                      1                −p
                                                            Pt (j)
                                       vtp   =∫           (        )         dj.           (17)
                                                  0          Pt

    We define the hypothetical construct of the flexible price level of output (or sometimes
“natural rate”) as the level of output which would obtain in the absence of price and wage
stickiness. We denote this by Ytf , and can solve for it as the equilibrium level of output when
θp = θw = 0. We then define the output gap, Xt , as the ratio of the level of output to the

                                                            7
flexible price level, Xt = Yt /Ytf .
    Aggregate welfare is defined as the sum of the presented discounted value of flow utility
across all households. This can be written recursively in terms of aggregate variables alone
as:

                                                         Nt1+η
                                Wt = νt [ln Ct − ψvtw          ] + βEt Wt+1 .                           (18)
                                                         1+η
    Recall that Nt is aggregate labor supplied by the labor aggregating firm. This is only
equal to aggregate labor supply in the special case that all households charge identical wages.
In the more general case, there is a wedge between aggregate labor supply and labor used
in production due to wage dispersion. This is captured by the variable vtw , which can be
written:
                                         1 w (h) −w (1+η)
                                 w           t
                                vt = ∫ (         )         dh.                            (19)
                                       0     wt

2.5     Monetary Policy
   Before fully characterizing the equilibrium it remains to specify the conduct of monetary
policy. In addition to a nominal GDP targeting rule, we also consider inflation and output
gap targeting rules. Each of these three targeting rules can be considered restricted cases of
a generalized Taylor (1993) type instrument rule, which is often used in quantitative work to
model the behavior of monetary policy.
   The primary objective of the paper is to evaluate the performance of a nominal GDP
targeting rule vis-á-vis other popular targeting rules. A nominal GDP targeting rule can be
written as
                                                       ∗
                                         Pt Yt = (P Y ) .                                (20)

In this rule the nominal interest rate adjusts so that nominal GDP, Pt Yt , equals some
                                            ∗
exogenous and constant target, (P Y ) .1 In the long run this rule is equivalent to a price
level target since the long run level of real GDP is independent of the monetary policy rule.
In the short run, commitment to this rule implies that the growth rate of nominal GDP is
zero, or that (1 + πt ) YYt−1
                           t
                              = 1 each period.
    The second rule we consider is a strict inflation targeting rule:

                                                  πt = 0.                                               (21)

Under an inflation targeting rule the central bank adjusts the nominal interest such that
   1
    Here we follow convention in assuming no trend growth in output or trend inflation. It is straightforward
to modify the nominal GDP targeting rule to account for these features.


                                                     8
inflation hits its target each period (implicitly we have normalized the target inflation rate to
zero, but could easily extend this to non-zero targets).
    The final targeting rule we consider is an output gap targeting rule:

                                                  Xt = 1.                                                 (22)

In this rule the nominal interest rate is adjusted in such a way that the equilibrium level of
output always equals its flexible price level.
    In a version of the model with flexible wages the so-called “Divine Coincidence” would
hold (Blanchard and Gali (2007)), and in equilibrium inflation and gap targeting would be
equivalent to one another, and would both implement the flexible price equilibrium. When
prices and wages are simultaneously sticky this equivalence does not hold. Gap targeting
requires that the central bank know the flexible price level of output, which is not directly
observable, neither in real time nor ex-post. A potential advantage of inflation targeting
is that inflation is observed at high frequencies and does not require a central a bank to
know anything about the underlying model. Whereas gap targeting focuses on a real variable
and inflation targeting focuses solely on prices, nominal GDP targeting implicitly targets
both nominal and real variables. It also only requires a central bank to observe endogenous
variables, not hypothetical model constructs like the flexible price level of output.
    Each of the three targeting rules can be understood to be special cases of a generalized
Taylor rule of the following form:

                                                                                                   Yt
  ln(1 + it ) = (1 − ρi ) ln(1 + i∗ ) + ρi ln(1 + it−1 ) + φπ ln (1 + πt ) + φx ln Xt + φy ln (        ) . (23)
                                                                                                  Yt−1

Here ρi ∈ [0, 1) is a smoothing parameter and φπ , φx , and φy are non-negative coefficients
on inflation, the output gap, and output growth, respectively. In writing this rule we have
maintained an implicit assumption of zero trend inflation and no trend growth. Whereas the
three rules discussed above are targeting rules, targeting the values of endogenous variables
and adjusting the nominal rate to hit those targets, the Taylor rule is an instrument rule,
directly specifying a process for the nominal interest rate as function of endogenous variables.
Taylor rules of this form seem to provide an accurate account of observed monetary policy
in the last several decades and tend to have good normative properties. Each of the three
targeting rules can be understood to be special cases of the Taylor rule. The Taylor rule would
be isomorphic to an inflation targeting rule when φπ → ∞ and ρi = φx = φy and equivalent to
a gap targeting rule when φx → ∞ and ρi = φπ = φy . Because commitment to a nominal GDP
targeting rule implies targeting the growth rate of nominal GDP each period, it is equivalent


                                                      9
to the Taylor rule when φπ = φy → ∞ and ρi = φx = 0.2


2.6     Quantitative Analysis
   We adopt a standard parameterization of the model’s parameters; in the next section
with a more empirically plausible model with capital accumulation we estimate them. The
values of the parameters are listed in Table 1.


                                      Table 1: Value of Parameters

                      Parameter                      Description                      Value
                            β                    Discount rate                        0.995
                            η              Inverse Frisch elasticity                     1
                                                                                      ∗
                           ψ                    Labor disutility                    N = 1/3
                           w         Elasticity of substitution – Labor                10
                           p         Elasticity of substitution – Goods                10
                           θw                   Wage stickiness                      0–0.75
                           θp                   Price stickiness                     0–0.75
                           σA         Standard deviation – Productivity               0.006
                           σν          Standard deviation – Preference                0.020
                           ρA             Persistence – Productivity                  0.97
                           ρν              Persistence – Preference                   0.70
                     Notes: The table shows the values of the parameters uses in the quantitative
                     analysis of the small scale model laid out in this section.



    The discount factor is set to β = 0.995, which implies an annualized risk-free interest
rate of two percent. The Frisch labor supply elasticity is set to unity, implying η = 1. The
elasticities of substitution for goods and labor, p and w , are both set to 10, implying steady
state price and wage markups of a little more than ten percent. The scaling parameter on
the disutility from labor, ψ, is set so that steady state labor hours equal 1/3. Our baseline
parameterization of the price and wage stickiness parameters is θw = θp = 0.75, which implies
that wages and prices both adjust once a year on average. We consider various different
values of these parameters in the quantitative work below. The autoregressive parameter
in the productivity process is set to ρA = 0.97 and the autoregressive parameter for the
preference shock is ρν = 0.70. The standard deviations of the innovations to productivity and

    2
      One could also map the Taylor rule into targeting rules that are not strict in the sense of featuring
large but nevertheless finite coefficients on the target variables in the Taylor rule. In particular, an inflation
targeting Taylor rule might feature a “large” value of φπ (say, 10) and values of 0 for the other parameters,
and similarly for a gap target and the coefficient on φx and a nominal GDP target with large and equal
coefficients on φπ and φy . We have experimented with these specifications and obtain similar results to the
strict targeting rules considered.


                                                         10
preferences are σA = 0.006 and σν = 0.02, respectively. When monetary policy is governed by
a conventionally parameterized version of the Taylor rule with ρi = 0.7, φπ = 0.45, φy = 0.0375,
and φx = 0,3 this parameterization generates a standard deviation of log output of 0.036,
which is very close to the observed volatility of linearly detrended log GDP in postwar US
data. Furthermore, the productivity and preference shocks each account for 50 percent of
the unconditional variance of log output. In other words, our parameterization implies that
supply and demand shocks are equally important in driving fluctuations in output.
    We evaluate different policy rules by computing the unconditional mean of welfare for
a particular policy rule and comparing that to the unconditional mean of welfare in a
hypothetical economy where prices and wages are both flexible, e.g. θp = θw = 0. We
compute these unconditional means by solving the model using a second order approximation
of the equilibrium conditions about the non-stochastic steady state. We then calculate a
compensating variation, computing the percent of consumption each period which would
make a household indifferent between the flexible price and wage economy and the sticky
price and wage economy. Formally, the compensating variation is given by:

                                   λ = 100 [exp(E Wf lex − E W0 ) − 1]

where E Wf lex is the expected present discounted value of utility under flexible prices and
wages and E W0 is the expected discounted value of utility in the sticky price and wage
economy with a given monetary policy regime. We can interpret this compensating variation
as a welfare loss from price and wage rigidity. More desirable monetary policy regimes
therefore coincide with lower values of the compensating variation.
   Table 2 present compensating variations for the three different targeting rules for different
combinations of price and wage stickiness parameters. For point of comparison we also show
the compensating variation for the Taylor rule parameterized as described above. Focus first
on the case where the price and wage rigidity parameters are both 0.75. The most desirable
policy regime is the output gap targeting rule, which produces a compensating variation of
only 0.02 percent of consumption. Nominal GDP targeting does almost as well, generating a
welfare loss of only 0.03 percent of consumption. Inflation targeting performs very poorly,
with a welfare loss of nearly 20 percent of consumption. The Taylor rule performs fairly
well, albeit substantially worse than either nominal GDP or output gap targeting, with a
compensating variation of 0.3 percent.
   We now turn attention to different combinations of price and wage stickiness parameters.
The output gap targeting rule at least weakly dominates the other two targeting rules as well
   3
     Note that our rule is not written as one of partial adjustment. The long run response of the interest rate
to inflation and output growth is φπ /(1 − ρi ) and φy /(1 − ρi ), or 1.5 and 0.125, respectively.


                                                      11
as the Taylor rule for all combinations of price and wage rigidity. The output gap targeting
rule implements the flexible price allocation (i.e. the compensating variation is zero) if either
prices or wages are flexible. Inflation targeting tends to perform very poorly except in the
extreme case where wages are flexible, when strict inflation targeting also fully implements
the flexible price allocation. The compensating variation associated with the Taylor rule is
roughly the same at all combinations of price and wage rigidity under consideration. Nominal
GDP targeting tends to perform very well, yielding compensating variations less than 0.04
percent of consumption for all combinations of price and wage stickiness parameters under
consideration.
               Table 2: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different
                                      Policy Rules

                                  θp = 0.75      θp = 0.00      θp = 0.50      θp = 0.75     θp = 0.75
                                  θw = 0.75      θw = 0.75     θw = 0.75      θw = 0.50      θw = 0.00

                  NGDP             0.0314         0.0000         0.0127         0.0352         0.0398
                 Inflation         20.3694       20.3694        20.3694         0.8618         0.0000
              Output Gap           0.0190         0.0000         0.0090         0.0166         0.0000
               Taylor Rule         0.2880         0.2908         0.2902         0.2506         0.1601
             Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting rules as
             well as a Taylor rule. The parameterization of the model is as described in Table 1. The first
             three rows consider strict targeting rules. The row labeled “Taylor rule” considers the Taylor
             rule, (23), parameterized with ρi = 0.7, φπ = 0.45, φx = 0, and φy = 0.0375.


    That inflation targeting performs poorly, and output gap targeting does very well, when
both prices and wages are rigid has been well-known since Erceg et al. (2000). The novel
result here is that nominal GDP targeting seems to have desirable properties. Nominal GDP
targeting is associated with substantially lower compensating variations than the Taylor
rule, and significantly outperforms inflation targeting except in the case where wages are
flexible. While nominal GDP targeting is always weakly worse than output gap targeting, the
differences in the compensating variations associated with these two targeting rules are very
small. From the Table it appears as though nominal GDP targeting is relatively better the
stickier are wages relative to prices – when wages are rigid and prices are flexible, nominal
GDP targeting is equivalent to gap targeting, while when wages are flexible and prices rigid,
inflation targeting outperforms nominal GDP targeting.
    Figure 1 shows the loci of wage (horizontal axis) and price (vertical axis) rigidity parameters
where nominal GDP targeting and inflation targeting generate the same compensating
variation. The area shaded green shows parameter combinations where nominal GDP
targeting strictly dominates inflation targeting. For wage stickiness parameters in excess

                                                          12
of 0.3 nominal GDP targeting strictly dominates inflation targeting for any value of the
parameter governing price rigidity. Furthermore, at low levels of wage stickiness inflation
targeting only dominates nominal GDP targeting if prices are very rigid.


                         0.9


                         0.8


                         0.7


                         0.6
                    θp




                         0.5


                         0.4


                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4        0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8     0.9
                                                                 θw

                          Figure 1: Nominal GDP vs. Inflation Targeting
                    Notes: This figure traces out the loci of wage stickiness parameters, (θw , θp )
                    for which nominal GDP targeting and inflation targeting yield the same com-
                    pensating variation. The area shaded green depicts combinations of (θw , θp )
                    for which nominal GDP targeting strictly dominates inflation targeting.


    We next consider the role of the two different shocks in the model in driving the relative
performance of the different monetary policy regimes. Tables 3 and 4 repeat the exercises in
Table 2 conditioning on only the productivity or the preference shock, respectively. For this
exercise, we set the standard deviation of one of the shocks to zero, and re-parameterize the
standard deviation of the remaining shock to generate the same volatility of log output as in
the baseline model when policy is characterized by a Taylor rule.4
    The compensating variations for the different policy regimes when there are only produc-
tivity shocks are qualitatively similar to the compensating variations when both shocks are
included in the model. Output gap targeting always weakly dominates the other policies
and inflation targeting does poorly unless wages are flexible. Nominal GDP targeting is
significantly more desirable than inflation targeting unless wages are flexible, and performs
better than the Taylor rule for most parameter configurations. Inflation targeting performs
worse conditional on productivity shocks relative to the case where both shocks are in the

   4
    When conditioning on the productivity shock, this implies a value of σA = 0.0085 and σν = 0. When
conditioning on the preference shock, σA = 0 and σν = 0.0285.


                                                            13
model. When there are only preference shocks, each of the three targeting regimes implements
the flexible price allocation for any combination of price and wage rigidity parameters, while
the Taylor rule performs similarly to when both shocks are in the model. This equivalence
of the three targeting regimes obtains because of the absence of capital in the model and
our assumptions about preferences. Given that preferences are separable in consumption
and labor and that consumption must equal output, in the flexible price allocation neither
output nor real wages change in response to a preference shock.5 This has the implication
that stabilizing prices (inflation targeting), real activity (gap targeting), or a mix of both
(nominal GDP targeting) are equivalent in equilibrium.

                Table 3: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different
                           Policy Rules, Only Productivity Shocks

                                  θp = 0.75       θp = 0.00      θp = 0.50      θp = 0.75      θp = 0.75
                                  θw = 0.75      θw = 0.75       θw = 0.75      θw = 0.50      θw = 0.00

                   NGDP             0.0629         0.0000         0.0254         0.0707          0.0800
                  Inflation        45.0747        45.0747        45.0747         1.7372          0.0000
                Output gap          0.0382         0.0000         0.0180         0.0333          0.0000
                Taylor rule         0.2740         0.2767         0.2767         0.0937          0.0178
              Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of the policies described in the text
              in a specification of the model in which there are only productivity shocks. In particular, the
              standard deviation of the productivity shock is chosen to produce the same volatility under
              a Taylor rule as in the version of the model with both shocks, while the standard deviation
              of the preference shock is set to zero. The standard deviation of the productivity shock is
              σA = 0.0085.



    The results in Tables 3 and 4 suggest that the choice of monetary regime is far more
relevant for welfare conditional on supply shocks (i.e. the productivity shock) than demand
shocks (i.e. the preference shock). This confirms the simple aggregate demand - supply
intuition in Sumner (2014). Our baseline parameterization assigns the productivity and
preference shocks equal weight in accounting for output fluctuations, and therefore takes
a relatively agnostic stand on the relative importance of supply and demand shocks. In
the next section we consider an empirically realistic medium scale model and estimate the
relative importance of several different kinds of shocks. In the simple model of this section,
the demarcation between supply and demand shocks is clear, because the preference shock
   5
     A simple way to see this is to note that the price and wage markups are fixed when both prices and
wages are flexible. Given our assumptions on preferences, this means that consumption and labor must
co-move negatively absent a change in At . But since Ct = Yt = At Nt , consumption and labor cannot co-move
negatively absent a change in At . Hence, in the flexible price allocation consumption, hours, output, and the
real wage do not react to a preference shock.


                                                           14
does not impact the flexible price level of output. But when capital and other features are
added to the model, the distinction between “supply” and “demand” can become blurry.
While the basic intuition about the choice of policy regime conditional on supply and demand
shocks will indeed carry over largely intact, some caution is in order when extrapolating from
the simple model to the more realistic one in the next section.

                   Table 4: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different
                               Policy Rules, Only Preference Shocks

                                     θp = 0.75     θp = 0.00      θp = 0.50     θp = 0.75      θp = 0.75
                                    θw = 0.75      θw = 0.75     θw = 0.75      θw = 0.50     θw = 0.00

                     NGDP             0.0000         0.0000        0.0000         0.0000        0.0000
                    Inflation         0.0000         0.0000        0.0000         0.0000        0.0000
                  Output gap          0.0000         0.0000        0.0000         0.0000        0.0000
                   Taylor rule        0.3094         0.3105        0.3094         0.4144        0.3078
                 Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of the policies described in the text
                 in a version of the model in which there are only preference shocks. In particular, the
                 standard deviation of the preference shock is chosen to produce the same volatility under a
                 Taylor rule as in the version of the model with both shocks, while the standard deviation
                 of the productivity shock is set to zero. The standard deviation of the preference shock is
                 σν = 0.0285.




3        Medium Scale Model
    While the previous section allows one to understand some of the intuition for the welfare
properties of nominal GDP targeting relative to inflation targeting and a Taylor rule, it did
so within the context of a very simplified framework. In this section, we consider a medium
scale version of the model. The simple economy of the previous section is a special case of
the more realistic model in this section. In addition to price and wage rigidity, the model
allows for capital accumulation, habit formation in consumption, variable capital utilization,
wage and price indexation to lagged inflation, and several more stochastic shocks. Such
a model has been shown to capture the dynamic effects of monetary policy and the most
salient business cycle facts.6 Where different from the simpler model of Section 2, in the
subsections below we lay out the details of the medium scale model. The full set of conditions
characterizing the equilibrium is presented in Appendix B.




    6
        See Christiano et al. (2005) as an example of the former and Smets and Wouters (2007) for the latter.


                                                            15
3.1    Households
    The basic structure of the household side of the model is very similar to the simpler model.
There again exist a continuum of households indexed by h ∈ [0, 1]. The labor aggregating
firm is the same, giving rise to the same downward-sloping demand for each household’s
labor, (2), and the same aggregate real wage index, (3). The medium scale model departs
from the simpler model in allowing for internal habit formation in consumption, capital
accumulation and capital utilization, and indexation of wages to lagged inflation. The problem
of a particular household is:
                                                          ∞
                                                                                           Nt (h)1+η
                               max                     E0 ∑ β t νt {ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψ             }
                 Ct ,Bt ,ut ,It ,Kt+1 ,wt (h),Nt (h)      t=0                               1+η
subject to

            Bt                γ2                                                         Bt−1
 Ct +It +      +[γ1 (ut − 1) + (ut − 1)2 ] Kt ≤ wt (h)Nt (h)+Rt ut Kt +Πt +Tt +(1+it−1 )      (24)
            Pt                2                                                           Pt
                                                           2
                                                τ It
                                  Kt+1 = Zt [1 − (     − 1) ] It + (1 − δ)Kt                             (25)
                                                2 It−1
                                                                           −w
                                                                wt (h)
                                                  Nt (h) ≥ (           )         Nt                      (26)
                                                                 wt
                   ⎧   #
                   ⎪ wt (h)
                   ⎪                                       if wt (h) chosen optimally
         wt (h) = ⎨                       ζw
                                                                                        .     (27)
                   ⎩ (1 + πt ) (1 + πt−1 ) wt−1 (h)        otherwise
                   ⎪
                   ⎪          −1


    Relative to the simpler model, the preference specification is identical with the exception of
the inclusion of internal habit formation, which is governed by the parameter b ∈ [0, 1). In the
flow budget constraint, (24), It denotes investment, Kt physical capital, ut capital utilization,
Rt the rental rate on capital services (where capital services is understood to represent the
product of utilization and physical capital), and Tt is a lump sum tax paid to a government.
There is a convex resource cost of capital utilization given by γ1 (ut − 1) + γ22 (ut − 1)2 . This
cost is measured in units of physical capital. The law of motion for physical capital is given
by (25). Zt is an exogenous shock to the marginal efficiency of investment along the lines
of Justiniano et al. (2010) and τ ≥ 0 is an investment adjustment cost in the form proposed
by Christiano et al. (2005). The depreciation rate on physical capital is given by δ ∈ (0, 1).
A household is required to supply as much labor as is demanded at its wage, just as in
the simpler model. The wage-setting process is virtually the same as in the simpler model.
With probability 1 − θw a household can adjust to a new optimal wage, which we denote in
real terms as wt# (h). Otherwise a household must charge its most recently chosen nominal


                                                                16
wage. Differently than the simple model, here we permit partial indexation of nominal wages
to lagged inflation as measured by the parameter ζw ∈ [0, 1]. It is again the case that all
updating households will adjust to the same reset real wage, which we denote by wt# .


3.2     Production
   The production process again takes place in two phases. The final output aggregator,
demand curve for each differentiated output, and expression for the aggregate price level are
the same as in the simpler model, given by equations (7), (8), and (9), respectively.
   The production function of firms who produce differentiated output is given by:

                                                ̂t (j)α Nt (j)1−α − F, 0} .
                               Yt (j) = max {At K                                                        (28)

Here K̂t is capital services leased from households. The parameter α lies between 0 and 1.
There is also a fixed cost of production given by F ≥ 0. Cost-minimization by firms reveals
that all firms face the same real marginal cost and hire capital services and labor in the
same ratio. As in the simpler model, firms face a probability of 1 − θp that they can adjust
their price in a given period. Differently than the simpler model, we permit indexation of
non-updated prices to lagged inflation, governed by the parameter ζp ∈ [0, 1]. A firm’s price
in any period therefore satisfies:

                          ⎧   #
                          ⎪ P (j)
                          ⎪                                 if Pt (j) chosen optimally
                 Pt (j) = ⎨ t          ζp
                                                                                       .                 (29)
                          ⎩ (1 + πt−1 ) Pt−1 (j)            otherwise
                          ⎪
                          ⎪

    Updating firms will choose their prices to maximize the present discounted value of flow
profits, where discounting is by the stochastic discount factor of households.7 It is again
straightforward to show that all updating firms choose an identical price, denoted by Pt# .


3.3     Fiscal Policy
   In the medium scale model we allow for government spending. Government spending is
assumed to be exogenous and obeys the following stationary stochastic process:

                              ln Gt = (1 − ρG ) ln G∗ + ρG ln Gt−1 + σG εG,t                             (30)



   7
     Though there is heterogeneity among households, because of separability and perfect insurance the
marginal utility of income is identical across households, so it is safe to talk about one stochastic discount
factor in spite of the heterogeneity among households.


                                                     17
Here G∗ is the steady state level of government spending, the parameter ρG lies between
zero and one, and the innovation εG,t is drawn from a standard normal distribution. The
innovation is scaled by the standard deviation parameter σG . We assume that the only source
of government revenue is lump sum taxes, Tt . This means that it is innocuous to assume
that the government balances its budget each period, with Gt = Tt .


3.4    Exogenous Processes
    The exogenous processes for productivity, At , and the preference shock, νt , are the same
as in Section 2. We assume that the investment shock, Zt , also obeys a stationary stochastic
process with steady state value normalized to unity:

                                   ln Zt = ρZ ln Zt−1 + σZ εZ,t                                   (31)

The parameter ρZ lies between zero and one, εZ,t is drawn from a standard normal distribution,
and σZ is the standard deviation of the innovation.


3.5    Monetary Policy
    Our ultimate objective is to again consider and compare the three different targeting rules
discussed in Section 2. For the purposes of estimation, however, we assume that the central
bank sets policy according to the same Taylor rule described above, but augment this to
include a policy innovation, εi,t , which is drawn from a standard normal distribution with
standard deviation σi :

                                                                                   Yt
 ln(1+it ) = (1−ρi ) ln(1+i∗ )+ρi ln(1+it−1 )+φπ ln (1 + πt )+φx ln Xt +φy ln (        )+σi εi,t . (32)
                                                                                  Yt−1

3.6    Aggregation
   Since we assume that the government issues no debt, in equilibrium bond-holding is
always zero, Bt = 0. Combining this with the definition for firm profit and the government’s
budget constraint gives rise to the aggregate resource constraint:

                                                            γ2
                       Yt = Ct + It + Gt + [γ1 (ut − 1) +      (ut − 1)2 ] Kt .                   (33)
                                                            2

   The expressions for the aggregate price and wage indexes are similar to Section 2, but
account for indexation:



                                               18
                  1−p               #,1−p                               1−
                Pt       = (1 − θp )Pt        + θp (1 + πt−1 )ζp (1−p ) Pt−1 p                (34)
                wt1−w = (1 − θw )wt#,1−w + θw (1 + πt )w −1 (1 + πt−1 )ζw (1−w ) wt−1
                                                                                      1−w
                                                                                           .   (35)

    The aggregate production function is given by:
                                                            α
                                              At (ut Kt ) Nt1−α − F
                                         Yt =                       .                          (36)
                                                         vtp

The variable vtp is the same measure of price dispersion as in the simpler model, defined by
(17).
    Aggregate welfare is defined similarly as in Section 2, but takes into account internal
habit formation:
                                                        N 1+η
                        Wt = νt [ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψvtw t ] + βEt Wt+1 .               (37)
                                                        1+η
The variable vtw is again a measure of wage dispersion, defined above by (19).


4     Quantitative Analysis
    In this section we analyze the welfare properties of nominal GDP targeting, inflation
targeting, output gap targeting, and the Taylor rule in the medium scale model. Quantitatively
evaluating different policy regimes requires selecting values for the parameters of the model.
We calibrate some parameters to match long run moments of the data and estimate the
remaining parameters so as to ensure that the model provides an empirically realistic fit to
observed data.
    The calibrated parameters and their values are listed in Table 5. As in the simpler model
of Section 2, the discount factor is set to β = 0.995, and the elasticities of substitution for
goods and labor, p and w , are set to 10. The steady state level of government spending is
chosen so that the steady state ratio of government spending to output is G∗ /Y ∗ = 0.20. The
scaling parameter on the disutility of labor is set to ψ = 6, which implies steady state labor
hours of between one-third and one-half for reasonable values of the Frisch elasticity and
habit persistence parameter. To first order, this scaling parameter is irrelevant for equilibrium
dynamics. The parameter on the linear term in the utilization adjustment cost function, γ1 ,
is chosen to be consistent with a steady state normalization of utilization to one. Capital’s
share is set to α = 1/3, and the depreciation rate on physical capital is δ = 0.025. The fixed
cost, F , is set so that profits are zero in steady state.


                                                       19
    The remaining parameters are estimated via Bayesian maximum likelihood. The observable
variables in the estimation are the log first differences of real output, real consumption, real
investment, the inflation rate, and the nominal interest. To facilitate comparison with
the model, we define nominal GDP as the sum of consumption (non-durables and services
consumption), investment (the sum of durables consumption and private fixed investment),
and government spending (government consumption expenditures and gross investment).
These series are all taken from the NIPA tables. We deflate nominal output, as well as the
individual components, by the GDP implicit price deflator. We then divide by the civilian
non-institutionalized population, take logs, and first difference. Inflation is defined as the log
first difference of the GDP deflator. Our measure of the nominal interest rate is the effective
Federal Funds Rate, aggregated to a quarterly frequency by averaging monthly observations.
We use data from the first quarter of 1984 through the third quarter of 2007. The start date
is chosen to account for the large break in volatility associated with the Great Moderation,
while the end date is chosen so as to exclude the recent zero lower bound period.


                    Table 5: Calibrated Parameters, Medium Scale Model

                  Parameter                      Description                          Value
                        β                     Discount rate                         0.995
                       ψ                     Labor disutility                         6
                       w          Elasticity of substitution – Labor                 10
                       p          Elasticity of substitution – Goods                 10
                       G∗              SS Government Spending                    G /Y ∗ = 0.2
                                                                                  ∗

                       α                      Capital Share                          1/3
                       F                        Fixed cost                          Π∗ = 0
                       γ1                Utilization linear cost                    u∗ = 1
                        δ                   Depreciation rate                       0.025
                 Notes: The table shows the values of the calibrated parameters in the medium scale
                 model.


   Table 6 presents the prior and posterior distributions of the estimated parameters. These
results are broadly consistent with Smets and Wouters (2007) and Justiniano et al. (2010).
There is significant rigidity in both prices and wages. The average duration between prices
changes is roughly three quarters, while the average duration between wage changes is about
a year. The latter is consistent with the micro evidence presented in Barattieri et al. (2014).
We find moderate levels of wage and price indexation. The investment adjustment cost
parameter, τ , and the parameter governing internal habit formation, b, imply significant real
inertia. The estimate of the parameter η implies a Frisch labor supply elasticity of about
two-thirds. The monetary policy rule features significant inertia and a large response to

                                                        20
inflation (the implied long run response of the interest rate to inflation is about four). The
policy rule features a positive response to output growth and no response to the output gap,
the latter of which is estimated precisely at zero. This is consistent with the evidence in
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) that the Fed moved away from responding to the output
gap and toward a much stronger reaction to output growth in the post-Volcker period.
                                        Table 6: Estimated Parameters

                                Prior                                               Posterior
 Parameter             Dist.          Mean       SD      Mode        Mean         SD       90% Probability Interval

       b               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.7508     0.7606      0.0713           [0.6634, 0.8759]
       τ             Normal            4.00     0.20     3.9676     3.9927      0.2007           [3.6661, 4.3288]
       η             Normal            1.50     0.20     1.6244     1.6290      0.2165           [1.3075, 1.9141]
       γ2              Beta            0.10     0.10     0.3783     0.4143      0.1226           [0.2372, 0.6042]
       θp              Beta            0.70     0.10     0.6762     0.6852      0.0556           [0.6008, 0.7659]
      θw               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.7887     0.7701      0.0780           [0.6517, 0.9054]
       ζp              Beta            0.50     0.10     0.3236     0.3417      0.0894           [0.1982, 0.4783]
      ζw               Beta            0.50     0.10     0.5252     0.5263      0.1071           [0.3610, 0.6990]
       ρi              Beta            0.70     0.10     0.8814     0.8804      0.0197           [0.8470, 0.9135]
      φπ             Normal            0.50     0.10     0.4495     0.4540      0.0478           [0.3747, 0.5330]
      φx             Normal            0.05     0.10     0.0000     0.0000      0.0000           [0.0000, 0.0000]
      φy             Normal            0.20     0.10     0.1469     0.1504      0.0276           [0.1036, 0.1971]

      ρA               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.8472     0.8295      0.0485           [0.7506, 0.9125]
      ρν               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.6916     0.6579      0.1201           [0.4885, 0.8276]
      ρZ               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.6820     0.6733      0.0575           [0.5840, 0.7708]
      ρG               Beta            0.70     0.10     0.9506     0.9488      0.0001           [0.9267, 0.9706]
      σA          Inv. Gamma           0.01     0.01     0.0064     0.0073      0.0015           [0.0046, 0.0100]
      σν          Inv. Gamma           0.01     0.01     0.0181     0.0203      0.0041           [0.0128, 0.0282]
      σZ          Inv. Gamma           0.01     0.01     0.0389     0.0405      0.0040           [0.0330, 0.0468]
      σG          Inv. Gamma           0.01     0.01     0.0098     0.0100      0.0001           [0.0087, 0.0113]
       σi         Inv. Gamma          0.002     0.01     0.0013     0.0013      0.0001           [0.0011, 0.0015]
Notes: The variables used in the estimation are the growth rates of output, consumption, and investment, and the levels of
inflation and the nominal interest rate. Construction of these series is as described in the text. The posterior is generated
with 100,000 Metropolis-Hastings draws.


    The estimated model produces second moments which align closely with their counterparts
in the data. Consumption growth is less volatile than output growth, while investment growth
is about three times more volatile than output growth. Output, consumption, and investment
are strongly positively correlated, while the nominal interest rate is roughly uncorrelated with

                                                            21
output growth and the inflation rate is mildly negatively correlated with output growth. The
first order autocorrelations of output, consumption, and investment growth are all significantly
positive. In terms of contributions to business cycle dynamics, the investment shock is the
most important disturbance. It accounts for about 50 percent of the unconditional variance
of output growth. The productivity shock explains about 30 percent of the variance of output
growth. The preference and government spending shocks each contribute a little less than
10 percent, while the monetary shock accounts for about 5 percent of the unconditional
variance of output growth. This variance decomposition is very much in line with the results
in Justiniano et al. (2010).


4.1    Evaluating Monetary Policy Rules
    We solve the medium scale model using the calibrated or estimated values listed in
Tables 5 and 6 using a second order approximation about the non-stochastic steady state.
Compensating variations are constructed comparing average welfare under different policy
regimes to the hypothetical flexible price and wage equilibrium. These exercises are identical
to the ones carried out in Section 2. When evaluating the welfare performance of the estimated
Taylor rule, we set the standard deviation of the policy innovation to zero so as to facilitate
comparison with the other targeting rules, which feature no shocks.
    The compensating variations for the different monetary policy rules in the estimated
model are summarized in the first main column of Table 7. The relative performance of the
different targeting rules is the same as in the small scale model from Section 2. The welfare
loss associated with nominal GDP targeting is 0.11 percent of consumption. This is not as
good as output gap targeting, which has a welfare loss of 0.03 percent of consumption, but
outperforms the estimated Taylor rule (welfare loss of 0.24 percent of consumption) and does
significantly better than inflation targeting, which produces a compensating variation of 0.86
percent of consumption.
    The remaining columns of Table 7 consider different values of the parameters governing
price and wage stickiness. For these exercises all but the listed parameter are fixed at their
estimated or calibrated values. The patterns in the Table again echo those from the small
scale model. If either prices or wages are completely flexible, the output gap targeting rule
implements the flexible price and wage allocation with a compensating variation of zero.
If wages are perfectly flexible then inflation targeting also implements the flexible price
allocation. Nominal GDP targeting performs very well, producing a lower welfare loss than
the Taylor rule in all specifications and outperforming inflation targeting by a wide margin in
all but the case where wages are flexible. As in the small scale model, the relative performance


                                              22
of nominal GDP targeting to inflation targeting depends on the relative stickiness of wages
to prices.

          Table 7: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different Policy
                                        Rules
                                Medium Scale Model

                             Estimated Model          θp = 0.00      θp = 0.50     θw = 0.50      θw = 0.00

             NGDP                   0.1056              0.0950        0.0976         0.1276         0.0755
            Inflation               0.8630              0.8630        0.8630         0.6182         0.0000
          Output Gap                0.0343              0.0000        0.0277         0.0312         0.0000
          Taylor Rule               0.2439              0.1998        0.2325         0.1286         0.1132
        Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting rules as well as a
        Taylor rule in the medium scale model. The column labeled “Estimated Model” uses the parameter
        values described in Tables 5 and 6. When evaluating the compensating variation for the Taylor rule the
        standard deviation of the monetary policy shock is set to zero. The other columns describe values of
        the price or wage rigidity parameters. For the exercises described in these columns all other parameters
        are fixed at their calibrated or estimated values.


    In Table 8 we compare the compensating variations for different policy rules conditional
on specific shocks. For these exercises we solve for the standard deviation of the listed shock
that would generate the same volatility of log output as in the baseline model when all
other shocks have standard deviations of zero. The output gap targeting rule produces the
smallest welfare losses conditional on each of the four considered shocks. Nominal GDP
targeting is the second best rule conditional on three of the four shocks, with the exception
being the government spending shock. Though nominal GDP targeting produces a fairly
high compensating variation conditional on the government spending shock, this shock is
estimated to be a relatively unimportant driver of fluctuations. Inflation targeting does
very poorly conditional on productivity shocks, but produces fairly small compensating
variations conditional on investment and preference shocks. The Taylor rule performs fairly
well conditional on all but the preference shock.
    In the estimated model the productivity shock is a “supply” shock in that it moves output
and inflation in opposite directions, while the other three shocks are “demand” shocks in that
they result in output and inflation co-moving positively (these statements are conditional on
the estimated model where policy is governed by the estimated Taylor rule). In the medium
scale model there is not a clean demarcation between “demand” and “supply” because the
investment, preference, and government spending shocks would affect output when prices
and wages are flexible. Nevertheless, some of the intuition from the simple model does
carry over to this setting. In particular, the difference between nominal GDP and inflation


                                                          23
targeting is starkest conditional on the productivity shock, with inflation targeting producing
a compensating variation more than fifteen times bigger than nominal GDP targeting. Further,
the welfare differences between nominal GDP and inflation targeting are smaller conditional
on the three demand shocks. Unlike the simple model, inflation targeting does not implement
the flexible price and wage allocation conditional on these three shocks, and nominal GDP
targeting outperforms inflation targeting conditional on two of the three demand shocks.

            Table 8: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different Policy
                                  Rules, Shock Specific
                                  Medium Scale Model

                                                                  Shocks
                             Productivity        Investment       Preference       Government Spending

              NGDP                0.1141            0.0872           0.2012                  0.5507
             Inflation            1.7684            0.1266           0.3379                  0.4828
           Output Gap             0.0684            0.0062           0.0173                  0.0209
           Taylor Rule            0.1562            0.2779           1.1869                  0.1075
         Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting rules as well as a
         Taylor rule in the medium scale model. We solve for the standard deviation of the listed shock that would
         generate the same volatility of log output as in the baseline model when all other shocks have standard
         deviations of zero. The resulting shock standard deviations are σA = 0.0096 for the productivity shock
         only case, σZ = 0.0537 when there are only investment shocks, σν = 0.1175 when conditioning on only
         preference shocks, and σG = 0.1103 for government spending shocks. All other parameters are fixed at
         their calibrated or estimated values.


    We consider some robustness to different values of parameters unrelated to the shock
processes and nominal price and wage stickiness in Table 9.8 For these exercises all parameters
but the one listed in the column are set to their baseline values. The basic pattern of results
is consistent with our previous analysis – the output gap targeting rule is always the best-
performing rule, while nominal GDP targeting is typically the second best. When there are
no investment adjustment costs (τ = 0), an infinite Frisch labor supply elasticity (η = 0), or
no variable utilization (γ2 = ∞), nominal GDP targeting performs slightly worse and inflation
targeting a little better than in the baseline estimated model, though nominal GDP targeting
is still more desirable than inflation targeting by a wide margin. The compensating variations
for both nominal GDP targeting and inflation targeting are slightly smaller with no habit
    8
     We consider several additional robustness exercises which are relegated to Appendix C. In Table 10 we
compute the compensating variations for the different policy rules when all estimated parameters are set at
either the 10th or 90th percentiles of the posterior distribution. In Tables 11 and 12 we set each parameter to
either the 10th or 90th percentile of the posterior distribution, respectively, while holding all other parameters
fixed at the posterior mode, and compute compensating variations for the different policy rules. Qualitatively
the relative ranking of different policy rules obtains in all the different parameter configurations considered.


                                                           24
formation (b = 0) and lower elasticities of substitution (p = w = 5), though again nominal
GDP targeting is preferred to inflation targeting. The Taylor rule produces compensating
variations similar to the baseline estimated model in all cases except where there are no
investment adjustment costs, in which case it performs very poorly. Assuming full indexation
of non-updated prices and wages to lagged inflation (γp = γw = 1) makes very little difference
for any of the welfare losses associated with different policies relative to the baseline estimated
model.

           Table 9: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different Policy
                              Rules, Parameter Robustness
                                 Medium Scale Model

                               τ =0        b=0        η=0        γ2 = ∞      p = w = 5     γp = γw = 1

               NGDP           0.2204      0.0919     0.2051      0.1056        0.0745           0.3020
              Inflation       0.6303      0.4683     0.4577      0.8021        0.6240           0.8630
            Output Gap        0.0403      0.0292     0.0374      0.0346        0.0141           0.0265
            Taylor Rule       5.0947      0.2654     0.0996      0.2463        0.1093           0.3152
          Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting rules as well as
          a Taylor rule in the medium scale model for different values of select parameters. The value of a
          parameter(s) different than in our baseline is indicated in each column; the remaining parameters
          are set at their calibrated or estimated values listed in Tables 5 and 6.



4.2    Gap or NGDP Targeting: Measurement Difficulties
    In both the small and medium scale versions of the model, we find that output gap
targeting is the most desirable policy rule. Nominal GDP targeting typically performs very
well, in many instances almost as well as gap targeting. A potential advantage of nominal
GDP targeting over gap targeting is that the former is easily observed, whereas the gap is
based on a hypothetical model construct that is likely difficult to observe even ex-post, much
less in real time. A nominal GDP target is likely also far easier to communicate to the public
than a gap targeting rule.
    There exists a large literature that studies the difficulties of observing the output gap
and the implications for monetary policy. Orphanides and van Norden (2002) find that the
measurement of the output gap in real time is acutely affected by the method of detrending.
Moreover, the ex post revisions in the output gap are on the same order of magnitude as the
output gap itself. Combing this uncertainty about the trend with conventional measurement
error implies that the real time measurement of the output gap is an unreliable measure of
the true output gap. Orphanides (2001) shows that inputting real time data in to a Taylor
rule with standard coefficients consistently under predicts the Fed Funds rate and Orphanides

                                                         25
(2003) shows that smaller coefficients in the Taylor rule are in fact welfare improving in
the presence of measurement error. Since any reaction to observed deviations of the output
gap and inflation is in fact a reaction to their true deviations plus measurement error, the
optimally behaved central bank is more prudent. In recent work, Beckworth and Hendrickson
(2015) show that a rule where the nominal interest rate is a linear function of nominal GDP
growth outperforms the conventional Taylor rule when real time forecasts are used for the
output gap. This corroborates the results of Orphanides (2003), who finds that policy rules
that respond to growth rates of economic variables rather than their misperceived deviations
from their natural rates are welfare improving.
   We consider a couple of different exercises to examine the relative desirability of gap
versus nominal GDP targeting when the gap is difficult to observe. In the first, we assume
that the central bank observes the flexible price and wage level of output with noise. In
particular, we assume:
                                     ln Ytf,obs = ln Ytf + nt .                          (38)

In this specification Ytf is the flexible price and wage level of output, while Ytf,obs is the
central bank’s observed flexible price and wage level of output. The two differ by nt , which is
a noise process which we assume obeys a mean-zero stationary AR(1) process:

                                      nt = ρn nt−1 + σn εn,t                                (39)

Here 0 < ρn < 1 is a persistence parameter, εn,t is a shock drawn from a standard normal
distribution, and σn is the standard deviation of the shock. These noise shocks capture in a
tractable yet realistic way the idea that the central bank may have difficulty in observing the
true flexible price and wage level of output. The central bank’s observed output gap is the
ratio of the actual level of output to the observed flexible price and wage level of output, e.g.
Xt = Yt /Ytf,obs . Noise shocks cause an output gap targeting central bank to target the wrong
measure of the gap. One would expect that gap targeting would be less desirable the noisier
is the observed flexible price and wage level of output.
    We consider the following experiment. We find the pairs of (ρn , σn ) for which gap targeting
(with the mis-measured output gap) and nominal GDP targeting produce the same welfare
loss. Figure 2 plots in the left panel these combinations for which a central bank would be
indifferent between gap and nominal GDP targeting. At parameter combinations above this
frontier (areas shaded green) nominal GDP targeting is preferred to gap targeting. The right
panel plots the overall standard deviation of noise (e.g. the standard deviation of nt ) at the
(ρn , σn ) pairs plotted in the left panel. Areas shaded green represent standard deviations of
the noise process for which nominal GDP targeting produces a lower welfare loss than does


                                               26
gap targeting.
    The standard deviation of the noise shock to the observed flexible price and wage level of
output which would equate the welfare losses of nominal GDP and gap targeting is always
less than 0.66 percent for any value of the persistence parameter. For levels of persistence in
excess of 0.9 the amount of noise required to equate the two targeting rules is less than 0.25
percent. It is interesting to note that the relationship between ρn and the standard deviation
of the noise shock which equates gap targeting to NGDP targeting is non-monotonic – for
low values of persistence, as ρn increases the standard deviation of the noise shock increases.
We surmise that this has to do with a smoothing motive – if the noise shocks are i.i.d., then
the central bank’s perceived flexible price and wage level of output fluctuates substantially
period-to-period, imparting significant volatility to interest rates. For very high levels of
persistence, however, the amount of noise required to equate nominal GDP and gap targeting
is smaller the bigger is ρn . The right panel plots the overall standard deviation of the noise
process for the parameter combinations in the left panel. The overall standard deviation
of the noise process necessary for output gap and nominal GDP targeting to produce the
same compensating variations is always less than 1 percent, and is often substantially less
than that. To put this number into perspective, the standard deviation of the log flexible
price and wage level of output in the estimated model is 1.8 percent. Roughly speaking, if
volatility of noise is greater than 1/3-1/2 the volatility of the flexible price and wage level of
output itself, nominal GDP targeting dominates output gap targeting.

                 ×10 -3
             7                                                                                                  0.01


                                                                                                               0.009
             6
                                                                                                               0.008
                                                                                 Standard Deviation of Noise




             5                                                                                                 0.007


                                                                                                               0.006
             4
        ρn




                                                                                                               0.005

             3
                                                                                                               0.004


             2                                                                                                 0.003


                                                                                                               0.002
             1
                                                                                                               0.001


             0                                                                                                    0
                 0    0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9                                              0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9
                                              σn                                                                                                   ρn

                 Figure 2: Measurement Error and Gap Targeting vs. NGDP Targeting
       Notes: The left panel of the figure plots the combinations of (ρn , σn ) for which output gap and nominal
       GDP targeting produce the same compensating variation in the estimated medium scale model. The right
       panel plots the standard deviation of the noise process, nt , at the parameter values plotted in the left panel.
       The areas shaded green correspond to parameter configurations where NGDP targeting is preferred to gap
       targeting.



                                                                            27
   We also consider a second specification in which, rather than being observed with noise,
the central bank’s perceived measure of the flexible price and wage level of output adjusts
slowly to actual movements in the flexible price and wage level of output. In particular:

                                                         ln Ytf,obs = ω ln Yt−1
                                                                             f,obs
                                                                                   + (1 − ω) ln Ytf .                       (40)

The parameter ω is restricted to lie strictly between 0 and 1. In this specification ω governs
the speed with which the flexible price and wage level of output adjusts to its true level. A
specification like this could be motivated as reduced form way to model an optimal filtering
problem solved by a central bank. As ω → 1, this rule would be equivalent to an output
targeting rule, since the perceived flexible price and wage level of output would always equal
its non-stochastic steady state, which is the same as the steady state level of actual output.
    In Figure 3 we calculate the compensating variation of gap targeting (when the gap is
constructed using the observed flexible price and wage level of output) for different values of
the parameter ω. For comparison, we also show the compensating variation associated with
nominal GDP targeting.
                                          3
                                                                                                          Gap Target
                                                                                                          NGDP Target
                                         2.5
                Compensating Variation




                                          2



                                         1.5



                                          1



                                         0.5



                                          0
                                               0   0.1     0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5     0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9        1
                                                                                    ω

                                                         Figure 3: Slow-Moving Gap Target
                Notes: The solid blue line plots the compensating variation associated with nominal
                GDP targeting in the estimated medium scale model. The ride line marked with “x”
                plots the compensating variation associated with gap targeting for different values
                of the parameter ω when the perceived flexible price and wage level of output follows
                the process described in (40).


    Output gap targeting produces a smaller welfare loss than nominal GDP targeting for
values of ω less than about 0.8. This is fairly high and suggests that the perceived flexible
price and wage level of output must adjust slowly to its true value for nominal GDP targeting
to be preferred to gap targeting. Nevertheless, there is significant downside risk to output

                                                                               28
gap targeting in the event that ω is high. The compensating variation associated with gap
targeting rises quickly at values of ω above 0.8. Once above about ω = 0.9 or so output gap
targeting performs worse than inflation targeting, and produces compensating variations in
excess of 1 percent. Since when ω → 1 this specification is equivalent to an output target,
these results are consistent with the analysis in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2007), who find
that it is non-optimal to target the deviation of output from its steady state in a Taylor rule.


4.3     Gap vs NGDP Targeting: Equilibrium Determinacy
    There exists a literature which emphasizes that a central bank strongly responding to
the output gap could result in equilibrium indeterminacy. This point has been made in
the context of the Taylor rule in a sticky price New Keynesian model by Hornstein and
Wolman (2005), Ascari and Ropele (2009), and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011). These
authors show that the standard Taylor principle for a Taylor rule to support a determinate
equilibrium may break down when trend inflation is positive. In particular, strong responses
to the output gap can result in equilibrium indeterminacy even if the long run response of the
interest rate to inflation is greater than one. Furthermore, the minimum required response to
inflation is increasing in the coefficient on the gap for positive levels of trend inflation.
    Whereas these papers focus on determinacy within the context of an instrument rule, to
our knowledge no paper has studied the issue of determinacy with trend inflation for strict
targeting rules. We find that gap targeting results in an indeterminate equilibrium at trend
inflation rates higher than 0.2 percent annualized, which is far below the observed average
level of inflation of about 2 percent over the last thirty years. Nominal GDP targeting, in
contrast, supports a determinate equilibrium for any level of trend inflation. This is because
in the long run nominal GDP targeting is isomorphic to a price level target, which always
ensures equilibrium determinacy.9


5       Conclusion
    The design of monetary policy has been the subject of a voluminous and influential
literature. In spite of widespread discussion in the press and policy circles, the normative
properties of nominal GDP targeting have not been subject to scrutiny within the context of
the quantitative frameworks commonly used at central banks and among academic macroe-

    9
      We also find that inflation targeting supports a determinate equilibrium for any level of trend inflation.
Though we do not report the results here, we continue to find that nominal GDP targeting produces
significantly lower welfare losses than inflation targeting (and the Taylor rule) in the model when trend
inflation is positive.


                                                      29
conomists. The objective of this paper has been to analyze the welfare properties of nominal
GDP targeting in comparison to other popular policy rules in an empirically realistic New
Keynesian model with both price and wage rigidity.
    We find that nominal GDP targeting performs well in this model. It typically produces
small welfare losses and comes close to fully implementing the flexible price and wage
allocation. It produces smaller welfare losses than an estimated Taylor rule and significantly
outperforms inflation targeting. It tends to perform best relative to these alternative rules
when wages are sticky relative to prices and conditional on supply shocks. While output
gap targeting always at least weakly outperforms nominal GDP targeting, the differences in
welfare losses associated with the two rules are small. Nominal GDP targeting may produce
lower welfare losses than gap targeting if the central bank has difficulty measuring the output
gap in real time. Nominal GDP targeting always supports a determinate equilibrium, whereas
output gap targeting may result in indeterminacy if trend inflation is positive. Overall, our
analysis suggests that nominal GDP targeting is a policy alternative that central banks ought
to take seriously.
    There are a number of possible extensions of our analysis. Two which immediately come
to mind are financial frictions and the zero lower bound. Though our medium scale model
includes investment shocks, which have been interpreted as a reduced form for financial
shocks in Justiniano et al. (2011), it would be interesting to formally model financial frictions
and examine how nominal GDP targeting interacts with those. Second, our analysis abstracts
from the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. It would be interesting to study how a
commitment to a nominal GDP target might affect the frequency, duration, and severity of
zero lower bound episodes.




                                               30
References
Ascari, G. and T. Ropele (2009): “Trend Inflation, Taylor Principle, and Indeterminacy,”
 Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41, 1557–1584.

Barattieri, A., S. Basu, and P. Gottschalk (2014): “Some Evidence on the Impor-
 tance of Sticky Wages,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6, 70–101.

Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983): “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model
 of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 101 – 121.

Beckworth, D. and J. R. Hendrickson (2015): “Nominal GDP Targeting and the
 Taylor Rule on an Even Playing Field,” Tech. rep.

Bernanke, B. S. and F. S. Mishkin (1997): “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
 Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 97–116.

Billi, R. M. (2014): “Nominal GDP Targeting and the Zero Lower Bound: Should We
  Abandon Inflation Targeting?” Tech. Rep. 270, Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series.

Blanchard, O. and J. Gali (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,”
 Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 35–65.

Cecchetti, S. G. (1995): “Inflation Indicators and Inflation Policy,” NBER Working
 Papers 5161, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113,
 1–45.

Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2011): “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and
 the Great Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation,” American Economic Review, 101,
 341–70.

Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy
 with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281–313.

Hall, R. E. and N. G. Mankiw (1994): “Nominal Income Targeting,” Tech. rep.

Hornstein, A. and A. L. Wolman (2005): “Trend Inflation, Firm-Specific Capital, and
 Sticky Prices,” Economic Quarterly, 57–83.



                                          31
Jensen, H. (2002): “Targeting Nominal Income Growth or Inflation?” American Economic
  Review, 92, 928–956.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment Shocks and
  Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 132 – 145.

——— (2011): “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of Investment,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 14, 101–121.

Kim, J. and D. W. Henderson (2005): “Inflation Targeting and Nominal-Income-Growth
 Targeting: When and Why are They Suboptimal?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52,
 1463 – 1495.

Mitra, K. (2003): “Desirability of Nominal GDP Targting under Adaptive Learning,”
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35, 197–220.

Orphanides, A. (2001): “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data,” American
 Economic Review, 91, 964–985.

——— (2003): “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 50, 605–631.

Orphanides, A. and S. van Norden (2002): “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates
 in Real Time,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, pp. 569–583.

Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2007): “Optimal Simple and Implementable Monetary
  and Fiscal Rules,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1702–1725.

Sims, E. (2013): “Growth or the Gap? Which Measure of Economic Activity Should be
  Targeted in Interest Rate Rules?” Tech. rep.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE Approach,” The American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.

Sumner, S. (2014): “Nominal GDP Targeting: A Simple Rule to Improve Fed Performance,”
 Cato Journal, 34, 315–337.

Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
 Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
 Princeton University Press.

                                          32
——— (2012): “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” Tech.
 rep.




                                         33
A     Basic New Keynesian Model
   The equations below characterize the equilibrium of the simple New Keynesian model
described in Section 2.

                                         1        νt+1 1 1 + it
                                            = βEt                                                              (41)
                                         Ct        νt Ct+1 1 + πt+1
                                                          w H1,t
                                                wt# =                                                          (42)
                                                        w − 1 H2,t
                             −w (1+η)                         #       w (1+η)
                     w#                                       wt+1
         H1,t = ψνt ( t )                Nt1+η   + θw βEt (           )           (1 + πt+1 )w (1+η) H1,t+1   (43)
                     wt                                         wt#
                                         −w                     #        w
                         1 wt#                                  wt+1
                H2,t = νt (     )              Nt + θw βEt (           ) (1 + πt+1 )w −1 H2,t+1               (44)
                         Ct w t                                 wt#
                                                              wt
                                                    mct =                                                      (45)
                                                              At
                                               1 + πt#   p X1,t
                                                       =                                                       (46)
                                               1 + πt p − 1 X2,t
                                         1
                            X1,t = νt       mct Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt+1 )p X1,t+1                               (47)
                                         Ct
                                          1
                             X2,t = νt       Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt+1 )p −1 X2,t+1                               (48)
                                          Ct
                                                     Yt = C t                                                  (49)
                                                          At Nt
                                                   Yt =                                                        (50)
                                                           vtp
                               (1 + πt )1−p = (1 − θp )(1 + πt# )1−p + θp                                    (51)

                          wt1−w = (1 − θw )wt#,1−w + θw (1 + πt )w −1 wt−1
                                                                          1−w
                                                                                                               (52)

                           vtp = (1 + πt )p [(1 − θp )(1 + πt# )−p + θp vt−1
                                                                           p
                                                                               ]                               (53)

        ln(1 + it ) = (1 − ρi ) ln(1 + i∗ ) + ρi ln(1 + it−1 ) + φπ ln (1 + πt ) + φy ln ( YYt−1
                                                                                              t
                                                                                                 )
     or                                             πt = 0                                                     (54)
                                                               ∗
     or                                        Pt Yt = (P Y )
                                         ln At = ρA ln At−1 + σA εA,t                                          (55)

                                          ln νt = ρν ln νt−1 + σν εν,t                                         (56)




                                                         34
                                                                   Nt1+η
                                     Wt = νt [ln Ct − ψvtw               ] + βEt Wt+1                                 (57)
                                                                   1+η
                                                  −w (1+η)
                                           w#                           wt             w (1+η)
                        vtw   = (1 − θw ) ( t )               + θw (        (1 + πt ))           w
                                                                                                vt−1                  (58)
                                           wt                          wt−1
    Equation (41) is the consumption Euler equation and equations (42) - (44) describe
optimal wage-setting for households given the opportunity to adjust their wage. Equation
(45) describes real marginal cost and comes from firms minimizing cost. Equations (46) - (48)
                                                                                        Pt#
describe optimal price-setting. Here we have defined 1 + πt# = Pt−1                            as reset price inflation.
Equation (49) is the aggregate resource constraint and (50) is the aggregate production
function. Equations (51) and (52) describe the evolution of aggregate inflation and the
aggregate real wage, respectively. The process for price dispersion is given by (53). Monetary
policy is characterized by (54), which either follows the Taylor rule, inflation targeting,
or nominal GDP targeting. Equations (55) and (56) are the stochastic processes for the
productivity and preference shocks. Aggregate welfare obeys (57), while the expression
for wage dispersion is given by (58). Given initial values of the state variables and current
realizations of the innovations in the shock processes, an equilibrium consists of a non-explosive
sequence of {Ct , it , πt , νt , wt# , H1,t , H2,t , wt , Nt , mct , At , πt# , X1,t , X2,t , vtp , Wt , vtw , Yt } such that
equations (41)-(58) all hold.


B        Medium Scale Model
   The equations below characterize the equilibrium of the medium scale model described in
Section 3.

                                                   νt               νt+1
                                        λt =              − βbEt                                                      (59)
                                               Ct − bCt−1        Ct+1 − bCt
                                                                     1 + it
                                                λt = βEt λt+1                                                         (60)
                                                                    1 + πt+1
                                                 Rt = γ1 + γ2 (ut − 1)                                                (61)
                                                                     γ2
              µt = βEt λt+1 [Rt+1 ut+1 − (γ1 (ut+1 − 1) +               (ut+1 − 1)2 )] + β(1 − δ)Et µt+1              (62)
                                                                     2
                                    2
                         τ It               It        It                        It+1        It+1 2
      λt = µt Zt [1 −     (     − 1) − τ (      − 1)      ] + βτ Et µt+1 Zt+1 (      − 1) (     )                     (63)
                         2 It−1            It−1      It−1                        It          It
                                                             w H1,t
                                                   wt# =                                                              (64)
                                                           w − 1 H2,t



                                                              35
                  −w (1+η)
            w#
H1,t = ψνt ( t )              Nt1+η +
            wt
                                            #      w (1+η)
                                           wt+1
                                θw βEt (          )           (1 + πt )−ζw w (1+η) (1 + πt+1 )w (1+η) H1,t+1 (65)
                                            wt#
                          −w                      #      w
                    wt#                           wt+1
        H2,t = λt (     )       Nt + θw βEt (            ) (1 + πt )ζw (1−w ) (1 + πt+1 )w −1 H2,t+1        (66)
                    wt                             wt#
                                                ut Kt     α wt
                                                      =                                                       (67)
                                                 Nt     1 − α Rt
                                                wt1−α Rtα
                                        mct =             (1 − α)α−1 α−α                                      (68)
                                                   At
                                            1 + πt#   p X1,t
                                                    =                                                         (69)
                                            1 + πt p − 1 X2,t
                     X1,t = λt mct Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt )−ζp p (1 + πt+1 )p X1,t+1                           (70)

                     X2,t = λt Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt )ζp (1−p ) (1 + πt+1 )p −1 X2,t+1                        (71)
                                                                     γ2
                        Yt = Ct + It + Gt + [γ1 (ut − 1) +              (ut − 1)2 ] Kt                        (72)
                                                                     2
                                                            2
                                                 τ It
                            Kt+1 = Zt [1 −        (     − 1) ] It + (1 − δ)Kt                                 (73)
                                                 2 It−1
                                                              α
                                                At (ut Kt ) Nt1−α − F
                                         Yt =                                                                 (74)
                                                           vtp
                    (1 + πt )1−p = (1 − θp )(1 + πt# )1−p + θp (1 + πt−1 )ζp (1−p )                        (75)

               wt1−w = (1 − θw )wt#,1−w + θw (1 + πt )w −1 (1 + πt−1 )ζw (1−w ) wt−1
                                                                                     1−w
                                                                                                              (76)

                  vtp = (1 + πt )p [(1 − θp )(1 + πt# )−p + θp (1 + πt−1 )−p ζp vt−1
                                                                                    p
                                                                                        ]                     (77)

       ln(1 + it ) = (1 − ρi ) ln(1 + i∗ ) + ρi ln(1 + it−1 ) + φπ ln (1 + πt ) + φy ln ( YYt−1
                                                                                             t
                                                                                                )
    or                                             πt = 0                                                     (78)
                                                              ∗
    or                                        Pt Yt = (P Y )
                                         ln At = ρA ln At−1 + σA εA,t                                         (79)

                                          ln νt = ρν ln νt−1 + σν εν,t                                        (80)

                                         ln Zt = ρZ ln Zt−1 + σZ εZ,t                                         (81)

                              ln Gt = (1 − ρG ) ln G∗ + ρG ln Gt−1 + σG εG,t                                  (82)



                                                         36
                                                                              Nt1+η
                                  Wt = νt [ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψvtw                  ] + βEt Wt+1                                    (83)
                                                                              1+η
                                          −w (1+η)
                                w#                              wt            w (1+η)
             vtw   = (1 − θw ) ( t )                  + θw (        (1 + πt ))         (1 + πt−1 )−ζw w (1+η) vt−1
                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                    (84)
                                wt                             wt−1
    In these expressions λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the flow budget constraint of a
household and µt is the multiplier on the capital accumulation equation. Equation (59)
defines the marginal utility of income, while (60) is a standard Euler equation for bonds.
The first order condition for capital utilization is given by (61). Equation (62) is the Euler
equation for physical capital and (63) is the optimality condition for the choice of investment.
Equations (64)-(66) describe optimal wage-setting. Expressions (67) and (68) come out of cost-
minimization for firms and establish that all firms face the same real marginal cost and hire
capital services and labor in the same ratio, equal to the aggregate ratio. Equations (69)-(71)
describe optimal price-setting. The aggregate resource constraint is given by (72), the law of
motion for physical capital by (73), and the aggregate production function by (74). Equations
(75) and (76) describe the evolution of inflation and the real wage. The law of motion for price
dispersion is (77). Monetary policy is characterized by one of the three rules in (78). The
exogenous processes for productivity, the preference shock, the investment shock, and govern-
ment spending are given by (79)-(82). Aggregate welfare is given by (83) and the process for
wage dispersion is (84). Given initial values of the state variables and current realizations
of the innovations in the shock processes, an equilibrium consists of a non-explosive sequence of
{λt , νt , Ct , it , πt , Rt , ut , µt , Zt , It , wt# , H1,t , H2,t , wt , Nt , Kt , mct , πt# , X1,t , X2,t , Gt , At , vtp , Wt , vtw , Yt }
such that equations (59)–(84) all hold.


C         Parameter Robustness
    Table 10 shows compensating variations associated with different policy rules in the
medium scale model when all parameter values are set at the 10th percentile of the posterior
distribution. The 10th percentiles of the posterior distribution of the parameters are shown
in Table 6.




                                                                   37
           Table 10: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from Different Policy Rules
                          Medium Scale Model, Parameter Robustness

                     Estimated Model          10th Percentile, All Parameters             90th Percentile, All Parameters

     NGDP                   0.1056                            0.0424                                      0.7731
    Inflation               0.8630                            0.2865                                      7.3909
 Output Gap                 0.0343                            0.0115                                      0.1777
  Taylor Rule               0.2439                            0.0838                                      2.0121
Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting rules as well as a Taylor rule in the medium scale
model when all parameters are set to the 10th percentile of the posterior distribution. When evaluating the compensating variation
for the Taylor rule the standard deviation of the monetary policy shock is set to zero. The other columns describe values of the
price or wage rigidity parameters. For the exercises described in these columns all other parameters are fixed at their calibrated or
estimated values.


    Table 11 shows compensating variations associated with different policy rules in the
medium scale model when parameters are set at the 10th percentile of the posterior distribution
one at a time. For this exercise only the listed parameter is set at the 10th percentile of its
posterior distribution; all non-listed parameters are set at the mode of the posterior. Because
the parameters of the estimated Taylor rule are irrelevant for the compensating variations
associated with the different targeting rules, the compensating variations are listed as “n/a”
in this portions of the table.




                                                              38
                  Table 11: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from
                   Different Policy Rules, 10th Percentiles of Parameters
                                    Medium Scale Model

                                    NGDP        Inflation      Output Gap         Taylor rule

                   b = 0.6634       0.0981        0.7458           0.0329            0.2452
                  τ = 3.6661        0.1084        0.8432           0.0343             0.255
                  χ = 1.3075        0.1077        0.7940           0.0348            0.2101
                  γ2 = 0.2372       0.1056        0.9000           0.0342            0.2426
                  θp = 0.6008       0.1012        0.863            0.0319            0.2386
                  θw = 0.6517       0.1126        0.7395           0.0332            0.1587
                  ζp = 0.1982       0.1107        0.8630           0.0398            0.2507
                  ζw = 0.3610       0.0920        0.8630           0.0275            0.2618
                  ρi = 0.8470         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2980
                  φπ = 0.3747         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2653
                  φx = 0.0000         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2439
                  φy = 0.1036         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2591
                  ρA = 0.7506       0.0886        0.7350           0.0249            0.2137
                  ρν = 0.4885       0.1018        0.8575           0.0340            0.2327
                  ρZ = 0.5840       0.0897        0.8388           0.0329            0.1793
                  ρG = 0.9267       0.1046        0.8624           0.0343            0.2438
                  σA = 0.0046       0.0814        0.4887           0.0198            0.2107
                  σν = 0.0128       0.1032        0.8589           0.0341            0.2299
                  σZ = 0.0330       0.0928        0.8443           0.0334            0.2031
                  σG = 0.0087       0.1047        0.8622           0.0343            0.2437
                Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting
                rules as well as a Taylor rule in the medium scale model when each parameter
                is set at the 10th percentile of its post distribution holding all other parameters
                fixed at the mode of the posterior.



    Table 12 shows compensating variations associated with different policy rules in the
medium scale model when parameters are set at the 10th percentile of the posterior distribution
one at a time. For this exercise only the listed parameter is set at the 90th percentile of its
posterior distribution; all non-listed parameters are set at the mode of the posterior. Because
the parameters of the estimated Taylor rule are irrelevant for the compensating variations
associated with the different targeting rules, the compensating variations are listed as “n/a”
in this portions of the table.




                                                       39
  Table 12: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses from
   Different Policy Rules, 90th Percentiles of Parameters
                    Medium Scale Model

                    NGDP        Inflation      Output Gap         Taylor rule

   b = 0.8759       0.1250        1.0646           0.0373            0.2484
  τ = 4.3288        0.1025        0.8861           0.0343            0.2322
  η = 1.9141        0.1048        0.9274           0.0339            0.2754
  γ2 = 0.6042       0.1056        0.8400           0.0344            0.2447
  θp = 0.7659       0.1136        0.8630           0.036             0.2544
  θw = 0.9054       0.1140        1.3226           0.0347            0.5346
  ζp = 0.4783       0.1008        0.8630           0.0281            0.2368
  ζw = 0.6990       0.1346        0.8630           0.0476            0.2384
  ρi = 0.9100         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2080
 φπ = 0.5330          n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2292
  φx = 0.0000         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2439
  φy = 0.1971         n/a          n/a              n/a              0.2291
 ρA = 0.9125        0.1317        1.0937           0.0458            0.3196
  ρν = 0.8276       0.1153        0.8755           0.0351            0.2576
 ρZ = 0.7708        0.1346        0.9103           0.0371            0.3628
 ρG = 0.9706        0.1073        0.8636           0.0343            0.2442
 σA = 0.0100        0.1792        2.0089           0.0784            0.3448
  σν = 0.0282       0.1124        0.8746           0.0349            0.2842
 σZ = 0.0468        0.1260        0.8929           0.0358            0.3091
 σG = 0.0113        0.1070        0.8643           0.0344            0.2442
Notes: The table contains the compensating variations of three different targeting
rules as well as a Taylor rule in the medium scale model when each parameter
is set at the 10th percentile of its post distribution holding all other parameters
fixed at the mode of the posterior.




                                       40
