NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JUMP STARTING THE EURO AREA RECOVERY:
WOULD A RISE IN CORE FISCAL SPENDING HELP THE PERIPHERY?
Olivier Blanchard
Christopher J. Erceg
Jesper Lindé
Working Paper 21426
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21426

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

We thank Andrew Berg, Martin Eichenbaum, Emmanuel Farhi, Josef Hollmayr, Andrew Levin,
Jonathan Parker, Ricardo Reis, Pedro Teles, Harold Uhlig, and Volker Wieland for helpful
comments, as well as participants at the CEPR's ESSIM conference, the ECB Public Finance
conference, the NBER Summer Institute, the EABCN conference in Cambridge (U.K.), and the
2016 NBER Macroeconomics Annual conference, and at seminars at the Federal Reserve Board,
the IMF, the Bank of Portugal, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank, the OFCE in Paris, the
JRC in Ispra, the University of Glasgow, and the Sveriges Riksbank. We especially thank Mazi
Kazemi, Patrick Moran, Aaron Markiewitz, and Sher Singh for providing excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the IMF, the Riksbank,the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Olivier Blanchard, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lindé. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Jump Starting the Euro Area Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?
Olivier Blanchard, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lindé
NBER Working Paper No. 21426
July 2015, Revised October 2016
JEL No. E62,F41,F45
ABSTRACT
We show that a fiscal expansion by the core economies of the euro area would have a large and
positive impact on periphery GDP assuming that policy rates remain low for a prolonged period.
Under our preferred model specification, an expansion of core government spending equal to one
percent of euro area GDP would boost periphery GDP by over 1 percent in a liquidity trap lasting
three years, nearly half as large as the effect on core GDP. Accordingly, under a standard ad hoc
loss function involving output and inflation gaps, increasing core spending would generate
substantial welfare improvements, especially in the periphery. The benefits are considerably
smaller under a utility-based welfare measure, reflecting in part that higher net exports play a
material role in raising periphery GDP.
Olivier Blanchard
Peterson Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
oblanchard@piie.com
Christopher J. Erceg
The Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
Christopher.Erceg@frb.gov

Jesper Lindé
Sveriges Riksbank
SE-103 37 Stockholm
Sweden
jesper.l.linde@gmail.com

1. Introduction
If the euro area were a …scal union like the United States, there would be a strong case for …scal
expansion: the unemployment rate remains in double digits, in‡ation has run persistently too low,
and monetary policy has limited scope to provide additional stimulus. However, the euro area is
not a …scal union, and …scal expansion has to be carried out by member states. Given that the
periphery economies most likely to bene…t from domestic …scal expansion are constrained from
doing because of concerns about high public debt and …scal solvency, any sizeable …scal expansion
has to come from the euro area’s core economies.
In this paper, we analyze the e¤ects of an expansion of …scal spending in the euro area’s core
economies. Rather than limiting attention to the e¤ects on the euro area as a whole, we focus
on how the stimulative e¤ects would be distributed between core and periphery: Would a core
…scal expansion have sizeable positive “spillovers” to periphery output and in‡ation, or would the
stimulus mostly be limited to those core economies opting to raise public spending? The answer is
clearly critical to evaluating potential welfare bene…ts. Even if core …scal expansion increased euro
area output and in‡ation, it may not be desirable if it caused core economies to overheat while
imparting little positive impetus to the periphery.
The …scal consolidations that began in 2010 in Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain
o¤ers some clues about the channels through which a prospective core …scal expansion might play
out.

On the one hand, the deep …scal cuts carried out from 2010 to 2013 had strong adverse

e¤ects on the periphery countries’domestic demand, due at least in part to the zero lower bound
on monetary policy (Blanchard and Leigh, 2014). On the other hand, the large negative output
gaps in those countries led to a decrease in relative price levels, and some improvement in external

1

demand. In this vein, Figure 1 illustrates the positive relationship between the average output gap
and price in‡ation for euro area economies in the aftermath of the …nancial crisis: the high degree of
resource slack in countries such as Spain and Portugal, partly driven by massive …scal consolidation,
translated into lower average in‡ation than in Germany. The euro area’s recent experience makes
clear that the net result of …scal consolidation, for both periphery and core countries, depends
on the stance of monetary policy and the relevance of the zero lower bound, on the size of the
multipliers, on the e¤ect of output gaps on in‡ation and by implication on relative prices, and on
the e¤ect of relative prices on imports and exports.
The same considerations are likely to play a key role in in‡uencing the macroeconomic e¤ects
of a rise in core government spending, and suggest the importance of both aggregate (euro-wide)
and compositional channels.
From an aggregate perspective, the e¤ects are likely to depend on how strongly monetary policy
reacts to the induced rise in euro area output and in‡ation. Outside of a liquidity trap, the ECB
would raise interest rates in real terms, which would dampen private demand in both the core and
periphery; and unless periphery net exports rose enough to compensate, periphery GDP would
likely fall.

But in a liquidity trap, higher core spending boosts in‡ation in both the core and

periphery, and potentially reduces real interest rates enough to provide a signi…cant boost both to
periphery and core GDP. From a compositional perspective, while the demand stimulus is likely
to a¤ect primarily core countries, the increase in in‡ation in core relative to periphery countries
leads to an increase in core relative prices, and to some reallocation of demand toward periphery
countries.
To gauge the strength of the various channels and make an assessment of the likely e¤ects of a
core …scal expansion on core and periphery GDP, we use two variants of a New Keynesian model
of a currency union. Our benchmark model is quite simple –extending Gali and Monacelli (2008)

2

mainly by adding habit persistence in consumption to get more plausible dynamics –but is useful for
pinpointing how the various aggregate and compositional channels shape the response of periphery
output. Moreover, the simple structure facilitates showing how key features such as the Phillips
Curve slope a¤ect both the aggregate multiplier and spillovers to the periphery. However, we also
use a larger-scale DSGE model –which includes price and wage rigidities, endogenous investment,
and allows for non-Ricardian consumption behavior –to derive quantitative assessments in a more
empirically-realistic setting. Following the general approach of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans
(2005) and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2011), we estimate this model by calibrating
key parameters to match the empirical responses to both a euro area monetary policy shock and
government spending shock.
We …nd that, outside of a liquidity trap, the e¤ects of higher core government spending on
periphery GDP tend to be small and even negative (assuming that the import content of core
government spending is low). The small response of periphery GDP re‡ects that the central bank
raises real interest rates, more than o¤setting the stimulus arising from a depreciation of the
periphery’s terms of trade. These results concur with previous research by Wieland (1996) and
Kollmann et al (2014) indicating that …scal spillovers tend to be negative under …xed exchange
rates (assuming that the central bank responds according to a standard policy reaction function).
The spillovers to periphery GDP are markedly di¤erent in a liquidity trap: Periphery GDP
tends to rise, re‡ecting the weaker interest rate response. The size of the periphery GDP response
to a core spending hike increases with the expected duration of the liquidity trap, with the import
content of core government spending, and with the responsiveness of in‡ation. In a relatively
short-lived trap lasting only a few quarters, the GDP stimulus to the periphery is small (unless
a sizeable fraction of core spending is imported), so that most of the expansionary e¤ects of the
…scal stimulus is con…ned to the core. However, higher core spending can provide a potent source

3

of stimulus to the periphery if monetary policy is expected to be constrained from raising interest
rates for a prolonged period of a couple of years or more.
The larger-scale model implies that a rise in core government spending has e¤ects on periphery
GDP that are about half as large as on core GDP in a three year liquidity trap; the aggregate euro
area multiplier of around 2 seems in line with both model-based analysis suggesting high multipliers
in a liquidity trap, and empirical analysis (both of which are reviewed in the next section). The
large spillovers to the periphery re‡ect a combination of factors: higher periphery net exports, lower
real interest rates as periphery in‡ation rises, and Keynesian multiplier e¤ects that boost domestic
demand (captured by the hand-to-mouth consumers in our model). But it bears emphasizing that
the sizeable spillovers don’t hinge on an implausibly large in‡ation response; though consistent
with the empirical responses of in‡ation to monetary and spending shocks, our model implies an
extremely ‡at Phillips Curve relative to most existing estimates. The Keynesian multiplier e¤ects
do play an important role, which seems in line with the substantial crowding in of domestic demand
in response to government spending shocks in our empirical VAR, as well as with evidence from the
literature on local multipliers (Nakamura and Steinsson 2014 and Acconcia, Corsetti, and Simonelli
2014).
We also use the simple model to conduct normative analysis: one important upshot is the
reminder that the output and in‡ation responses perhaps shouldn’t be the sole criteria for judging
whether …scal adjustment is desirable. We consider two alternative welfare metrics, including an
ad hoc but standard criterion based on output and in‡ation gap variability in each region and a
utility-based criterion that is based on a population-weighted average of the utility functions of
households. Under either criterion, we show that the welfare bene…ts of core …scal expansion are
smaller than under …scal union. This is intuitive, and simply re‡ects that a core-only spending hike
delivers the most stimulus to where it is “needed least” insofar as resource slack is much smaller

4

than in the periphery. Under …scal union, more of the expansion could be targeted to the periphery,
allowing comparatively large welfare gains.1
However, the alternative welfare criteria di¤er substantially in their assessment of whether a core
…scal expansion would improve welfare in the periphery economies. The ad hoc criterion indicates
that an expansion of core spending can elicit large welfare gains in both the core and periphery
by shrinking output gaps and increasing in‡ation closer to target. By contrast, the utility-based
criterion cares about whether the …scal stimulus boosts periphery consumption enough - and in
a front-loaded manner – to justify the utility cost of the increased employment. Accordingly, the
utility-based measure sees less bene…t from core …scal expansion than the simple ad hoc measure
because net exports play a substantive role in reducing the periphery’s output gap. In addition,
the consumption rise in the periphery is very drawn out, so that much of it occurs when the
economy has largely recovered. Our sense is that the utility-based analysis is useful for highlighting
that a focus on reducing output and in‡ation gaps may be too narrow in assessing the merits of
…scal expansion. However, as we argue below, the utility-based measure probably understates the
bene…ts of reducing the output gap and unemployment in economies facing high resource slack.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the literature on …scal
multipliers and spillovers. Section 3 presents the simple benchmark model in log-linearized form,
while Section 4 reports impulse responses to a core …scal expansion with a focus on factors determining spillovers to the periphery. Section 5 considers both the positive and normative e¤ects of
alternative …scal expansion packages against a reasonable baseline for the euro area.

Section 6

examines robustness in the larger-scale model, while Section 7 concludes.
1
While our discussion here focuses on the desirability of …scal expansion in a prolonged liquidity trap, it bears
emphasizing that a core …scal expansion could potentially be counterproductive if monetary policy had latitude to
cut interest rates su¢ ciently. Indeed, the analysis of Gali and Monacelli (2008) suggests that it might be desirable
to respond to a contraction in periphery demand by cutting core …scal spending – thus better aligning business
cycles within the CU – and then cutting interest rates aggressively. While the implication that core consolidation
is desirable is perhaps somewhat model-speci…c, the more general message that core …scal expansion would not be
desirable if monetary policy could do the lifting seems very reasonable.

5

2. Brief Overview of the Literature
From an aggregate perspective, the models we consider are closely related to those of an extensive
literature examining …scal policy in a liquidity trap. This literature shows that the spending multiplier is likely to be substantially larger than in normal times, e.g., Eggertsson (2011), Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) and Woodford (2011). The higher multiplier re‡ects that the central bank does not raise nominal policy rates even though in‡ation rises, so that real interest rates
fall and domestic demand is crowded in. These crowding in e¤ects can be large if in‡ation is responsive to resource slack. For example, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) showed that
the peak multiplier exceeds 2 in a long-lived liquidity trap under their preferred model speci…cation.
A number of empirical papers have corroborated the implication of a large spending multiplier
when monetary policy is constrained. Some of this analysis has focused on the Great Depression
period given that monetary policy was arguably unreactive to …scal stimulus during most of that
time. Almunia et al. (2010) found a spending multiplier of over 2 using a panel VAR for major
industrial economies that is estimated over the interwar period and uses the same identifying
assumptions as in Blanchard and Perotti (2002). Gordon and Krenn (2010) estimated a spending
multiplier of slightly under 2 for the United States in a narrow window preceding the U.S. entry
into World War II. They argue that this is an ideal period for estimating the multiplier given
that government spending rose massively (by 13 percent of U.S. GDP between 1940:Q2-1941:Q4),
monetary policy was passive, resource slack still large, and tax rates weren’t (yet) adjusted up.
They also document a substantial crowding in of private demand.
Blanchard and Leigh (2014) focused on the recent experience of …scal consolidation in the
euro area during the 2010-2012 period.

While some analysis suggested that deep spending cuts

would exert only a modest drag on output – or possibly even raise output through con…dence
channels (Alesina and Ardagna 2010) –Blanchard and Leigh showed that …scal multipliers in euro
6

area countries turned out to be much larger than forecast ex ante, implying that …scal cuts in
the periphery had considerably more adverse e¤ects than anticipated. Their estimates suggest a
spending multiplier of around 1.5 for the euro area.
Both the theoretical and empirical literature has attempted to identify key factors in‡uencing
the size of the aggregate spending multiplier. In addition to the in‡ation response, the multiplier is
larger in a longer-lived liquidity trap, if the bulk of spending occurs when the zero bound constraint
is still binding (see the papers by CER and Woodford mentioned above), or if the economy is in
a deep recession with substantial excess capacity (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012 and Gordon
and Krenn 2010). Moreover, as indicated by Uhlig (2010), Erceg and Linde (2014), and Drautzberg
and Uhlig (2015), the tax reaction function can be quite consequential: the spending multiplier can
be signi…cantly lower if tax rates are adjusted quickly and if distortionary tax rates account for
most of the adjustment. In our analysis, we assume that …scal stimulus can be implemented fairly
quickly, and that taxes are either lump-sum (as in the simple model of Section 3), or that tax rates
at least adjust very slowly. The multipliers derived from our simulations would be lower under less
favorable assumptions on these dimensions.
Several recent papers have analyzed …scal spillovers in a liquidity trap in stylized open economy
models. The qualitative analysis of Farhi and Werning (2012) shows that the pattern of spillovers
‡ips sign – from negative in normal times when the currency union monetary authority raises
interest rates – to positive in a liquidity trap.

Other papers, including by Cook and Devereux

(2011) and Fujiwara and Ueda (2013), have focused on environments with ‡exible exchange rates,
and have shown that a country expanding …scal spending is likely to cause its currency to depreciate,
potentially generating negative spillovers to its trading partners.
As discussed in the introduction, an empirical implication of the models we consider is that …scal
expansion in core countries should boost periphery real net exports. This implication is consistent

7

with Beetsma et al (2006), who used a panel VAR framework to show that expansionary …scal
shocks in European Union economies typically increase the net exports of their trading partners
(and conversely for …scal contractions).
We also draw on the literature estimating “local multipliers” to help assess the empirical plausibility of our model(s) for the di¤erential e¤ects of a rise in core government spending on core
versus periphery output. This literature estimates how output is a¤ected in a region that boosts
government spending (e.g., a city or state) relative to other regions, and typically …nds that relative
output –i.e., output in the region experiencing the spending hike –rises by considerably more than
the increase in relative government spending (scaled by GDP). For example, Acconcia et al. (2014)
estimated a local multiplier of 1.5-1.9 for municipalities in Italy, using as an instrument sudden cuts
in municipal public spending triggered by the removal of local city councils (following evidence of
ma…a-related corruption); while Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) analyzed the e¤ects of changes in
defense expenditures concentrated in particular U.S. states, and estimated a local multiplier of 1.5.
Although our simple model in the next section constrains the local multiplier to be less than unity,
we interpret the estimates of high local multipliers as suggestive of strong Keynesian multiplier
channels, and hence build these features into the larger-scale model of Section 6.
Finally, the Phillips Curve slope plays a paramount role in in‡uencing both the aggregate
multiplier, and in determining the size of compositional e¤ects on trade. The extensive empirical
literature estimating the Phillips Curve slope –both for the industrial economies, and the euro area
in particular – generally points to a low Phillips Curve slope. This includes estimates based on
DSGE models (Smets and Wouters, 2003), as well as from single equation models as in Blanchard,
Cerutti, and Summers (2015), with the latter highlighting a substantial fall in the Phillips Curve
slope in the early 1990s. Even so, it bears emphasizing that these estimates are generally consistent
with a noticeable response of in‡ation to a sustained rise in …scal spending, as we will show below.

8

Moreover, a number of papers suggest that the low estimated slopes partly re‡ect various forms
of misspeci…cation – including e.g., not taking adequate account of how TFP shocks or …nancial
conditions in‡uence marginal cost (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt 2015 and Gilchrist,
Schoenle, Sim, and Zakrajšek 2015) – and that the actual Phillips Curve slope is considerably
higher. Thus, although our own estimates in Section 6 imply a low Phillips Curve slope, and we
embed a low slope in the baseline calibration of our models, we also consider the implications of a
higher slope.

3. The Benchmark Open Economy Model
Our benchmark model is comprised of two countries that may di¤er in population size. Households
are in…nitely-lived, derive utility from consumption and leisure, and make consumption decisions
based on their permanent income. Monopolistically competitive …rms are subject to Calvo-style
pricing frictions, so that nominal prices adjust sluggishly. Similar to Gali and Monacelli (2008),
our model assumes that …nancial markets are complete both domestically and internationally, and
that producers set the same price in both the home and foreign market (producer currency pricing).
We generalize the Gali and Monacelli model by allowing for habit persistence in consumption, and
by assuming that some fraction of government consumption may be imported.
Given the symmetric structure across countries, we look at the home country: the same equations and calibration apply to the foreign country (aside from population size). Our formulation
below highlights how the model can be decomposed into two parts. The …rst part, which determines the equilibrium for the currency union (CU) as a whole, is completely standard. The familiar
three equations – the New Keynesian IS curve, the AS curve, and the policy reaction function –
determine aggregate CU output, in‡ation, and policy rates, respectively; and per usual, a core …scal
expansion boosts CU output and in‡ation. The second part involves characterizing the di¤erence

9

between the response of periphery and core variables. These di¤erences depend exclusively on the
terms of trade and exogenous shocks, including to …scal policy. Importantly, monetary policy only
a¤ects the core and periphery through its e¤ects on the CU as a whole, but does not in‡uence the
terms of trade, or the di¤erences between the responses of periphery and core variables.2
Our discussion below focuses on the log-linearized equations of the model; a full description of
the underlying model structure is provided in Appendix A.

3.1. The Log-Linearized Benchmark Model
Consumption demand in each economy is determined by the consumption Euler equation condition,
which for the home economy is given by:

ct

=

ct+1jt

+ iCU
t

ct+1jt ;

(1)

where iCU
is the policy rate of the central bank in the currency union (CU),
t
in‡ation in the home economy, and

ct

ct

ct

is consumer price

is the marginal utility of consumption:

=

1
(ct
b

{ct

1

t ):

(2)

The marginal utility of consumption varies inversely with current consumption ct ; but rises with past
consumption due to habit persistence. Taken together, these equations imply that consumption falls
in response to higher real interest rates, with the sensitivity depending on intertemporal elasticity
in substitution parameter b =

at any given interest rate.3

(1

{

) : The preference shock

t

boosts consumption demand

Given that households are in…nitely-lived and taxes are lump-sum,

the manner in which changes in government spending are …nanced has no e¤ect on consumption
decisions.
2
This decomposition depends importantly on our assumption of a symmetric structure across countries, including
in the calibration of structural parameters.
3
While our model also allows for discount factor shocks, these shocks have been omitted from the description of
the log-linearized equations. The discount factor shock boosts consumption demand, but has no e¤ect on potential
output or labor supply.

10

Consumption demand in the CU as a whole is determined as a population-weighted average of
the demand of the home and foreign economies (with weights

and

, respectively). Imposing the

CU less governaggregate resource constraints which equate CU consumption cCU
t to CU output yt

ment spending gtCU (i.e., cy cCU
= ytCU
t
CU (
t

Ct

+

Ct

=

CU );
t

gy gtCU ) and CPI in‡ation in each country to CU in‡ation

aggregate demand in the CU may be expressed in terms of a familiar

New Keynesian IS curve:
xCU
=
t

{
1
xCU +
xCU
1 + { t+1jt 1 + { t 1

cy b(iCU
t

CU
t+1jt

rtCU;pot );

(3)

where cy denotes the consumption-output ratio in steady state, and gy is the government spending
share. As seen from eq. (3) ; the CU output gap xCU
depends both on past and future output
t
gaps, and inversely on the di¤erence between the real policy rate in the CU iCU
t

CU
t+1jt

and its

potential or “natural” rate of rtCU;pot :4
On the aggregate supply side, the in‡ation rate of domestically-produced goods in each country
is determined by a New Keynesian Phillips Curve.

Thus, the home in‡ation rate

Dt

depends

both on the current marginal cost of production mct and future expected in‡ation:

Dt

=

Dt+1jt

+

mc mct :

(4)

The subscript “D” on in‡ation is used to distinguish the in‡ation rate on domestically-produced
goods

Dt

from the consumer price in‡ation rate

Ct :

Given our assumption of monopolistically

competitive producers and Calvo-style staggered price contracts, the parameter

mc

determining

the sensitivity of in‡ation to marginal cost mct depends on the mean price contract duration
1
1

P

according to

mc

=

(1

P )(1
P

P)

: Thus, longer-lived price contracts ‡atten the slope of the

Phillips Curve. Marginal cost in turn depends on the gap between the product real wage wrt and
4
As we discuss below, government spending shocks a¤ect output both through in‡uencing the potential real
interest rate and potential output.

11

the marginal product of labor mplt :
mct = wtr

mplt = [ nt

ct

+ ! c t ] + nt

(1

)zt :

(5)

The e¤ects on marginal cost associated with ‡uctuations in the product real wage are captured by
the term in brackets. Because wages are fully ‡exible, the product real wage rises in response to
an increase in work hours nt (
consumption

ct

is the inverse Frisch elasticity), a fall in the marginal utility of

(re‡ecting a wealth e¤ect), or to a depreciation of the terms of trade

t.

Marginal

costs also rise in response to factors which reduce the marginal product of labor, including a rise
in hours work (with sensitivity ), or decline in technology zt :
Aggregate CU in‡ation is determined as a population-weighted average of equation (4):
CU
t

=

CU
t+1jt

+

CU
mc mct :

(6)

Using the production function to substitute for hours in terms of output, CU marginal cost can be
expressed solely in terms of the CU output gap and its lag (with the latter re‡ecting the e¤ect of
habit persistence in consumption on labor supply). Thus, the New Keynesian Phillips Curve for
CU in‡ation is given by:
CU
t

CU
t+1jt

=

where the composite parameter
disutility of working, and

1
cy b

x

=

+

CU
mc [ x xt

+
1 a

+

1
(xCU
cy b t

{xCU
t 1 )];

(7)

captures the in‡uence of diminishing returns and the

the wealth e¤ect on labor supply.

The currency union central bank is assumed to adhere to a Taylor-type policy rule subject to
the ZLB of the form:
iCU
= max
t

CU
t

i;

+

CU
x xt

;

(8)

Thus, outside of a liquidity trap, the policy rate iCU
rises in response to an increase in the CU
t
in‡ation rate

CU
t

or expansion in the CU output gap xCU
t : Because the policy rate is measured
12

as a deviation from the steady state nominal interest rate i –the sum of the steady state interest
rate r and in‡ation rate
falls below

the zero bound constraint becomes binding only when the policy rate

i: The CU output gap xCU
is the di¤erence between currency union output ytCU and
t

its potential level ytCU;pot ; with both variables again simply population-weighted averages of the
respective country variables.
Both the potential output measure ytCU;pot relevant for the CU output gap (xCU
= ytCU
t
ytCU;pot ) and the potential real rate rtCU;pot depend only on population-weighted averages of the
underlying shocks and lags of ytCU;pot (due to habit persistence). For example, abstracting from
habit persistence for expositional simplicity, CU potential output is given by:
ytCU;pot =
where

=

1
b(1 gy )

x +1

gy gtCU + (1

gy )

CU
t +(1

g y )(1 + )ztCU ;

(9)

< 1, while the potential real interest rate may be expressed as:5

rtCU;pot = (1

)

(1
1

)
gy

gy gtCU +

CU
t +(1

+ )ztCU

;

(10)

A rise in average CU government spending gtCU has the same positive e¤ect on currency union
potential output and the potential real interest rate rtCU;pot irrespective of how it is distributed
across the member states (as does the preference shock

CU
t

and technology shock ztCU ). This

result rests on our assumption of a symmetric structure across the home and foreign economy,
aside from population size and home bias in trade.
Our formulation highlights how a core …scal expansion can be thought of as partly operating
through aggregate channels –boosting euro area in‡ation, the output gap, and possibly the policy
rate.

Given the simple equation structure implied by the IS curve (3), the Phillips Curve (7),

and the CU policy rule (8), the …scal expansion has exactly the same e¤ects on aggregate variables
5
This expression assumes that the government spending, consumption taste, and technology shocks all follow
AR(1) processes with common persistence parameter :

13

(including xCU
t ,

CU ;and
t

iCU
t ) as in a similarly calibrated closed economy model.

Of course, in

addition to the aggregate impact, we are also interested in how the e¤ects of core …scal stimulus
would be distributed between the periphery and core. Accordingly, we next solve for the di¤erences
in the responses between the home and foreign economy.

This approach allows us to solve the

model in a way that sheds light on the question of why the stimulus has a di¤erential impact on
each economy.
The resource constraint implies that home output yDt may be expressed as a weighted average
of consumption ct ; government spending gt ; and “net exports” nxt ; which are the the di¤erence
between exports mt and imports mt scaled by the trade share of GDP:
yDt = cy ct + gy gt + nxt ;

(11)

Net exports in turn depend on the percentage di¤erence between exports and imports of each type of
tradable good, including private consumption goods (i.e., mct mct ) and government goods/services
mgt ) :

(mgt

nxt = ! cy (mct

mct ) + ! gy (mgt

mgt ):

(12)
C
Y

Each component is weighted by its respective GDP share (i.e. ! cy = ! C

G
Y ).

and ! gy = ! G

Net exports of either type of tradeable rise if home goods become relatively cheaper –that is, the
home terms of trade

The parameters

c

t

and

depreciates –or if foreign demand rises relative to home demand.

g

Thus:

mct

mct = ct

ct +

c t,

(13)

mgt

mgt = gt

gt +

g t:

(14)

capture the sensitivity of each component of real net exports to the terms

of trade and may di¤er between consumption and government goods.6
6

In

(1+ G )
G

(2

terms
!G

of

the

!G )

model

1 ; where

parameters,
(1+ C )
C

we

have

c

=

(1+ C )
C

(2

!C

!C )

1

and

g

=

is (the absolute value of) the price elasticity of demand between

domestically-produced and imported private consumption goods, and
demand for government goods and services.

14

(1+ G )
G

the corresponding price elasticity of

Using the home resource constraint and its analogue for the foreign economy, the di¤erence
between home and foreign GDP may be expressed:
yDt

yDt = gy (gt
= gy (1

gt ) + cy (ct
!g

! g )(gt

ct ) + (nxt
gt ) +

This equation says that home relative output yDt

t

nxt )

+ cy (1

(15a)
!c

! c )(ct

ct ):

yDt depends on three factors – home relative

government spending, the terms of trade, and home relative consumption – and is very useful for
considering how a rise in foreign government spending gt (identi…ed with higher core spending
below) a¤ects the composition of aggegate demand across the home and foreign economy. Speci…cally, the “direct”e¤ect of a rise in foreign government spending of one percentage point of baseline
GDP gy gt is to reduce home relative output by (1

!g

! g ) percent, with the smaller-than-unity

response re‡ecting that some government spending may be imported.

We call this the “direct”

e¤ect because it holds relative prices (i.e., the terms of trade) constant.

The latter two terms

capture the strength of the rebalancing channel, and both vary positively with the terms of trade.
In particular, the term

t

captures how the home country’s terms of trade depreciation – which

would be expected following a rise in foreign government spending – shifts some demand toward
the home country through a net exports channel. The responsiveness coe¢ cient

is a weighted

average of the import price sensitivity of private consumption and government services (i.e.,
cy (! C + ! C )

c

+ gy (! G + ! G ) g ). Moreover, home relative consumption ct

=

ct also varies posi-

tively with the terms of trade through the complete markets risk-sharing condition (16) below, and
thus also contributes to rebalancing:
ct

ct = {(ct

1

ct

1)

+ b(1

!C

!C )

t

+

1

(

t

t ):

(16)

It may seem surprising that home relative consumption rises in response to the foreign government spending shock. To provide more intuition for why this occurs in the benchmark model, it
15

is helpful to draw on the consumption Euler equations to link the consumption di¤erential to the
long-term real interest rate di¤erentials in each economy:
ct

ct = {(ct

1

ct

1)

b(1

!C

! C )(rLt

where the long-term real interest rate di¤erential (rLt

rLt ) +

1

(

t

t ):

(17)

rLt ) may in turn be expressed either in

terms of future short-term real interest rates, or in terms of expected in‡ation di¤erentials:
rLt

rLt = Et

1
X

(rt+j

rt+j ) =

Et

j=0

1
X

(

Dt+j

Dt+j );

(18)

j=1

A foreign government spending hike initially causes foreign in‡ation to rise relative to home in‡ation, implying that the home terms of trade depreciates. But for relative prices to converge in the
long-run –as they must given that the government spending shock is stationary –long-run expected
in‡ation in the home country must exceed long-run expected in‡ation abroad (i.e., Et
> Et

P1

j=1

Dt+j

P1

j=1

Dt+j

in equation (18)); implying that expected long-run real interest rates fall at home

relative to abroad.7 Since it is the long-run real interest rate response that matters for consumption
in the benchmark model, equation (17) implies that periphery relative consumption rises relative
to foreign consumption (concurring with equation (16)).
Relative price convergence plays a key role in accounting for large output spillovers to the
periphery following an expansion of foreign government spending in a liquidity trap. It is important
to point out that the implication that home relative consumption rises in response to higher foreign
government spending is somewhat model-speci…c, and in particular, re‡ects the dependence of
consumption on the long-term real interest rate in the New Keynesian model; as we will show in
Section 6, home relative consumption may decline if consumption depends more on current income
due to “hand-to-mouth”consumption behavior, or if it depends more on the short-term real interest
rate. Thus, the key implications about spillovers that we develop in the next section should not be
7
Because the price level immediately jumps in the core when government spending increases (while rising less or
falling in the periphery), the rise in the price level going forward (i.e., long-run expected in‡ation) must be higher in
the periphery.

16

regarded as hinging on the response of relative consumption; what matters instead is that foreign
government spending has a big enough e¤ect on home in‡ation and real interest rates –including
through the expectation that relative prices will eventually converge – that home consumption is
a¤ected signi…cantly.
Turning to the home price-setting equation (4) and its foreign counterpart, it follows in‡ation
di¤erentials between the home and foreign economy depend on the di¤erence between home and
foreign marginal costs:

Dt

Dt

= (

Dt+1jt )

Dt+1jt

+

mc (mct

mct ):

(19)

Relative marginal costs –using equation (5) and its foreign analogue –may be expressed:

mct

mct =

+
1

(yDt

yDt ) +

Relative marginal cost depends on relative output yDt

t

(1 + )(zt

zt ):

(20)

yDt , the terms of trade, and on exogenous

productivity di¤erentials between the home and foreign economy.consumption.8

A rise in home

relative demand boosts home relative marginal costs as wages rise more at home, and because of
diminishing marginal returns to production; conversely, the rise in foreign government spending
we focus on below causes foreign relative marginal costs to increase.

As noted above, relative

demand can be expressed exclusively as a function of the terms of trade and exogenous shocks
(given complete markets).9
Since in‡ation di¤erences between the home and foreign economy vary inversely with terms
of trade growth according to

Dt

Dt

=

(

t

t 1)

(see equation A.19 in the Appendix) ,

the solution for the in‡ation di¤erential in equation (19) implies that the terms of trade evolves
8
While this expression abstracts from habit for convenience, relative marginal cost also depends on lagged output
gaps.
9
There is also an additional role for the terms of trade to a¤ect marginal costs – captured by the middle term
of equation (20) – which re‡ects that a terms of trade depreciation, by increasing home relative consumption, raises
home relative marginal costs through a wealth e¤ect on wages.

17

according to:
(

t 1)

t

= (

t)

t+1jt

mc (mct

mct ):

(21)

From an intuitive perspective, a rise in foreign …scal spending gt initially increases aggregate demand by relatively more abroad (as seen from equation 15a). This boosts relative marginal production costs abroad, which causes the home terms of trade to depreciate (from equation 21, mct > mct ;
so that

t

rises).

The terms of trade depreciation helps rebalance some of the expansion in ag-

gregate demand towards the home economy. As can be seen by reformulating equation (21), the
home terms of trade continues to depreciate (i.e.,
below its ‡exible price level
(

t

pot
t

t

> 0) as long as the terms of trade remains

(in discounted present value):

t 1)

= (

t)

t+1jt

+

pot
mc mc ( t

t );

(22)

This expression abstracts from habit persistence for expositional convenience.10
Equation (15a) underscores that the terms of trade simply evolves as an autonomous di¤erence
equation. Thus, the evolution of the terms of trade does not depend on CU monetary policy, or
whether the currency union is in a liquidity trap. Because relative output levels, relative in‡ation
rates, and relative consumption levels also only depend on the terms of trade, monetary policy has
no e¤ect on these variables: it can only operate through e¤ects that are felt uniformly across the
currency union members.11

3.2. Calibration
We calibrate our model at quarterly frequency, and assume a symmetric calibration for each country
block aside from di¤erences in trade intensities (due to di¤erent population sizes). While many
10

The parameter mc captures the reduced form sensitivity of marginal cost to the terms of trade gap. Even with
habit persistence, the terms of trade can be represented as a function only of the terms of trade gap (as a third order
di¤erence equation).
11
Moreover, given that we have solved for both aggregate CU variables and corresponding cross-country di¤erences,
country-speci…c variables may be solved for by the relevant identi…es. For example, given that aggregate CU output
is de…ned as ytCU = yDt + yDt , output of the home country may be solved for as yDt = ytCU + (1
)ytd , where
d
CU
d
yt = yDt yDt ; and foreign output is given by yDt = yt
yt :

18

aspects of our calibration are standard, two classes of parameters – including those which govern
the responsiveness of in‡ation, and those which in‡uence trade ‡ows –deserve particular emphasis.
The degree to which in‡ation responds to marginal cost is the key determinant of both the
aggregate response of CU in‡ation and output, and of the terms of trade response.
Wouters (2003) reported a Phillips Curve slope of

mc

= 0:009 based on estimating a DSGE model

using euro area data, which implies a mean price contract duration of 10 quarters (
estimated slope of

mc

Smets and

p

= 0:9). The

= 0:0034 that we report in Section 6 –when using the larger scale model to

…t the responses of empirical VARs to euro area monetary policy and government spending shocks
–implies even more sluggish price adjustment.12
The response of relative prices in the euro area also seems consistent with a very ‡at Phillips
Curve. Although Figure 1 shows that in‡ation has run noticeably lower in the periphery than in
the core since the …nancial crisis, the di¤erence in in‡ation rates –and implied adjustment in the
terms of trade –seems quite modest in light of the much higher level of resource slack in periphery
economies.13 The upper panel of Figure 2 considers the relationship between the periphery terms
of trade and (periphery) relative marginal costs more directly.
trade have deteriorated (
mct

t

While the periphery’s terms of

> 0) since 2009 (the solid line) as periphery relative marginal costs

mct have declined (the dotted line, where relative labor shares proxy for marginal cost

di¤erentials), the sensitivity appears quite low.
regression of (

t

t 1)

(

t+1jt

t)

(vertical axis) against mct

implied by equation (21) yields a slope estimate of
Based on these considerations, we set
very sluggish price adjustment.

As seen in the bottom panel, a simple OLS

mc

mc

mct (horizontal axis) as

= 0:006:

= 0:005 (consistent with

p

= 0:93), which implies

Even so, we recognize that there is considerable uncertainty

12

A low Phillips Curve slope in the same range also helps to yield plausible in‡ation responses in the model
following a "Great Recession-sized” shock that generates a large and persistent output gap (as shown below).
13
The unemployment rate in the periphery remained in the high teens (levels typically associated with an economic
depression) through most of the 2012-2014 period, over twice the unemployment rate in core economies.

19

about the Phillips Curve slope.

Most of the extensive literature estimating the Phillips Curve

slope for the industrial countries using pre-…nancial crisis data reported estimates in the range
of

mc

= 0:009

0:014; well above our benchmark setting.14

As noted in Section 2, some

recent research argues that the low estimated slopes may partly re‡ect various forms of model
misspeci…cation (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt 2014 and Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim, and
Zakrajšek 2015). With this in mind, we also consider the implications of a higher Phillips Curve
slope in our simulations below.
The second key group of parameters are those determining the responsiveness of trade ‡ows
as a share of domestic output, including the import share of private (consumption) spending ! C ;
of public spending ! G ; and the trade price elasticity of each of these components (

c

and

g,

respectively). Ceteris paribus, a higher trade share or higher trade price elasticity ampli…es the
“leakage” associated with a core …scal expansion to the periphery, and thus should push in the
direction of more balanced e¤ects across regions. Trade data from Eurostat for Spain and Italy
indicate an average import/GDP ratio of those economies of about 22 percent in 2007.15

In

calibrating the trade share in our two country framework, a notable complication involves how
to treat periphery trade with non-EU members: periphery imports are closer to 14-15 percent of
GDP if all non-EU trade is excluded from our computation.

We assume an import share of 15

percent of GDP for the periphery in our baseline and hence e¤ectively exclude non-EU trade, but
recognize that the e¤ects of a core …scal expansion in reality would depend on how the periphery’s
real exchange rate varied relative to non-EU trading partners.16

Given that periphery GDP is

14
The median estimates of the Phillips Curve slope in empirical studies by e.g. Adolfson et al (2005), Altig et al.
(2011), Galí and Gertler (1999), Galí, Gertler, and López-Salido (2001), Lindé (2005), and Smets and Wouters (2003;
2007) are in this range. As we discuss in Section 6, some recent estimates based on U.S. data point to a very ‡at
slope closer to our benchmark calibration.
15
This computation excludes their trade with each other (so as to e¤ectively treat them as a single country as in
the model).
16
If the ECB was unconstrained by the ZLB, the ECB would tighten policy in response to higher core spending,
and the euro would appreciate; however, in a deep liquidity trap, the euro (and hence periphery exchange rate) could
well depreciate as real interest rates declined.

20

about half of that of the core euro area countries, we set the country size parameters

= 1=3 and

= 2=3; accordingly, balanced trade implies a trade share of 7.5 percent of GDP for the core.
Our model requires parsing this import share of GDP into private and public spending components. We set ! G = ! G = 0 under our benchmark, and then consider ! G = 0.2 (implying ! G
= 0.4) as a high side alternative. Under the benchmark with ! G = ! G = 0; the import share of
private consumption is 20 percent in the periphery and 10 percent in the core (i.e., ! C = 0.2 and
! C = 0.1).17 The trade price elasticity for both private consumption and government spending is
assumed to be slightly above unity (1.1), consistent with estimates from the macro literature on
trade price elasticities.
The calibration of remaining parameters is fairly standard. The discount factor of

= 0:99875

implies a steady state real interest rate of 0.5 percent (at an annualized rate). With a steady state
in‡ation rate of 2 percent (i.e.,

= :005), the steady state nominal interest rate is 2.5 percent (i.e.,

i = :00625 at a quarterly rate). We set the intertemporal substitution elasticity
consistent with log utility over consumption.18

= 1; which is

The habit parameter { is set to 0:8: This value

is on the higher side of the range of estimates in the empirical literature, but helps our model
generate a fairly plausible path for the aggregate spending multiplier, even if somewhat lower than
estimated by e.g., Blanchard and Perotti (2002). The Frisch elasticity of labor supply of
and capital share of

1

= 0:4

= 0:3 are in the typical range speci…ed in the literature. The government

share of steady state output is set to 23 percent (gy = 0:23); which is in line with the average
government spending share of GDP in the euro area in recent years.
Our benchmark model assumes that the currency union central bank follows a Taylor-rule in
equation (A.27) that is somewhat more aggressive on in‡ation than a standard Taylor rule, and
17
The sizeable disparity between the import share of consumption and that of GDP re‡ects that nearly a quarter
of output is devoted to government spending.
18
The scale parameter on the consumption taste shock is set to 0:01 (this parameter is set to have a negligible
impact on model dynamics).

21

thus sets

= 2:5, and

x

= 0:125.

4. Impulse Response to Higher Core Government Spending
Figure 3 examines the e¤ects of a positive shock to core government spending that is scaled to
equal one percent of CU baseline GDP (i.e., 1.5 percent of core GDP). The government spending
hike is assumed to last 10 quarters, after which spending returns to its baseline level; this spending
path is captured by an MA(10) in our scenarios.
We begin by considering impulse responses in normal times in which monetary policy is unconstrained by the zero lower bound. These responses are shown in the left column of Figure 3. From
an aggregate perspective, the higher core spending boosts CU output (the solid line in panel A), CU
in‡ation (panel C), and induces the central bank to raise the policy rate (panel E). Output rises
well above potential (not shown) because the Taylor rule implies that real interest rates increase by
somewhat less than the potential real rate (recalling equation 3); the positive output gap in turn
boosts in‡ation. The CU output multiplier is less than unity due to some crowding out of private
consumption, though habit persistence dampens these crowding-out e¤ects, and hence raises the
spending multiplier relative to a speci…cation abstracting from habit. As discussed above, these
e¤ects on the CU are identical to those that would obtain in a closed economy model.
Turning to the compositional e¤ects across core and periphery, it is evident that the stimulus
to real GDP is con…ned exclusively to the core. While core output (dash-dotted line in panel A)
rises more than 1 percent above baseline for the duration of the spending hike –consistent with a
average spending multiplier of about 0.8 – periphery output (the dashed line) contracts modestly
in the short-run.

The relatively large increase in core GDP causes core in‡ation to run above

periphery in‡ation for some time, and the implied depreciation of the periphery’s terms of trade
(the dashed line in panel E) boosts periphery real net exports. However, because the rise in core

22

government spending triggers a sharp rise in real interest rates, the stimulus to periphery GDP
from higher real net exports is swamped by a fall in periphery consumption.
To shed more light on why the output e¤ects of core spending hikes are strongly tilted towards
the core, it is useful to recall how relative aggregate demand yDt yDt is a¤ected by core government
spending (from equation 15a)):
yDt

yDt = gy (1

!g

! g )(gt

gt ) +

t

+ cy (1

!c

! c )(ct

ct ):

(23)

With the import share of government spending set to zero (! g = ! g = 0), a 1.5 percent of GDP rise
in core government spending (i.e., gy gt = :015) would cause periphery relative demand yDt
fall by a commensurate amount if the terms of trade
case neither relative consumption ct

t

yDt to

remained unchanged, re‡ecting that in this

ct nor relative trade ‡ows (captured by the term

t)

would

adjust. Given sluggish price adjustment, the terms of trade in fact changes very little in the nearterm, which accounts for why core output in fact rises nearly 1.5 percent above periphery output
(panel A) immediately following the shock.

Subsequently, the gap between core and periphery

output narrows as terms of trade depreciation (panel E) boosts periphery real net exports while
causing core real net exports to contract, and also induces periphery consumption to rise relative
to core consumption.19
Even so, the …gure shows that this “rebalancing”towards the periphery isn’t particularly large
over the period in which the …scal expansion remains in force.
relative trade ‡ows

t

The adjustment coming from

is quite modest because sluggish price adjustment damps the movements in

the terms of trade (panel F shows that the depreciation peaks at only 0.7 percent), and because
the trade responsiveness parameter

is fairly small (around 0.3) given observed trade shares and

our calibration of trade price elasticities of around unity.20 Similarly, periphery consumption rises
19
Our model constrains the “local currency multiplier” to be less than unity (as the 1.5 percent of GDP rise in
core spending relative to periphery spending causes core output to rise by less than 1.5 percent relative to periphery
output). The model of Section 6 includes hand to mouth agents that allow the local currency multiplier to be
considerably larger, and closer to the empirical estimates mentioned in Section 2.
20
Only about one quarter of the 1.5 percent “autonomous” shift in demand towards the core is o¤set by relative

23

only slightly above core consumption.21
We next consider the e¤ects of core …scal expansion in a liquidity trap. The right column of
Figure 3 shows the e¤ects of the same 1.5 percent of GDP rise in core government spending in
a liquidity trap lasting 12 quarters; the liquidity trap is generated from an adverse consumption
taste shock that persistently depresses the potential real rate rtCU;pot :22 At an aggregate CU level,
the highly accommodative monetary policy stance in a liquidity trap makes …scal expansion more
potent in stimulating output and in‡ation than under the Taylor rule which is in force in normal
times. CU output expands around 1.3 percent after four quarters in a 12 quarter liquidity trap (the
solid line in panel B) rather than 0.7 percent in the case of no liquidity trap (the solid line in panel
A), with the larger expansion re‡ecting that private consumption is “crowded in”rather than out by
a fall in real interest rates. These aggregate implications are consistent with an extensive literature
showing that …scal policy has ampli…ed e¤ects in a liquidity trap, cf. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2011) and Woodford (2011). Consistent with this literature, the stimulus to CU output
due to …scal expansion quickly dissipates once government spending reverts to its initial level.
The more accommodative monetary policy stance in a liquidity trap relative to normal times
imparts a commensurate degree of stimulus to each CU member, recalling from Section 2 that the
gap between the output responses in the core and periphery is invariant to monetary policy. Thus,
as can be seen by comparing panel B with panel A, the output responses in both the periphery
and core in panel B are shifted up by the same exactly the same amount in percent terms relative
to the case of no liquidity trap (e.g., about 0.5 percent after four quarters). Output still expands
by considerably more in the core, but the spillovers to the periphery are now positive and sizeable.
A liquidity trap, in e¤ect, “lifts all boats” in tandem relative to normal times. Intuitively, both
price changes after 10 quarters (the …nal quarter of the government spending hike).
21
Recalling the discussion in section 3, periphery consumption rises more than core consumption because periphery
expected in‡ation exceeds core in‡ation (given that core prices initially rise by more, and that relative prices must
converge in the long-run).
22
The taste shock is assumed to follow a …rst order autoregression with persistence of 0.9.

24

periphery and core GDP are boosted by the same degree because ECB policy rates do not rise
in a liquidity trap – which provides equivalent stimulus to each member state – and due to the
expansionary e¤ect this more accommodative policy stance has on in‡ation in each member.
The larger GDP e¤ects on both the periphery and core in a liquidity trap are due to a larger
response of consumption relative to normal times. By contrast, given that real net exports depend
only on the consumption gap ct ct and terms of trade –both of which are invariant to the stance of
monetary policy –the response of real net exports turns out to be the same in a liquidity trap as in
normal times. Our results showing ampli…ed spillovers are consistent with the qualitative analysis
of Farhi and Werning (2012), who also underscore how a crowding in of private consumption plays
a key role in generating positive output spillovers in a liquidity trap.
Overall, changes in core government spending seem likely to exert substantial e¤ects on periphery output in a deep liquidity trap. Under such conditions, a core government spending hike
increases periphery GDP through qualitatively similar channels as would an easing of monetary policy (if the periphery had an independent monetary policy): lower real interest rates boost periphery
consumption, and terms of trade depreciation stimulates net exports. However, a key di¤erence is
that a (hypothetical) monetary easing by the periphery central bank would depress nominal interest rates and raise in‡ation, while the core …scal expansion we consider relies exclusively on higher
in‡ation to reduce real interest rates.23 A more subtle di¤erence –but which may have important
implications for welfare, as we explore in Section 5 –is that the stimulus to periphery GDP is very
drawn out.

As seen in Figure 3, periphery output (panel B) remains elevated for several years,

even after the government spending shock has died out and CU GDP returned to baseline. These
longer-term expansionary e¤ects re‡ect that periphery in‡ation must run persistently above core
in‡ation in the medium-run (panel D) to allow relative prices to converge back to their pre-shock
23

Moreover, under an independent monetary policy in the periphery, the periphery nominal and real exchange
rate would depreciate immediately.

25

level. Thus, …scal stimulus can have longer-lived distributional e¤ects on member states through
relative price channels even if the aggregate CU output e¤ects dissipate quickly.

4.1. The Longer the Liquidity Trap, the Stronger the Spillover E¤ects
A key question is how the e¤ects of a core spending expansion vary with the expected duration
of the liquidity trap. The upper panels of Figure 4 show the e¤ect of the same core government
spending expansion on both periphery output (left panel) and core output (right panel) for liquidity
traps ranging in duration from zero quarters (normal times) to 12 quarters. The e¤ects are derived
as the average response over the …rst four quarters following the stimulus, and hence can essentially
be read o¤ the IRFs in Figure 3 for both the normal times case and for the 12 quarter trap. The
…gure indicates that an expansion of core spending is “counterproductive” to the aim of boosting
periphery output even in a liquidity trap lasting up to about a year: periphery output falls slightly,
while the GDP stimulus accrues wholly to the core.
Our result that the spillovers to the periphery are negative in a shorter-lived liquidity trap –
and that the aggregate multipliers are fairly modest –may seem surprising in light of the literature
suggesting a sharp disparity between the e¤ects of …scal expansion between a liquidity trap and
normal times.

There are three important reasons for why a short-lived liquidity trap doesn’t

look too di¤erent from normal times in our baseline model.
for substantial habit persistence in consumption.

The …rst reason is that we allow

This allays the strong “crowding out” e¤ects

on consumption that would occur in normal times when interest rates rise in response to higher
government spending, while limiting the crowding in e¤ects due to lower real interest rates in a
liquidity trap.
The second reason –explored more fully below –is that in‡ation is much less responsive under
our calibration than often assumed in the literature.

26

The third reason is that government spending shock is assumed to follow an MA(10), and
hence persists well beyond the duration of the shorter-lived liquidity traps considered in the …gure.
As emphasized by Woodford (2011) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2012), this …scal
overhang attenuates the aggregate CU multiplier relative to a “ideally-structured”…scal intervention
that dissipates before the economy exits the liquidity trap. In particular, to the extent that …scal
spending was expected to remain high even after the economy exited the liquidity trap, long-term
interest rates would be pushed up, generating negative spillovers to the periphery in short-lived
traps. It turns out that spillovers to the periphery would always be positive – even in a transient
liquidity trap – provided that the core spending only rose during the period in which monetary
policy was constrained by the ZLB. However, practical impediments would make it unlikely to
achieve a rapid phase-in and phase-out within a few quarters; and moreover, even if such a nimble
…scal response was feasible, the short duration wouldn’t provide much, if any, stimulus to the
periphery (since in‡ation wouldn’t rise much).24
Somewhat more broadly, our results underscore that core …scal expansion would probably only
be likely to boost periphery GDP noticeably if the central bank was expected to remain accommodative for a fairly prolonged period of a couple of years or more.

We should add that some

caution is warranted with respect to the quantitative estimates from this simple model, as it tends
to understate spillovers relative to the policy-oriented model in Section 6; but this main conclusion
is robust.

4.2. The Steeper the Phillips Curve, the Stronger the Spillover E¤ects
While slow price adjustment seems consistent with Europe’s experience since the Great Recession,
it is possible that the Phillips Curve slope is higher than we have assumed in our benchmark
24
As Cogan et al (2010) have pointed out, only around a third of the increased U.S. federal spending on goods
and services authorized by the American Reconstruction and Recovery Act was earmarked to be spent within the
…rst two years of the ARRA’s passage in February 2009.

27

calibration.

Accordingly, Figure 5 shows IRFs to the core spending shock under a calibration

with a steeper Phillips Curve slope: speci…cally, we set
parameter of

mc

p

= 0:88, implying a Phillips Curve slope

= .017, which is slightly above the median point estimates in the literature

mentioned earlier.
In normal times, the faster terms of trade adjustment (panel E) generates more rebalancing
towards the periphery than in the benchmark: However, monetary policy also raises interest rates
(panel E) by more given the bigger increase in in‡ation. As a result, CU output rises by less, and
periphery output still contracts (as under the benchmark calibration).
The …scal expansion under the higher Phillips Curve slope does have dramatically di¤erent
implications than in the benchmark in a persistent liquidity trap. With the higher Phillips Curve
slope, the higher in‡ation implies much lower real interest rates, and consequently a much larger
expansion of CU GDP (comparing panel B of Figure 5 with panel B of Figure 3). With the larger
rebalancing e¤ect now reinforced by the bigger real interest rate decline, periphery GDP rises over
1 12 percent in a 12 quarter liquidity trap, over half as much as core GDP. The dashed lines in the
upper panels of Figure 4 show how the e¤ects on core and periphery GDP vary with the duration
of the liquidity trap under this alternative calibration.
This calibration is useful for highlighting conditions that might give rise to very large positive
…scal spillovers, and is of particular interest given that calibrations of the Phillips Curve slope in
this range are often used in the literature. Although the implied responsiveness of in‡ation seems
somewhat of a stretch in light of the Great Recession experience, the scenario does underscore
some upside risk to …scal spillovers if in‡ation proves more responsive than assumed under the
benchmark.

28

4.3. The Larger the Import Content of Spending, the Stronger the Spillover E¤ects
Policymakers often draw attention to terms of trade adjustment as a key channel through which
the periphery might bene…t from a core …scal expansion. But with sluggish price adjustment, the
stimulus accruing through this channel is likely to be quite modest. Accordingly, we next consider
how allowing for a sizeable component of core spending to fall on periphery imports could facilitate
rebalancing the aggregate demand stimulus more evenly across the core and periphery.
In an extreme case in which the core government spending was disbursed equally across currency
union members according to population size – a “no home bias” case in which ! G = 1/3 and ! G
= 2/3 – equation (23) indicates that the periphery and core would share equally in the stimulus.
Figure 6 shows the e¤ects in a less extreme case when the import share of core government spending
! G is set to 0.20 (20 percent of government spending in the steady state).

As this reallocation

of spending has no consequences for CU aggregates, the e¤ects of the core spending hike on CU
output are identical to Figure 3 (in which ! G = 0): However, the changes in the pattern of GDP
response across core and periphery are striking: the rise in periphery GDP is more than half as
large as the rise in core GDP even in normal times. Thus, core spending may provide considerable
stimulus to the periphery even in a short-lived liquidity trap if it falls substantially on periphery
imports. As seen in the bottom panels of Figure 4, the boost to both periphery (and core) GDP
is even larger in a long-lived liquidity trap.
Overall, these results underscore how direct purchases may allow core …scal spending to have
much more balanced e¤ects on core and periphery output even if terms of trade adjustment is quite
sluggish. It is important to note, however, that the greater spillovers to periphery GDP re‡ect a
larger boost to periphery real net exports than in the baseline without direct purchases; periphery
consumption actually rises a bit less than under our baseline calibration.25 As we will discuss in
25
Because the output expansion is more balanced across regions, there is less upward pressure on the terms of trade;
and hence periphery in‡ation doesn’t have to rise as much to bring relative prices back to their long-run equilibrium

29

the next section, these compositional e¤ects turn out to be consequential in evaluating the extent
to which increasing the import share of government purchases a¤ects welfare.

5. Welfare E¤ects of Higher Core Government Spending
The literature analyzing the e¤ects of …scal expansion in a liquidity trap has largely focused on
environments which abstract from di¤erences in economic conditions across countries or states.
The implicit assumption is that each member of a common currency area – whether a country or
state –faces an equally severe downturn, and would get a similar boost in government spending if
a stimulus package were enacted. The situation facing policymakers in Europe is di¤erent in two
important respects.

First, resource slack in the periphery economies is much larger than in the

core, and in‡ation is correspondingly more subdued. Second, assuming that …scal stimulus would
have to come mainly from the core economies, the expansionary e¤ects on CU GDP would be likely
to be concentrated in the core economies.
These asymmetries across member states – both in initial business cycle positions, and in
the e¤ects of …scal policy – have important implications for gauging the welfare e¤ects of …scal
expansion.

In this section, we illustrate some of the considerations that would seem relevant in

designing a …scal stimulus program in this environment.
To conduct our analysis, we use two alternative measures of welfare.

First, we assume a

standard ad hoc loss function in which the policymaker only cares about minimizing squared output
gaps and in‡ation gaps in both the core and periphery economies:
LCP
t =

1X
4
s=0

s

n h

P er
Dt+s

2

+

y

er
xPt+s

2

i

+ (1

)

h

Core
Dt+s

2

+

y

xCore
t+s

2

io

;

(24)

Thus, the welfare loss LCP
is population-weighted average of the loss function for each CU member
t
(core or periphery). Each region’s loss function is simply a sum of the squared in‡ation gap and
level. This smaller rise in periphery expected in‡ation translates into a smaller rise in periphery consumption.

30

squared output gap, with the parameter
to 1=3 for each region.

y

determining the relative weight on the output gap set

The in‡ation target

is set to 2 percent. While this loss function is

admittedly simple, it helps address the interesting question of the extent to which …scal policy can
substitute for monetary policy when the latter is constrained by the ZLB by “…lling in” output
and in‡ation gaps.26

Our second welfare measure – considered in Section 5.2 – is based on the

discounted utility of households in our model.

5.1. Welfare Results under Ad Hoc Loss Function
5.1.1. Fiscal Expansion in Core and Periphery (Fiscal Union)
As a useful reference point for assessing the e¤ects of a core-only …scal expansion, we …rst consider
the welfare e¤ects of …scal expansion under the assumption that the euro area countries were part
of a …scal union.

From the perspective of the euro area as a whole, there would seem a strong

rationale for …scal expansion under current conditions: output gaps are large, in‡ation is below
target, and monetary policy is likely to be constrained by the ZLB for a prolonged period. A …scal
union would presumably give more scope to the periphery economies to expand domestic …scal
spending than in the current environment in which concerns about debt sustainability and adverse
market reactions appear to impose tight constraints. Exactly how much latitude is unclear, as it
would depend on the speci…c features of the …scal compact. However, it seems plausible that such
a union might allow an expansion in euro area government spending that was distributed roughly
equally across member states on a per capita basis.27 Accordingly, we assume that each member
state boosts …scal spending by a commensurate amount under …scal union.
The welfare bene…ts of a …scal stimulus program clearly depend on how output and in‡ation
26
This assumption would seem most reasonable to the extent that the additional stimulus is on goods for which
there was considerable scope to substitute purchases intertemporally (e.g., construction or transport equipment).
27
The large-scale expansion of U.S. …scal spending authorized in 2009 under the ARRA was reasonably balanced
across U.S. states in per capita terms (Orr and Sporn, 2012), notwithstanding that spending on some components of
these programs (such as unemployment compensation) varied with regional economic conditions.

31

gaps in the core and periphery would evolve absent any …scal stimulus.
adverse consumption demand shocks (i.e., lower

t)

Our baseline assumes

cause a prolonged recession in the euro area

that is especially concentrated in the periphery.28 The solid lines in Figure 7 depict this baseline.
Speci…cally, the output gap in the core (the solid line in panel C) is about

2 percent at the end

of 2015 and nearly closes within three years; whereas the output gap in the periphery (panel D) is
about

5 percent initially, and slack remains sizeable even after a few years. In‡ation stays well

below 2 percent in both the core (panel E) and periphery (panel F), but runs particularly low in the
periphery (with some de‡ation on average in 2015).29 Our calibration of the Taylor rule implies
that the CU interest rate remains pinned at zero for 12 quarters (noting that the policy rate is
expressed as an annualized percentage rate, or APR).

Table 1: Losses under Baseline: Ad Hoc Welfare Function

Discounted Loss

Overall Loss LCP
t

Core

Periphery

21.5

12.5

39.5

LCP
t

Note: The overall loss
is based on eq. (24) for 2015:Q1 to 2020:Q4. The core and periphery losses are based
on their respective discounted squared in‡ation and output gaps with y = 1=3:

Table 1 reports the losses under the welfare measure (24) that are derived from cumulating the
discounted squared output and in‡ation gaps from 2015:Q1 to 2020:Q4; given that the e¤ects of the
…scal actions we consider on output and in‡ation gaps are small after six years, the welfare gains
reported below would change very little if the horizon were extended beyond that period. Clearly,
28
The e¤ects of …scal stimulus on output and in‡ation gaps analyzed below do not hinge on the particular type
of shock(s) driving the output gap in the baseline. Other shocks, such as the productivity shocks zt and zt ; would
yield similar results if calibrated to imply the same evolution of the core and periphery output gaps as shown in
Figure 7 (i.e., both the positive e¤ects would be similar, as well as the normative implications under the quadratic
criterion). This invariance re‡ects the tight link between output gaps and in‡ation in our benchmark model, and
would not obtain if there were features such as wage rigidities that implied tradeo¤s. It is important to note that
the welfare results under the utility-based criterion considered in Section 5.2 do depend somewhat on the nature of
the shocks driving the output and in‡ation gaps, re‡ecting that welfare depends on the evolution of consumption and
other variables; however, we found that experimenting with di¤erent underlying shocks had relatively little e¤ect on
our results (provided that the alternative shocks implied similar output gap and in‡ation responses).
29
The output gaps in the baseline are broadly similar –albeit somewhat smaller –to those forecast by the OECD
in its interim economic outlook that was released in March 2015 (for example, the OECD projects that the output
gap in the euro area will be about 3 percent in 2015, compared with 2-1/2 percent in our baseline, and almost 6
percent in the periphery, compared with 4 percent in our baseline). The large and persistent output gaps in the
baseline in turn imply considerable downward pressure on in‡ation, notwithstanding that Phillips Curve slope is very
‡at under our baseline calibration; under more typical calibrations of Phillips Curve slope used in the literature, the
decline in in‡ation would be even sharper.

32

losses are heavily concentrated in the periphery.
Against this backdrop, we assume that a CU-wide …scal stimulus is initiated that boosts government spending by 1 percent of baseline GDP in both the core and periphery. The stimulus begins in
the same quarter as the adverse shocks and lasts 12 quarters, and thus is “well-timed” to coincide
with the period in which monetary policy is constrained. We compute the model solution –both
under the baseline and for the scenario with higher …scal spending – using a nonlinear solution
algorithm for solving perfect foresight models in DYNARE.30
The blue dashed lines in Figure 7 labelled “Fiscal Union: CU-Wide Stimulus” show the e¤ects
of this …scal expansion.

The joint …scal expansion narrows the periphery output gap (panel D)

substantially – as well as the gap between periphery in‡ation (panel F) and the 2 percent target –
while nearly closing the core output gap (panel C). Panel A in Table 2 reports the welfare gains from
…scal stimulus, which is measured as the di¤erence between the welfare loss assuming no stimulus
(from Table 1) and the welfare loss under the stimulus program.

Aggregate welfare improves

substantially, with welfare losses cut by half relative to the baseline.

While both the core and

periphery experience welfare improvements, the periphery experiences much larger absolute gains
given the large initial output and in‡ation gaps in that region (which are penalized heavily under
the quadratic objective).
Fiscal policy in this setting is similar to monetary policy insofar as both forms of stimulus
operate with equal force on each member state, and hence can’t close output (and in‡ation) gaps
in each.

Larger welfare improvements could be achieved by channeling relatively more of the

…scal stimulus to the periphery where the marginal value of additional stimulus is higher – and
thus essentially using core and periphery spending as separate instruments to “…ll gaps” in each
30

We assume in our simulations below that the CU central bank does not counteract the core …scal stimulus by
raising rates any earlier than in the absence of stimulus. This limited form of commitment modestly ampli…es the
stimulus from the …scal expansion. Upon exit, policy rates follow the Taylor rule, and thus eventually react to the
higher demand caused by the …scal expansion.

33

member state.31

Of course, political economy considerations could well preclude such targeted

spending.

Table 2: Gains From Fiscal Expansion: Ad Hoc Welfare Function
Panel A: Welfare Gains under Fiscal Union
Currency Union

Core

Periphery

11.2

7.8

18.1

Panel B: Welfare Gains under “Core Only” Fiscal Expansion
Currency Union

Core

Periphery

Benchmark (! G = 0)

10.4

8.3

14.5

High Import Share (! G = 0:2)

10.9

7.9

16.8

Note: The table reports absolute gains, computed as Loss

Baseline

LossScenario .

5.1.2. Fiscal Expansion only in Core
We next assess how a …scal expansion that was concentrated exclusively in the core would a¤ect
welfare in both the core and periphery; for comparability with the previous analysis, we continue
to assume that the core spending hike equals 1 percent of CU GDP. As seen by the red dotted lines
in Figure 7 labeled “Core Only Stimulus,” the core spending hike provides a much larger boost to
core GDP and in‡ation than to the periphery: the core output gap turns noticeably positive, while
the periphery output gap only narrows modestly.
The …rst row of Panel B in Table 2 reports the welfare gains under the core-only …scal expansion
under our benchmark calibration in which the import content of government spending is zero
(! G = 0). The core …scal expansion improves welfare by less than under the …scal union case
31

As is clear from previous work by Gali and Monacelli (2008), it would not be optimal to close output or in‡ation
gaps in each member state if there were some costs of expanding government spending (at least beyond a certain
level). First, it would be essential to balance any direct …scal costs against the bene…ts of reducing output (and
in‡ation) gaps. Second, the optimal policy would also take account of how current increases in government spending
a¤ected the terms of trade and hence future output (and in‡ation) gaps. In particular, higher periphery government
spending would boost periphery relative prices and thus tend to hurt periphery net exports in the future. Because
the optimal policy would take account of both the direct …scal costs and the loss in future competitiveness, it would
not be optimal to close the periphery output gap completely (and similarly for the core).

34

(reported in the upper panel), especially for the periphery.

This is because the core expansion

boosts aggregate demand relatively more in exactly the region (the core) in which it is “least
needed”according to the ad hoc welfare criterion. The disparity in the welfare results between the
core-only and …scal union cases would be even larger if the size of the …scal expansion under each
case were chosen optimally to maximize the quadratic welfare criterion (24): this re‡ects that the
optimal expansion turns out to be considerably larger under …scal union because …scal union allows
more of the …scal stimulus to be channeled to the region where its marginal value is comparatively
high.32
Even so, it is remarkable that the core-only …scal expansion does achieve a good portion of the
welfare gains that would accrue under …scal union.

Because output and in‡ation gaps are very

large in the periphery –and output spillovers to the periphery sizeable in a long-lived liquidity trap
– the periphery derives substantial bene…ts from core …scal expansion.

Moreover, even the core

bene…ts from a modest-sized expansion that can help pare its own output and in‡ation gap.
An expansion of government spending in the core would raise welfare even more if some of the
increase in core government spending was on imported periphery goods.

As we have shown in

Section 4.3, such an approach balances the stimulus to output and in‡ation more evenly across the
core and periphery, and thus appears more akin to …scal union than the case in which core spending
falls exclusively on domestically-produced goods. For a calibration with a high core import share
of 20 percent (! G = 0:2); the e¤ects of a core-only …scal expansion on output and in‡ation gaps
in each region are very similar to that achieved under …scal union (and hence not shown in Figure
7 for expositional reasons). By implication, Panel B in Table 2 shows that the welfare gains to
the currency union approach those achieved under …scal union, with both the core and periphery
32

The optimal spending hike under …scal union is 2.5 percent of CU GDP, while the optimal hike for the core-only
case is 3.1 percent of core GDP, which is equal to 2.1 percent of CU GDP. Under an optimally-sized …scal expansion,
the welfare gain to the CU is 18.0 under …scal union, compared with 14.9 under the core-only expansion.

35

experiencing nearly commensurate welfare gains.33

5.2. Welfare Results under Utility-Based Criterion
Our previous welfare results indicate that an expansion of core government spending may improve
periphery welfare considerably by shrinking the periphery’s sizeable output and in‡ation gaps; and
that comparatively large welfare improvements –for both core and periphery –may be achieved to
the extent that a larger share of core government spending falls on periphery imports.
We next consider the robustness of these normative results to an alternative welfare measure
based on the discounted conditional expected utility of the representative household in each member
state in our model:

Et

1
X
j=0

j

(

ln (Ct+j

{Ct+j

1

C

t+j )

(Nt+j )1+
#G
+
0
1 (Gt+j
1+
1
G

{G Gt+j

1)

1

1
G

)

:

(25)

Household utility depends positively on public and private consumption, and inversely on hours
worked. Welfare in the currency union on the “utility-based”metric is simply a population-weighted
average of the utility functionals of periphery and core households.34

5.2.1. Fiscal Expansion in Core and Periphery (Fiscal Union)
Panel A of Table 3 reports welfare gains under …scal union using the utility-based objective (25) :
Because we continue to assume that government spending in each CU member would expand by 1
percent of GDP under …scal union, the impulse responses are the same as in Figure 7 (the dashed
lines labelled “Fiscal Union”). The utility gains in the table are summarized in terms of the “con33
If a sizeable share of the rise in core government spending fell on periphery imports, then a rise in core government
spending would boost periphery GDP and welfare even in a short-lived liquidity trap, at least under this ad hoc welfare
metric.
34
To perform this welfare analysis, we assume that households regard government spending on goods and services
as somewhat more substitutable through time than private consumption, and that habit persistence is somewhat
lower (speci…cally, we set G = 2; so that the elasticity of substitution is 2, and the habit persistence parameter {G
= 0.4). Finally, we set #G to account for a steady steady share of government consumption to output of :23; and
0 so that N (hours worked per capita) equals unity in the steady state.

36

sumption equivalent compensation”(CEV henceforth), which is the permanent percent increase in
household private consumption –relative to the baseline with no …scal expansion –that is required
to make households equally well o¤ as under the government spending expansion. Following the
usual approach in the literature, household welfare depends on how the …scal expansion a¤ects the
entire in…nite discounted sum of period utility. The aggregate CU CEV is a population-weighted
average over the core and periphery.

Table 3: Welfare Gains From Fiscal Expansion: Utility-Based
Panel A: Welfare Gains under Fiscal Union
Aggregate CU

Core

Periphery

.015

.008

.028

Panel B: Welfare Gains under “Core Only” Fiscal Expansion
Aggregate CU

Core

Periphery

Benchmark (! G = 0)

.010

.013

.002

High Import Share (! G = 0:2)

.012

.027

-.018

Note: The table report consumption equivalent compensation (CEV henceforth) , i.e., the percent increase in
households’ consumption that makes them— in expectation— equally well-o¤ under no …scal stimulus as when core
government spending expands. Aggregate CEV is calculated as the weighted sum of CEV in the core and periphery.

As under the ad hoc loss criterion above, the equal-sized …scal expansion in each CU member
is strongly welfare-improving.

Fiscal expansion is bene…cial because it boosts utility directly

through increasing government services, and indirectly through inducing an expansion of private
consumption, with the latter re‡ecting that the higher in‡ation induced by the …scal expansion
reduces real interest rates. Crucially, this increase in utility from public and private goods comes
at a low cost in terms of foregone leisure because labor is underutilized and in‡ation suboptimally
low. The low level of in‡ation is undesirable because it implies substantial ine¢ ciency in goods
production in our modeling framework with staggered price setting (Rotemberg and Woodford,
1997), and hence acts like a tax on production; accordingly, a key bene…t of …scal expansion is
that it boosts productivity by pushing in‡ation closer to target (assumed to be 2 percent). Aside
37

from the implication –clear from Panel A in Table 3 –that the periphery bene…ts more from …scal
expansion due to its relatively large degree of slack, the logic favoring …scal expansion under …scal
union closely parallels that provided by Woodford (2011) for a closed economy.

In particular,

because the …scal expansion is the same in each CU member, it has no e¤ect on the terms of trade
or net exports; accordingly, all of induced expansion in employment goes to increasing either public
or private consumption.

5.2.2. Fiscal Expansion only in Core
The utility-based metric in e¤ect poses a much more stringent test than the simple ad hoc loss function (24) for assessing whether increases in core government spending improves periphery welfare:
assuming as we do that the periphery gets no direct utility bene…ts from the higher core government
spending (e.g., from better roads in France), periphery welfare only improves if the core spending
hike boosts periphery consumption enough to o¤set the cost of working additional hours. Thus,
the composition of the rise in periphery GDP matters a great deal for welfare, as well as the timing
of the rise in consumption. Even if the periphery output gap is large and the output spillovers to
the periphery fairly big–conditions that lead to substantial periphery welfare improvements under
the simple quadratic loss function – periphery welfare may fall under the utility-based criterion if
the rise in periphery GDP is driven by net exports, or if the stimulus persists too long.
As seen in Panel B in Table 3 (above), the expansion of core spending in the case in which the
import content is zero (! G = 0) yields an improvement in core welfare.

Core welfare improves

because the core’s sizeable resource slack makes it less costly –and hence more desirable –to produce
more government services.

The e¤ects on periphery welfare are more complicated.

Periphery

discounted welfare improves, though by much less than core welfare. This re‡ects that the core
…scal expansion boosts the period utility of periphery households in the near-term, but has slightly

38

negative e¤ects on their period utility at horizons much beyond a year.
Figure 8 is helpful for understanding these results, as it shows the “partial e¤ects”of a rise in core
government spending on key components of household welfare.35 Focusing …rst on our benchmark
case with ! G = 0 – shown by the red dotted lines – it is evident that periphery consumption
(panel B), real net exports (panel F), and employment (panel D) each respond positively to the
core spending shock. As might be expected in a deep recession, the bene…ts of the rise in periphery
(private) consumption outweigh the cost in terms of labor e¤ort at least in the near-term, which
accounts for why the period utility of the representative periphery household (panel H) improves
for over a year.

Some of the improvement in periphery household utility re‡ects that the core

spending hike boosts periphery in‡ation from a suboptimally low level, and this reduced in‡ation
tax distortion means that less labor is required to produce any given quantity of output.
It may seem surprising that the core …scal expansion doesn’t provide an even more sustained
boost to periphery welfare: after all, the periphery responses look very similar qualitatively to
the usual e¤ects of a favorable monetary shock under an independent monetary policy, insofar as
lower periphery real interest rates crowd in consumption, and a depreciation of the periphery’s
terms of trade boosts real net exports. Monetary stimulus of this type might be expected to be
very bene…cial given the periphery’s poor initial conditions. However, to achieve welfare bene…ts
under the metric (25), it is critical that the policy action boost consumption in the near-term
when the gap between the marginal utility of consumption and disutility of work is especially large.
From the prism of the utility-based welfare metric, there are two key problems with how the core
…scal expansion a¤ects the periphery. First, a sizeable share of the expansion in periphery output –
about 1/4 under our benchmark calibration –is due to higher real net exports rather than increased
periphery consumption; in e¤ect, this diversion of employment towards net exports operates like a
35

Thus, the …gure shows the deviation between the responses that include a rise in core government spending
(layered onto the baseline) and the baseline.

39

tax, because it means that the rise in periphery employment is associated with a smaller near-term
consumption boost. Second, the stimulus to periphery consumption is very spread out over time, as
evident in panel B (and discussed previously in Section 4.3). The protracted consumption response
re‡ects that periphery in‡ation remains elevated for a long time –which holds down periphery real
interest rates –to allow the terms of trade to converge back to its pre-shock level. This longer-term
boost to periphery consumption, coming as it does after periphery consumption would have largely
recovered even absent …scal stimulus, simply isn’t worth the labor cost.
These considerations also help explain why an expansion of core spending causes periphery
welfare to deteriorate considerably – as reported in Panel B in Table 3 – in the case in which
core imports are sizeable (! G = 0:2): These results di¤er dramatically from the implications of the
ad hoc loss function in which the higher import content was a major plus for welfare in both CU
members. As we have seen –and is also shown by the blue dashed lines in Figure 8 –the periphery
GDP expansion under the higher import share calibration is more heavily driven by net exports,
which the utility-based welfare measure views as undesirable.
As might be expected, a core government spending hike yields a larger improvement in periphery
household welfare if initial conditions are noticeably worse than assumed in Figures 7 and 8. To
illustrate this, Table 4 reports the e¤ects of the same core government spending expansion against
an alternative baseline in which output gaps in each member are much larger (slightly below minus
8 percent in the periphery, and close to minus 3 percent in the core), and in‡ation falls well
below zero in the currency union as a whole.

Periphery period utility – as well as CU welfare

– improves very persistently under these conditions, leading to an improvement in the discounted
welfare measure. The output spillovers to the periphery are not only larger than under the initial
conditions underlying Figures 7 and 8, but fueled by a bigger consumption rise; moreover, the
welfare bene…ts of boosting both consumption and in‡ation are larger given the poorer initial

40

conditions.

Table 4: Welfare Gains of Core Fiscal Expansion
under More Adverse Baseline: Utility-Based
Aggregate CU

Core

Periphery

Benchmark (! G = 0)

0.021

.027

.010

High Import Share (! G = 0:2)

0.024

.040

-0.007

Note: The table reports consumption equivalent compensation (CEV henceforth) , i.e., the percent increase in
households’ consumption that makes them— in expectation— equally well-o¤ under no …scal stimulus as when core
government spending expands. Aggregate CEV is calculated as the weighted sum of CEV in the core and periphery.

Taking stock of our results, each of the alternative welfare measures we have considered – ad
hoc and utility-based – suggests that a suitably-designed …scal stimulus program in the core can
improve near-term welfare in both the periphery and core. The welfare improvements under each
measure are clearly larger and more persistent the worse the baseline and longer monetary policy is
likely to be constrained from raising interest rates. Welfare improvements would also be larger if
spillovers to periphery consumption were bigger than in our baseline (as would occur if e.g., prices
were more ‡exible than in our benchmark). However, there is clearly some tension between how the
welfare measures score policy actions which reduce the periphery output gap signi…cantly, but don’t
provide much short-run stimulus to consumption. This tension can have important implications
for the design of a core stimulus program, and in particular, for assessing the desirability of a higher
import content of core government purchases.
Our sense is that the utility-based analysis is useful for highlighting how the welfare e¤ects of
…scal expansion depend partly on how the stimulus a¤ects the composition of demand – between
consumption and net exports – and that …scal policy may have long-lived e¤ects arising through
relative price channels that may possibly reduce welfare. Even so, the utility-based welfare metric probably understates some of the bene…ts of reducing the output gap and unemployment in
economies plagued by high resource slack. Indeed, our model embeds two key assumptions – of

41

perfect consumption risk-sharing, and that all variation in labor e¤ort occurs at the intensive margin – that tend to minimize the costs of a large output gap, and correspondingly, to understate
the bene…ts of …scal expansion.

While these assumptions are useful for analytical tractability,

household consumption in reality depends heavily on each household’s employment status. These
considerations suggest that policies that could markedly reduce the periphery’s output gap –and as
a result, reduce both unemployment and consumption dispersion across households –would probably enhance periphery welfare. All in all, our sense is that the welfare bene…ts of …scal expansion
probably lie between the two measures, but tilt more in the direction suggested by the simple ad
hoc loss function.

6. The E¤ects of a Core Spending Expansion in a Larger Scale Model
The benchmark model is useful for highlighting many of the key factors likely to shape how a core
…scal expansion would a¤ect the periphery. However, the benchmark model likely understates both
the aggregate e¤ects of core …scal expansion and spillovers to the periphery due to the exclusion of
Keynesian multiplier and accelerator e¤ects on household and business spending. A consequence is
that the aggregate government spending multiplier is relatively modest even in a persisent liquidity
trap (unless in‡ation rises more than under our baseline calibration).
Accordingly, we next reconsider the e¤ects of a core government spending expansion in a largerscale two country model with endogenous investment that closely follows Erceg and Linde (2013).
Abstracting from open economy features, the speci…cation of each country block builds heavily on
the estimated models of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (CEE, 2005) and Smets and Wouters
(2003, 2007). Thus, the model includes both sticky nominal wages and prices, allowing for some
intrinsic persistence in both components; habit persistence in consumption; and embeds a Q theory
investment speci…cation modi…ed so that changing the level of investment (rather than the capital

42

stock) is costly. However, our model departs from this earlier literature by assuming that some
fraction of households are “Keynesian,” and simply consume their current after-tax income in a
hand-to-mouth fashion; this contrasts with our benchmark model which assumes that all households
make consumption decisions based on their permanent income. Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2007)
show that the inclusion of non-Ricardian households helps account for structural VAR evidence
indicating that private consumption rises in response to higher government spending. Although
the inclusion of hand-to-mouth agents increases the spending multiplier even in normal times, we
will show that the ampli…cation e¤ects are considerably larger in a liquidity trap, and in particular,
can help generate sizeable spillovers to the periphery even if the Phillips Curve is very ‡at.
On the open economy dimension, the model assumes producer currency pricing as in the benchmark. Financial markets are assumed to be incomplete, meaning that there is a single “internationally traded” bond available to core and periphery households. However, given that the trade price
elasticity is calibrated to be close to unity, the implications of incomplete markets are similar to
those of complete markets; as we have discussed above, even complete markets may allow for sizeable country-speci…c ‡uctuations in consumption given that households have di¤erent preferences
over goods (see Cole and Obstfeld, 1991, for a more detailed discussion).
Monetary policy is assumed to follow a Taylor-style rule, and government spending to evolve
exogenously. To satisfy intertemporal …scal balance, the distortionary tax rate on labor income is
assumed to adjust to both government debt and the change in government debt. We assume that
tax rates adjust inertially, so that a rise in government spending would mainly be de…cit-…nanced
(at least under normal conditions). A detailed description of the model is provided in Appendix
B.

43

6.1. Empirical Impulse Responses to Monetary and Fiscal Shocks in the Euro Area
We next use a structural vector autoregression estimated on euro area data over the 1970:1-2008:3
period to help gauge the dynamic e¤ects of both a monetary policy shock and a shock to euro
area government spending. We will use the empirical impulse responses to each of these shocks
both to estimate key parameters of our model –following the approach of CEE (2005) and Altig,
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (ACEL, 2011) –and to assess the model’s empirical …t.36
Speci…cally, we estimate a VAR where the vector

t

of endogenous variables is comprised of

government spending on goods and services (gt ), real GDP (yt ), real private consumption (ct ) ,
real gross investment (invt ), the GDP de‡ator in‡ation rate (

Dt ),

the nominal wage (wt ); and

the short-term interest rate (it ), which we interpret as the policy rate. Following the in‡uential
analysis of Angeloni et al. (2003), which estimated monetary transmission in euro area countries,
we also include commodity prices, U.S. output and the federal funds rate as exogenous variables
(collected in the vector

t ).

We assume that the endogenous variables collected in

t

can be

represented in reduced form as following a VAR of order p:
t

=

+ B (L)

t

+ B(L)

t 1

+ ut ;

(26)

Eut u0t = V;
where B(L) is a pth -ordered polynomial in the lag operator, L: The structural economic innovations
"t are related to the reduced form innovations ut by the relation:
ut = C"t ; E"t "0t = I,

(27)

where C is a square matrix and I is the identity matrix.
We identify the monetary and …scal spending innovations through imposing timing restrictions
on the VAR. Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999), we identify the monetary
36
Given the complications posed by the zero lower bound constraint and possible changes in the transmission
of monetary and …scal shocks following the global …nancial crisis, we limit the sample for our VAR analysis to the
pre-crisis period.

44

policy innovation by assuming that it has no contemporaneous e¤ect on aggregate quantities and
prices (i.e., all other variables are ordered before the short-term interest rate in the VAR). As in
Blanchard and Perotti (2002), we identify a government spending shock by assuming that government spending does not react contemporaneously to the remaining variables in the VAR, including
output.

This assumption seems reasonable over the pre-crisis period in light of our quarterly

estimation frequency, though clearly would be problematic after the onset of the …nancial crisis
(given that euro area governments quickly ramped up discretionary public spending in response
to current and prospective output declines).

These timing restrictions are implemented by a

standard Cholesky factorization of the matrix C which orders government spending …rst, and the
policy rate last, in the VAR.
The solid lines in Figure 9 shows the impulse responses of each variable to a one standard
deviation rise in the euro area policy rate, while 95 percent standard error bands (derived from
Monte Carlo simulations) are shaded.

A monetary policy innovation of about 40 basis points

causes output to contract gradually, with the size of the decline reaching about 0.2 percent after
two years. Private investment falls by more than GDP - presumably re‡ecting the high interest
sensitivity of many components of investment spending –while consumption falls roughly as much
as GDP. The policy tightening causes price in‡ation to fall about 0.1 percentage points after some
delay. The initial jump in in‡ation is consistent with a short-lived “price-level” puzzle typically
found in VAR studies of the e¤ects of monetary shocks, see e.g., CEE (2005).
The responses to the euro area government spending shock are shown by the solid lines in Figure
10. To facilitate interpretation and comparison with other estimates, we scale the shock to equal
one percent of euro area GDP, which corresponds to a rise in government spending of nearly 4 12
percent.37 The government spending shock boosts output persistently, and induces a substantial
37

The innovation to government spending is less than a tenth as large, about 0.4 percent.

45

crowding in of both private consumption and total gross investment at a horizon stretching out
almost two years. The actual output multiplier is about 1 12 at impact, and even somewhat higher
over the next year. Thus, government spending increases appear to have large and persistent e¤ects
on real activity, nothwithstanding a sizeable rise in the policy rate.

After some delay, in‡ation

also appears to rise somewhat, though con…dence intervals are wide.
The response of output to the monetary policy shock seems well in line with the evidence
provided by Angeloni et al. (2003) in a similar VAR framework (as noted above), though the
latter was estimated over an earlier 1965-2001 sample period. Moreover, the output responses are
remarkably similar quantitatively to typical estimates of the output response to a monetary policy
innovation in the United States: ACEL’s VAR, for example, implies that a 40 basis point rise in
the U.S. policy rate would cause U.S. output to fall 0.2-0.3 percent after about 6 quarters, and
Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2011) report similar results.
In some contrast, our implied estimate of the euro area government spending multiplier is
substantially higher than derived by Perotti (2007) for Germany in a similar VAR-based framework,
or that Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2011) found for a cross-section of OECD countries –many
of them European –based on a narrative approach to identifying …scal shocks in the spirit of Romer
and Romer (2010). Similarly, the U.S. government spending multiplier is usually estimated to be
around unity –as in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) –or somewhat below, at least in normal times
in which policy rates can adjust freely. Thus, while the high government spending multiplier we
estimate in the euro area suggest the importance of Keynesian-style multiplier e¤ects on private
demand, some caution is probably warranted in light of the relatively modest variation in euro area
government spending over the past several decades, and given that evidence for other countries –
and derived by alternative methods –points to somewhat lower multipliers in normal times.38
38

The estimated impulse responses do not seem particularly sensitive to shortening the sample period (i.e., starting
in the early 1980s), nor to adopting a more parsimonious speci…cation of the VAR.

46

6.2. Matching Model Responses to Empirical Responses
We follow the basic approach of CEE (2005) and ACEL (2011) to estimate a subset of model
parameters so that the model-implied impulse responses – to both a monetary shock, and in our
case, to a government spending shock –match their empirical counterparts in Figures 9 and 10 as
closely as possible.

We estimate an aggregate version of the model under the assumption that

parameters are equal in both the core and periphery and then compare these aggregate implications
to the data. Our model is formulated so that it imposes the same timing restrictions as the empirical
VAR (speci…cally, that the monetary shock has no contemporanous e¤ects on other variables).
The vector of parameters

that we estimate play a key role in determining the interest sensi-

tivity of domestic demand and the slopes of the price and wage Phillips Curve. In particular, we
estimate the vector

= f{;

I ; P ; W ; G;

G;

Mg

where the parameters before the semicolon are

the external habit persistence parameter {, the parameter determining the costs of varying investment

I,

the price contract duration parameter

P,

and the wage contract duration parameter

W.

The parameters following the semicolon characterize the persistence of the AR(1) process determining government spending (of

G)

and its standard deviation

G.

The monetary innovation is

assumed to be i.i.d, but exerts persistent e¤ects given some structural persistence in the monetary
policy reaction function.
This parameter vector is estimated conditional on calibrating all other model parameters as
described in Appendix B. However, a couple of features of the calibration merit some discussion.
First, although we simply calibrate the share of Keynesian households, we set the population
share to 0:65 – and thus pin it towards the upper side of plausible empirical estimates – to help
better match the crowding in of private consumption evident in the response to a government
spending shock. This choice implies that Keynesian households account for about 1/3 of aggregate

47

consumption in the steady state.39

Second, we set the parameters of the monetary policy rule

according to a Taylor-style reaction function with a coe¢ cient of 2:5 on in‡ation, but allow for a
modest coe¢ cient of 0:7 on the lagged interest rate in line with most empirical estimates. As we
found little evidence of a response of the policy rate to the output gap (or output growth rate), we
set these coe¢ cients to zero when matching the empirical responses. Finally, the import content
of government spending in each country is assumed to be the same as for private consumption
spending –13 percent for the periphery, and hence 6.5 percent for the core.
The model impulse responses depend on the parameter vector
we have calibrated.

in addition to the parameters

We stack the …rst T model impulse responses to the monetary shock and

the …rst T responses to the government spending shock into a 2T x1 vector

( ); and denote the

corresponding estimates derived from the SVAR above by ^ : Our estimator of

is obtained as

the solution to:
b = arg min( ^

( ))0 z

1

(^

( )):

(28)

where z is a diagonal matrix based on the 95 percent con…dence intervals for the impulse responses
shown in Figures 9 and 10.

Thus, impulse responses that are measured with greater precision

get more weight in determining the estimate of

: We set T = 20, so that impulse responses are

matched for 20 quarters.
Table 5 reports the estimated parameters and standard errors (below), with the latter computed
for b using the delta-function method.

= 0:877 and costs of adjusting investment

Our estimates of habit persistence in consumption {
I

= 1:94 indicate an important role for real rigidities in

accounting for the empirical impulse responses.

The estimate of habit is somewhat above typical

estimates of the literature. The Calvo price contract duration parameter of

P

= :944 implies a very

low Phillips Curve slope – when expressed in terms of marginal cost – of only :0034; as indicated
39
Because Keynesian households are assumed to own no capital in our model (and hence have much lower steady
state income than forward-looking households), their share of aggregate consumption is much lower than their population share.

48

in Section 3 and as we will discuss further below, this speci…cation is very consequential. Wage
dynamics in the model depend on both the estimated wage contract duration paramer

W

= 0:871

and on parameters which a¤ect strategic complementarities in wage-setting (the latter include the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and the degree of substitutibility between labor types). From a
reduced form perspective that is relevant for the model simulations below, nominal wage in‡ation
is somewhat less sensitive to the wage markup than price in‡ation is to the price markup.

Table 5: Estimated Parameters and Standard Errors
{
G
I
P
W
G

M

Parameter Estimate

.877

1.94

.944

.871

.914

.0640

.0989

Standard Error

.0494

.580

.0121

.0660

.0253

.00518

.00735

The solid lines in Figures 9 and 10 show the euro area aggregate responses of the model to both
the monetary shock and a government spending shock, and provide insight both into the ability of
the model to …t the data along these dimensions, and into key factors determining our parameter
estimates.

We begin with the responses to the monetary shock. As emphasized by CEE (2005),

empirical responses to a monetary shock are very informative for gauging the interest sensitivity
of domestic demand and its components, and also the slope of the price and wage Phillips Curves:
consistent with their analysis, our estimates of the structural parameters in Table 5 would change
little if we only …t the monetary shock (and thus can be regarded as largely “pinned down”by the
monetary shock).
As seen in Figure 9, the model does very well in tracking how a monetary policy tightening
causes euro area output to fall, and also performs well in accounting for the comparatively larger
contraction in investment relative to consumption. The small decline in in‡ation in the empirical
VAR is best …t with a very ‡at Phillips Curve, which helps account for the high estimated value
of the contract duration parameter
40

P

in Table 5.40 More broadly, a low implied responsiveness

While the implied contract duration is extremely long, it is important to mention that our model does not embed

49

of in‡ation to resource slack seems consistent with the general resilience of euro area in‡ation in
the aftermath of the …nancial crisis. Even so, because the estimation procedure tries to make the
model …t the initial rise in in‡ation in the empirical VAR – a “puzzle” the model cannot account
for – the model impulse response understates the subsequent decline in in‡ation. Thus, it seems
plausible that the Phillips Curve slope may be at least somewhat higher than our estimate in Table
5.41
Turning to Figure 10, the model also does well in …tting the empirical responses to a rise in
government spending. Notably, the model implies an initial rise in output of a little less than
1 12 percent, and of private consumption of almost

1
2

percent, both of which are very close to the

empirical responses, though it does imply somewhat less persistent responses thereafter.42 However,
the model implies only a small and transient rise in investment, in contrast to the larger and more
sustained response we estimate.

Thus, even with a large share of rule-of-thumb households, it

appears that our model may understate some of the Keynesian channels that would appear to drive
the empirical responses, though the model clearly moves in the right direction relative to the simple
model of Section 2.

6.3. Core Government Spending Hike in Normal Times
We next consider the e¤ects of a rise in core government spending in normal times that is scaled to
equal one percent of CU GDP. Given that the core and periphery are calibrated symmetrically, this
rise in core government spending has exactly the same aggregate CU e¤ects as would an equal-sized
rise in both core and periphery spending. We assume core government spending is increased in a
…rm-speci…c capital or other real rigidities that could help it account for the low reduced form slope with a much
shorter implied contract duration (corresponding to a signi…cantly lower value of P ).
41
On the other hand, some recent evidence based on U.S. data also …nds a very low Phillips Curve slope. Brave et
al. (2012) estimated the Chicago Federal Reserve’s DSGE model of the United States over the 1989:1-2011:4 period,
and found a Phillips Curve slope of only 0.002. Lindé, Smets, and Wouters (2016) estimated a Phillips Curve slope
of 0.005 (identical to our estimate for the euro area), and the estimate of Del Negro, Giannoni and Schorfheide (2015)
is similar.
42
The lower right panel of Figure 10 shows the response of consumption in the …rst few quarters following the
government spending hike – and omits con…dence intervals – in order to highlight the initial consumption rise.

50

uniform fashion for 12 quarters, and then immediately cut back to zero (i.e., spending follows an
MA(12) process with unit coe¢ cients).
As seen in Figure 11, the responses to a core spending hike in normal times are similar qualitatively to the benchmark model.

CU output rises a little less than 1 12 percent initially (panel

A), then then dies out as policy rates increase (panel F). The stimulus to GDP is heavily concentrated in the core (panel C). Periphery real net exports are boosted by some direct purchases
of core goods/services from the core government, and from terms of trade depreciation (panel G)
as the higher core government spending puts upward pressure on the relative price of core goods.
However, periphery GDP (panel D) is basically ‡at as this stimulus to net exports is o¤set by a
fall in domestic demand (panel E shows consumption) that is induced by higher real interest rates.
Periphery GDP would contract noticeably if the policy reaction function put even a modest weight
on stabilizing the output gap (e.g., of 0.5 as under the standard Taylor rule).
The Keynesian features in this larger model – while amplifying the CU multiplier modestly –
also drive a greater wedge between the response of core and periphery output. Notwithstanding
the leakage from lower core net exports, core GDP rises about 1 43 percent relative to periphery
GDP in the …rst year following the shock.

This is considerably larger than the GDP di¤erence

implied by the simple model results discussed in Section 4 (in which periphery private domestic
demand actually rises relative to that in the core). The bigger wedge between core and periphery
output responses in Figure 11 seems more in line with the literature on local multipliers, though
the local multiplier implied by our model is still only around 1 14 ; which is somewhat lower than
typical empirical estimates in the range of 1 21 to 2.43 Overall, both the estimates from the empirical
VAR in Figure 10 and the local multiplier literature suggest sizeable Keynesian multiplier e¤ects
that, if anything, may be somewhat larger than captured by our model.44
43
Recall from Section 2 that this literature aims to estimate how a di¤erential rise in government spending in one
region ‘A’vs. another region ‘B’a¤ects relative output levels.
44
Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) also emphasize that a simple model that embeds separable preferences as in

51

Given our interest in spillovers, the local multiplier is important insofar as factors which raise
the local multiplier tend to generate larger negative spillovers to the periphery in normal times, at
least if monetary policy is su¢ ciently reactive to in‡ation (and/or the output gap). Intuitively,
stronger Keynesian multiplier e¤ects would imply more stimulus to the core if monetary policy
didn’t react. Hence, the central bank must raise interest rates more sharply to keep CU output
close to potential and in‡ation from rising above target, which in turn causes a deeper contraction
in the periphery.

Thus, conditions which imply a relatively larger aggregate CU multiplier in

normal times – re‡ecting a bigger e¤ect on the natural real interest rate r – actually tend to
generate bigger negative spillovers to the periphery. Stronger multiplier (and accelerator) channels
and the consequent boost in r have profoundly di¤erent e¤ects in a deep liquidity trap, as we
next consider; but it is important to keep in mind the risk that a core …scal expansion could hurt
periphery GDP if the CU faced less extreme economic conditions (such as a short-lived liquidity
trap followed by a fast hike in policy rates).

6.4. Core Government Spending Hike in Liquidity Trap
We next consider the same expansion of core …scal spending in a deep liquidity trap that would
last 12 quarters absent core …scal stimulus.

Our baseline assumes that the adverse aggregate

demand shock generating the liquidity trap is much larger in the periphery (as in Figure 7 in the
case of the simple model). In this section, we assume that the monetary policy reaction function is
very aggressive in responding to both the in‡ation and output gap, implying that monetary policy
remains accommodative even following this sizeable and persistent …scal expansion.45
Section 2 generates far too low a local multiplier, and propose non-separable preferences as a mechanism for generating
a larger local multiplier (in contrast with our focus on Keynesian multiplier and accelerator channels).
45
Speci…cally, we assume that the the ECB reaction function puts a substantial weight on the output gap of
unity. This choice helps account for a protracted liquidity trap in the baseline, and also implies monetary policy
“forbearance” in not reacting to the large …scal stimulus program we consider. More broadly, it seems reasonable
to characterize ECB monetary policy as putting a fairly large weight on the output gap as well as the in‡ation gap
in the period following the intensi…cation of the euro area debt crisis in 2011. In particular, the ECB put more
emphasis on the output gap in its communication about monetary policy, and left policy rates low in 2012-2013 even
though in‡ation ran only modestly below 2 percent.

52

Aggregate CU output (solid line in panel A) rises much more in a protracted liquidity trap, and
periphery GDP (panel D) also rises substantially. The rise in periphery GDP partly arises from
the same channels as emphasized in Section 2.

In particular, net exports rise in response to the

rise in core domestic demand and to terms of trade depreciation. Moreover, periphery real interest
rates fall persistently, re‡ecting the expectation that periphery prices will eventually rise enough to
bring the terms of trade back to its pre-shock level. However, Keynesian e¤ects arising from the
hand-to-mouth consumers play a substantial role in amplifying this stimulus, and in contributing
to periphery GDP expansion. Of course, these Keynesian e¤ects also increase the response of core
GDP.
All told, periphery GDP rises rises more than 1 14 percent after two years, which is almost half
the expansion in core GDP. Thus, as in the benchmark model of Section 2, the output stimulus
due to core …scal expansion becomes more balanced in a prolonged liquidity trap.

The implied

CU multiplier of over 2 is in the range of estimates of the spending multiplier in a deep recession
surveyed in Section 2.
While we view our estimates – including of the aggregate government spending multiplier,
and spillovers to the periphery – as quite plausible, there is clearly some uncertainty about key
transmission channels.

Several observations seem worthwhile in this regard.

First, the model

may understate the importance of multiplier/accelerator e¤ects: as we noted, the model implies
an aggregate CU government spending multiplier lower than our empirical VAR, and a “local
multiplier” modestly below empirical estimates. To allow for larger Keynesian e¤ects, we have
explored extending the model to include a …nancial accelerator in each country block following
Christiano, Motto, and Rostagna’s variant (CMR, 2005) of the Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(BGG, 1999) framework. In a liquidity trap, we found that both the aggregate government spending
multiplier and spillovers are enhanced by …nancial frictions, re‡ecting that the boost in nominal

53

demand from higher core spending improves private sector balance sheets and lowers credit spreads.
Second, the model may not adequately capture how in‡ation and in‡ation expectations evolve.
As we have noted, the very ‡at Phillips Curve slope we have imposed seems consistent with both
VAR-based estimates, and with the resilience of in‡ation during the …nancial crisis and its aftermath. But poor credit conditions and other adverse supply-side developments may have helped
account for why in‡ation didn’t fall much in spite of an enormous fall in output below trend (see
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt 2014 and Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim, and Zakrajšek 2015), so
that the Phillips Curve slope could well be higher; in this case, the multiplier and spillovers would
also be larger.

On the other hand, our Calvo contract speci…cation implies an immediate jump

in both in‡ation and in‡ation expectations. But it is quite plausible that in‡ation and in‡ation
expectations would show a more gradual rise, perhaps more in line with the implications of Mankiw
and Reis’ (2002) sticky information model of price formation; or alternatively, in‡ation expectations could rise more gradually if expectations formation was partially adaptive. Ceteris paribus,
a more gradual rise in expected in‡ation would tend to reduce both the aggregate multiplier and
spillovers to the periphery.
Finally, it bears emphasizing that the model’s implications of large spillovers depend on our
assumptions that neither monetary nor …scal policy acts to o¤set the stimulus.

Clearly, the

stimulus to the core and periphery would be much smaller if monetary policy began hiking rates
more quickly as resource slack and the in‡ation gap closed. On the …scal side, both the aggregate
multiplier and associated spillovers would be lower if the …scal reaction function implied a more
aggressive reaction to government debt (Drautzberg and Uhlig 2015).

54

7. Conclusions
Our paper has considered the implications for the euro area of a …scal expansion in the core
economies, with particular focus on how the periphery would be a¤ected.

We have shown that

not only does the …scal multiplier for the euro area as a whole become much larger in a prolonged
liquidity trap, but also that the stimulative e¤ects become relatively more balanced between the
core and periphery (though still tilted in favor of the core). Periphery GDP expands as domestic
demand is “crowded in” by lower real interest rates, and as net exports are boosted by terms of
trade depreciation and an expansion of domestic demand in the core economies. Accordingly, …scal
policy seems a potent tool to improve welfare throughout the euro area, at least to the extent that
welfare can be proxied by in‡ation and output gaps.
While an extensive literature has focused on the potential bene…ts of …scal policy in a liquidity
trap, most of this analysis has abstracted from di¤erences in business cycle positions across member
states. Our analysis suggests that …scal spending is likely to be much more e¤ective in boosting
welfare to the extent that it can be targeted to countries or states facing relatively adverse business
cycle conditions.

Thus, a euro area …scal compact that would allow more distressed countries

greater latitude to engage in de…cit-…nanced spending could yield substantial bene…ts. Of course,
there are many challenges of designing a …scal union, including of how to limit the moral hazard
risks that such insurance might pose to other members of the compact.
From a methodological perspective, our modeling framework has abstracted from a number of
features that would seem useful extensions for future research.

First, our analysis is conducted

under the assumption of perfect foresight, implying that the public is convinced that the economy
will eventually recover absent …scal action. The bene…t of …scal expansion would likely be greater
in a stochastic environment in which …scal expansion could help mitigate downside tail risks that
likely are substantial in a prolonged liquidity trap. Second, our simple benchmark model assumes
55

a representative agent structure with perfect risk sharing.

The bene…ts of …scal expansion –

especially using a utility-based welfare criterion –would presumably be greater in a heterogenous
agent framework in which risk-sharing was much less pervasive, and each household’s consumption
more dependent on its particular employment opportunities.46

Finally, it would be desirable to

extend our modeling framework to allow sovereign borrowing spreads to respond endogenously to
changes in …scal policy.

46
On the other hand, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2015) argue that taking account of borrowing constraints
and uninsurable income risk may imply a somewhat lower interest elasticity of demand than implied by models which
assume that …nancial markets are complete at the national level. A lower interest elasticity would damp the …scal
multiplier in a liquidity trap.

56

References
Acconcia, Antonio, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Saverio Simonelli. 2014. “Ma…a and Public Spending:
Evidence on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-experiment.” American Economic Review,
104(7): 2185-2209
Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé and Mattias Villani (2005). “The Role of Sticky
Prices in an Open Economy DSGE Model: A Bayesian Investigation.”Journal of the European
Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 3(2-3), 444-457.
Alesina, Alberto and Silvia Ardagna (2010). “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes vs. Spending.” In Tax Policy in the Economy, edited by Je¤rey Brown, NBER: University of Chicago
Press, 35-68.
Almunia, Miguel, Augustin Bénétrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin O’Rourke, Gisela Rua, Silvana
Tenreyro, and Fabrizio Perri. “From Great Depression to Great Credit Crisis: Similarities,
Di¤erences, and Lessons,” in Economic Policy 62 (eds G. De Ménil, R. Portes and H.-W.
Sinn), John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK.
Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Lindé (2011). “Firm-Speci…c
Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(2),
225-247.
Anderson, Gary and George Moore (1985), “A Linear Algebraic Procedure for Solving Linear
Perfect Foresight Models,” Economics Letters 17(3), 247-252.
Angeloni, Ignazio, Anil K Kashyap, Benoit Mojon, and Daniele Terlizzese (2003). “The Output
Composition Puzzle: A Di¤erence in the Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the Euro
Area and U.S.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35, 1265-1306.
57

Auerbach, Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012). “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
Policy,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 1-27.
Bernanke, Ben, Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.”In Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor
and Michael Woodford, North-Holland Elsevier Science
Beetsma, Roel, and Massimo Giuliodori, and Franc Klaassen. “Trade Spill-Overs of Fiscal Policy
in the European Union: A Panel Analysis,” Economic Policy, vol. 21 (48), 639-687.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Monacelli, Tomasso, and Roberto Perotti (2015). “Is Government Spending at
the Zero Lower Bound Desirable?,” NBER Working Paper 20687.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). “In‡ation and Activity –Two
Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications,” IMF Working paper 15-230 (November).
Blanchard, Olivier and Charles Kahn (1980), “The Solution of Linear Di¤erence Models under
Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.
Blanchard, Olivier and Daniel Leigh (2014). “Learning about Fiscal Multipliers from Growth
Forecast Errors,” IMF Economic Review 62(2), 179-212.
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti (2002). “An Empirical Characterization of The Dynamic
E¤ects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 117(4), 1329-1368.
Brave, Scott, Je¤rey Campbell, Jonas Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). “The Chicago Fed
DSGE Model," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working paper 2012-02 (August).

58

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005). “Nominal Rigidities and
the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
1-45.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). “When is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 78-121.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt (2015). “Understanding the
Great Recession,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 110-167.
Christiano, Lawrence, Motto, Roberto and Massimo Rostagno (2008), “Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and the US After 2001,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 32(8), 2476-2506.
Christiano, Lawrence, Trabandt, Mathias and Karl Walentin (2007), “Introducing Financial Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model,” Sveriges Riksbank Working
Paper Series No. 214.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (2001), “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open Versus Closed Economics: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 91, 248-252.
Coenen, Günter, Christopher J. Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof, René
Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lindé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula,
Carlos de Resende, John Roberts, Werner Roeger, Stephen Snudden, Mathias Trabandt, and
Jan in’t Veld (2012). “E¤ects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1), 22–68.
Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland (2010). “New Keynesian
59

versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 34, 281-295.
Cole, Harold and Maurice Obstfeld (1991). “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing:
How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28(1), 3-24.
Cook, David and Michael B. Devereux (2011). “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a World Liquidity Trap,”
European Economic Review, 55(2), 443-462.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide (2015), “In‡ation in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1),
168-196.
Thorsten Drautzburg & Harald Uhlig, 2015. "Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxation,”Review
of Economic Dynamics 18(4), 894-920.
Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and Optimal
Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 139-211.
Eggertsson, Gauti (2011). “What Fiscal Policy is E¤ective at Zero Interest Rates?”NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Volume 25, NBER Books, National Bureau of Economic Research,
59-112.
Erceg, Christopher, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2006). “SIGMA: A New Open Economy
Model for Policy Analysis,” Journal of International Central Banking 2(1), 1-50.
Erceg, Christopher and Jesper Lindé (2013). “Fiscal Consolidation in a Currency Union: Spending
Cuts vs. Tax Hikes,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37, 422-445.
Erceg, Christopher and Jesper Lindé (2014). “Is there a Fiscal Free Lunch in a Liquidity Trap?,”
Journal of the European Economic Association 12(1), 73-107.
60

Fujiwari, Ippei and Kozo Ueda (2013) “The Fiscal Multiplier and Spillover in a Global Liquidity
Trap,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37, 1264-1283.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning (2012) “Fiscal Multipliers:

Liquidity Traps and Currency

Unions." Manuscript, Harvard University.
Galí, Jordi, David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2007). “Understanding the E¤ects of Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association 5(1),
227-270.
Galí, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli (2008), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Currency
Union,” Journal of International Economics, 76, 116–132.
Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek (2015). “In‡ation Dynamics
During the Financial Crisis,”Finance and Economic Discussion Series paper 2015-012, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (March).
Gordon, Robert, and Robert Krenn (2010). “The End of the Great Depression 1939-41: Policy
Contributions and Fiscal Multipliers,” NBER Working paper 16380.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Hu¤man (1998), “Investment, Capacity Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 78(3), 402-417
Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori (2014). “Expansionary Austerity: International Evidence” Journal of the European Economic Association 12(4), 949-968.
Hebden, James, Lindé, Jesper and Lars E.O. Svensson (2009), “Optimal Monetary Policy in the
Hybrid New Keynesian Model under the Zero Lower Bound Constraint,” mimeo, Federal
Reserve Board and Sveriges Riksbank.

61

Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsotumu Watanabe (2005). “Optimal Monetary Policy at the
Zero-Interest-Rate Bound,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37(5), 813-835.
Kollmann, Robert, Marco Ratto, Werner Roeger, and Lukas Vogel (2015). “What drives the
German current account? And how does it a¤ect other EU member states?,” Economic
Policy 30, 47-93.
Lindé, Jesper (2005). “Estimating New Keynesian Phillips Curves: A Full Information Maximum
Likelihood Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(6), 1135-1149.
Lindé, Jesper, Frank Smets, and Raf Wouters (2016).

“Challenges for Central Banks’ Macro

Models,” Riksbank Research Paper Series paper 147 (May).
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., (1987). Models of Business Cycles, Basil Blackwell, New York.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002). “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices:

A

Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117(4), 1295–1328.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakumura, and Jon Steinsson (2015). “The Power of Forward Guidance
Revisited,” Manuscript, Columbia University.
Orr, James and John Sporn.(2012) “The American Recovery and Reinvestment Acto of 2009: A
Review of Stimulus Spending in New York and New Jersey,” Current Issues in Economics
and Finance 18(6), 1-12.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson (2014). “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
US Regions,” American Economic Review 104(3): 753-92.
Perotti, Roberto (2007). “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 22, 169-226.
62

Ramey, Valerie A. (2011). “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 1-50.
Romer, Christina and David Romer (2010). “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on New Measures of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review 100(3): 763801.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997). “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework
for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual volume 12, edited
by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, MIT Press.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(5), 1123-1175.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2007). “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97(3), 586-606.
Wieland, Volker (1996). “Monetary Policy Targets and the Stabilization Objective: A Source of
Tension within the EMS,” Journal of International Money and Finance 15(1), 95-116.
Uhlig, Harald (2010). “Some Fiscal Calculus.”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
100(2), 30-34.
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press.
Woodford, Michael (2011). “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(1), 1-35.

63

Figure 1: Average Output Gaps and Inflation Rates in Euro Area: 2010-2014
2.5

Average Inflation Rate: 2010-2014

2

1.5

Germany
1

0.5

Spain
Portugal

0

-0.5

Greece
-1
-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

Average Output Gap: 2010-2014

-2

0

Figure 2: Calibrating the Speed of Price Adjustment
Periphery/Core Terms of Trade and Relative Marginal Cost
10

5

0

-5

-10

mct - mc*t
t (Pcore/Pperiphery)

-15
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Quasi First Difference of Terms of Trade Vs. Difference of Marginal Cost: 1996Q1 - 2013Q4
1.5
Quarterly Observations
OLS Regression
Calibrated Slope

t - t+1

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1
-3

-2

-1

0

1

mct -

mc*t

2

3

4

Figure 3: Rise in Core Government Spending
No Liquidity Trap

12 Quarter Liquidity Trap

A. Real GDP

2

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

C. Inflation

2

-0.5

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

2

0

4

8

12

16

20

E. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade
Policy Rate
Terms of Trade
Potential Terms of Trade

1.5

-0.5

0.5

0

0

8

12

16

20

16

20

D. Inflation w/ZLB

0

4

8

12

16

20

1.5

0.5

4

12

2

1

0

8

F. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade w/ZLB

1

-0.5

4

1.5

1

-0.5

0

2

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

1.5

B. Real GDP w/ZLB

2

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 4: Core Government Spending Hike: Output Responses in
Core and Periphery as Function of Liquidity Trap Duration.
Panel A: Benchmark (Slow) vs. Faster Price Adjustment, No Import Content in Core Govt Spending

*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0

2.5

*

Fast Price Adjustment − ωG=0

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
0

1

2

Core Output (Average First Year)
Percent (Dev From Baseline)

Percent (Dev From Baseline)

Periphery Output (Average First Year)
3

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Zero Lower Bound Duration

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0

0
−0.5
0

*

Fast Price Adjustment − ωG=0

1

2

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Zero Lower Bound Duration

Panel B: Benchmark (Slow) Price Adjustment, Varying the Degree of Import Content in Core Govt Spending
2
*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0
*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0.2

1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
0

1

2

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Zero Lower Bound Duration

Core Output (Average First Year)
Percent (Dev From Baseline)

Percent (Dev From Baseline)

Periphery Output (Average First Year)
2
1.5
1
0.5

*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0

0

*

Benchmark Price Adjustment − ωG=0.2

−0.5
0

1

2

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Zero Lower Bound Duration

Figure 5: Rise in Core Government Spending: Faster Price Adjustment
No Liquidity Trap

12 Quarter Liquidity Trap

A. Real GDP

2

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

1.5

B. Real GDP w/ZLB

3
2.5
2

1

1.5

0.5

1
0.5

0
0
-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

C. Inflation

6

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

2

4

8

12

16

20

E. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade
Policy Rate
Terms of Trade
Potential Terms of Trade

1.5

0

0

12

16

20

20

4

8

12

16

20

1.5

0.5

8

16

2

0.5

4

12

F. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade w/ZLB

1

0

8

D. Inflation w/ZLB

0

1

-0.5

4

5

4

0

0

6

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

5

-0.5

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 6: Rise in Core Government Spending: 20 Percent Imported
No Liquidity Trap

12 Quarter Liquidity Trap

A. Real GDP

2

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

C. Inflation

2

-0.5

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

2

0

4

8

12

16

20

E. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade
Policy Rate
Terms of Trade
Potential Terms of Trade

1.5

-0.5

0.5

0

0

8

12

16

20

16

20

D. Inflation w/ZLB

0

4

8

12

16

20

1.5

0.5

4

12

2

1

0

8

F. Policy Rate and Terms of Trade w/ZLB

1

-0.5

4

1.5

1

-0.5

0

2

Currency Union
Periphery
Core

1.5

B. Real GDP w/ZLB

2

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 7: Impact of Fiscal Stimulus When ECB Keeps Exitdate Unchanged.

A. Currency Union Output Gap

B. Currency Union Inflation (YoY)

1

2

0

1

−1
0

−2
−3

−1

−4

−2

−5
15

16

17

18

19

−3
15

20

C. Core Output Gap
1

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2

−3

−3

−4

−4

−5

−5
16

17

18

19

20

15

E. Core Inflation (YoY)
2

1

1

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2
16

17

18

18

19

16

17

18

19

19

−3
15

20

16

17

18

19

G. ECB Policy Rate (APR)
Baseline−No Stimulus
1.5

Core Only Stimulus − ω*G=0
Fiscal Union: CU−Wide Stimulus

1
0.5
0
15

16

20

20

F. Periphery Inflation (YoY)

2

−3
15

17

D. Periphery Output Gap

1

15

16

17

18

19

20

20

Figure 8: Rise in Core Government Spending in Recession (Deviation From Baseline).
B. Periphery Consumption
Share of trend GD

Share of trend GDP

A. Core Consumption

0.4

0.2

0
14

16

18

0.4

0.2

0
14

20

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1
0.5
0
−0.5
14

0.5
0

16

18

−0.5
14

20

Share of trend GDP

Share of trend GDP

0

−0.5
16

18

16

18

20

F. Periphery Net Exports

0.5

20

0.5

0

−0.5
14

G. Core Period Utility

16

18

20

H. Periphery Period Utility

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.05

−0.05

14

20

1

E. Core Net Exports

14

18

D. Periphery Hours Worked

2.5

Percent

Percent

C. Core Hours Worked

16

16

18
Year

20

14

Core only, ω*G=0
Core only, ω*G=0,2

16

18
Year

20

Figure 9: Responses to Monetary Policy Shock (−o− Model, − VAR, Grey Area: 95% Confidence Interval)
CU Govt Spending (Trend Output Share)
0.05

CU Output
0.2
0

0

−0.2
−0.05
−0.4
0

5

10

15

0

CU Private Consumption

5

10

15

CU Private Investment

0.2

0.5

0
0

−0.2

−0.5

−0.4
−0.6

−1
0

5

10

15

0

CU Nominal Wage

5

10

15

CU Inflation (APR)
0.2

0

0

−0.5

−0.2
−1

0

5

10

15

Policy Rate (APR)
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

5

10

15

Figure 10: Responses to CU Government Spending Shock (−o− Model, − VAR, Grey Area: 95% Confidence Interval)
CU Govt Spending (Trend Output Share)
1

CU Output
2

0.5

0

0

−2

−0.5

−4
−6
0

5

10

15

0

CU Private Consumption

5

10

15

CU Private Investment

2
0
−2
−4
−6
−8

5
0
−5
−10
−15
0

5

10

15

0

CU Nominal Wage

5

10

15

CU Inflation (APR)
5

5
0

0

−5
−10

−5
0

5

10

15

0

Policy Rate (APR)

5

10

15

Near−term Effects on CU Private Consumption
1

5

0.5

0
−5
0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

0

1

2
Quarters

3

Figure 11: Core Spending Hike in Large−Scale Model in Normal Times.
A. Currency Union Output
3

Actual
Potential
Percent

2
Percent

B. CPI Inflation (Annualized Percentage Rates)
0.8
Periphery
0.6
Core
Currency Union
0.4

1

0.2

0
−1

0
0

4

8

12

16

−0.2

20

0

C. Core Output

Percent

Percent

16

20

Actual
Potential

2

1
0

1
0

0

4

8

12

16

−1

20

Periphery
Core

0.2

0.2

−0.2

0.1
4

8

12

8

12

16

20

0.3

0

0

4

0.4
Percent

0.4

0

F. ECB Policy Rate (Annualized Percentage Rates)

E. Private Consumption

0.6

Percent

12

3

Actual
Potential

2

16

20

G. Periphery Real Exchange Rate
2
Actual
Potential
1

0

4

8

12

16

20

H. Periphery Real Net Exports (GDP Share)
0.4
Actual
0.3
Potential
Percent

Percent

8

D. Periphery Output

3

−1

4

0

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1

−1
0

4

8
12
Quarter

16

20

0

4

8
12
Quarter

16

20

Figure 12: Core Spending Hike in Large−Scale Model in a Long−Lived Liquidity Trap.
A. Currency Union Output

B. CPI Inflation (Annualized Percentage Rates)
0.8
Periphery
0.6
Core
Currency Union
0.4

3

Percent

Percent

2
1

0.2

0
−1

0
0

4

8

12

16

20

−0.2

0

3

2

2

1
0
−1

8

12

16

20

12

16

20

D. Periphery Output

3

Percent

Percent

C. Core Output

4

1
0

0

4

8

12

16

−1

20

4

8

F. ECB Policy Rate (Annualized Percentage Rates)

E. Private Consumption
Periphery
Core

1.2

0

0.4
Percent

Percent

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2
0.1

0.2
0

4

8

12

16

0

20

G. Periphery Real Exchange Rate

0

4

8

12

16

20

H. Periphery Real Net Exports (GDP Share)
0.4

0.25

0.3

0.2

Percent

Percent

0.3

0.15
0.1

0.2
0.1
0

0.05
0

4

8
12
Quarter

16

20

0

4

8
12
Quarter

16

20

Appendix A. The Benchmark Model
This Appendix provides a detailed description of the benchmark model from which the log-linearized
equations in Section 3 are derived.

A.1. Households
The utility functional of household h in the home economy is given by:
8
>
(Nt+j (h))1+
1
< 1 1 (Ct+j (h) {Ct+j 1 C t+j )1 1
X
+
0
1+
1
j
Et
%t+j
>
M Bt+j+1 (h)
:
j=0
+ F
0

#g
1

1
g

1

Gt+j

PCt+j

1
g

9
>
=
>
;

(A.1)

The preference speci…cation in equation (A.1) implies that household h derives utility from private
consumption Ct (h) ; government spending Gt (h); and real balances

M Bt (h)
PCt ,

whereas utility declines

in hours worked Nt (h). The utility function is assumed to be separable in each of these arguments.
The subutility function over consumption incorporates external habit persistence –captured by the
presence of lagged aggregate consumption Ct

1

– with the degree of habit determined by the

parameter { 2 (0; 1) : There are two types of preference shocks, including a consumption taste
(demand) shock

t,

and a discount factor shock %t .

The latter type of shock has been widely

used in the ZLB literature (see e.g., Eggertsson, 2011, and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo,
2011) as a driving force of the “Great Recession.” Following Eggertsson and Woodford (2003),
the subutility function over real balances, F
for M B=P .

M Bt+j+1 (h)
Pt+j

, is assumed to have a satiation point

Hence, the inclusion of money - which is a zero nominal interest asset - provides a

rationale for the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. However, we maintain the assumptions
that money is additive and that

0

is arbitrarily small so that changes in real money balances have

negligible implications for government debt and output. Finally, we assume that 0 <
g

> 0;

> 0,

0

< 1,

> 0,

> 0 and #g > 0.

Household h faces a ‡ow budget constraint in period t which states that combined expenditure

76

on goods and on the net accumulation of …nancial assets must equal its disposable income:

PCt (1 +

Ct ) Ct (h)

+

Z

s

t;t+1 Bt+1 (h)

Bt (h) + BG;t (h) = (1

N;t ) Wt (h)Nt (h)

Tt

+RKt K + 1 + iCU
t 1 BG;t

(A.2)

1 (h)

+

t (h):

In (A.2), all variables have been expressed in per capita terms. A household may either spend its
income either on consumption goods, which are subject to a sales tax of
in either government bonds BG;t (h) or contingent claims. The term

Ct ;

or can save by investing

t;t+1

denotes the price of an

asset that will pay one unit of domestic currency in a particular state of nature at date t + 1, and
Bt+1 (h) the quantity of claims purchased. Each household earns per capita labor income net of
taxes (1

N;t ) Wt (h)Nt (h) ;

an aliquot share

t (h)

earns rental income of RKt K on its …xed stock of capital K, receives

of the …rm pro…ts, and pays lump sum taxes of Tt to the government.A.1

Each household h maximizes the utility functional (A.1) with respect to its consumption, hours
worked, government bonds, and holdings of contingent claims subject to its budget constraint (A.2),
taking bond prices, the wage, the rental price of capital (RKt ), and the price of the consumption
bundle (PCt ) as given. The …rst order condition(s) for contingent claims both at home and abroad
implies the complete markets condition that the marginal utility of a “euro” is equalized across
home and foreign households:

t

=

t;

Because the marginal utility of consumption equals

Ct

=

t PCt

(and analogously for foreign

households), the complete markets condition may be written in the familiar form:

Ct

=

Ct

PCt
=
PCt

A .1

Ct QCt :

(A.3)

While our description of the benchmark model allows for exogenous taxes on consumption and labor income, we
abstract from these features in Section 3 (by setting these tax rates equal to zero at all times).

77

Thus, a depreciation of the home economy’s consumption-based real exchange rate (QCt rises)
boosts the marginal utility of foreign consumption relative to the marginal utility of home consumption.
The …rst order conditions with respect to Ct ; Nt , and BG;t are given by:

Ct

=

mrst =
Ct

1

(Ct

=

{Ct 1 C t )
;
(1 + C;t )
Wt
0 Nt
= (1
;
N;t )
P
Ct
Ct
1 + iCU
PCt
t
Et t
Ct+1 :
PCt+1

(A.4)

The …rst of these conditions indicates that the marginal utility of consumption decreases in current
consumption, but decreases in past consumption due to habit. The second equation is the labor
supply curve, which relates the household’s marginal cost of working – expressed in terms of the
consumption good, i.e., mrst =

0 Nt
Ct

–to the after-tax consumption real wage. The …nal expression

is the consumption Euler equation, where

t

=

%t+1
%t

is simply a rescaling of the time preference

shock.
The problem for the foreign households h is isomorphic to the problem outlined above for the
domestic households.

A.2. Firms and Price-Setting
Below, we describe the problem for the home producers of both …nal and intermediate goods.

A.2.1. Production of Final Goods
We assume that a single …nal domestic output good YDt is produced using a continuum of di¤erentiated intermediate goods YDt (f ). The technology for transforming these intermediate goods into

78

the …nal output good is constant returns to scale, and is of the Dixit-Stiglitz form:
Z

YDt =

1

1+

1

YDt (f ) 1+

p

p

df

;

(A.5)

0

where

p

> 0.

Firms that produce the …nal output good are perfectly competitive in both product and factor
markets. Thus, …nal goods producers minimize the cost of producing a given quantity of the output
index, YDt , taking as given the price PDt (f ) of each intermediate good YDt (f ). Moreover, …nal
goods producers sell units of the …nal output good at a price PDt that can be interpreted as the
aggregate domestic price index:
PDt =

Z

1

PDt (f )

1
p

p

df

:

(A.6)

0

A.2.2. Production of Domestic Intermediate Goods
Intermediate good i is produced by a monopolistically competitive …rm, whose output YDt (i) is
produced according to a Cobb-Douglas production function:
YDt (i) = K(i) (Zt Lt (i))1

;

(A.7)

where Zt denotes a stationary, country-speci…c shock to the level of technology. Intermediate goods
producers face perfectly competitive factor markets for hiring capital and labor. Thus, each …rm
chooses K (i) and Lt (i), taking as given both the rental price of capital RKt and the aggregate
wage rate Wt . Within a country, labor and the capital stock (albeit …xed in the aggregate) are
completely mobile; thus, the standard static …rst-order conditions for cost minimization imply that
all intermediate …rms have identical marginal cost per unit of output:
M Ct =

Wt

1

RKt

1
Zt1

1
79

;

(A.8)

where the standard static cost minimization problem of the …rm implies that

RKt =

Wt

1

Lt
:
K

(A.9)

Intermediate goods-producing …rms set prices according to Calvo-style staggered contracts, and
set the same price in both the home and foreign market (i.e., the home market price PDt (i) equals
the price in the foreign market of PM t (i)).
1

p,

In particular, …rm i faces a constant probability,

of being able to re-optimize its price, PDt (i). Firms which are not allowed to reoptimize

their prices in period t (which is the case with probability

p ),

update their prices according to the

following formula
P~Dt (i) = (1 +
where

D

D ) PDt 1 (i);

(A.10)

is the steady-state (net) in‡ation rate and P~Dt is the updated price.

opt
(i)) solves
Given Calvo-style pricing frictions, …rm i that is allowed to reoptimize its price (PDt

the following problem

max Et

opt
PDt
(i)

where
i.e.

j

t;t+j

Et & t+j

1
X

j
p

t;t+j

j=0

h

(1 +

j opt
D ) PDt (i)

i
M Ct+j YDt+j (i) ;

is the stochastic discount factor (the conditional value of future pro…ts in utility units,
t+j
t

, recalling that the household is the owner of the …rms),

p

the net markup and
(1+

the demand function for …rm i has the following general form YDt+j (i) =

opt
PDt
(i)
PDt

p

p)

YDt : The

…rst-order condition is given by:

Et

1
X

j
p

t;t+j

j=0

"

(1 +

D)

j

1+

opt
PDt
(i)
p

#

M Ct+j YDt+j (i) = 0:

(A.11)

Given that all …rms which can re-optimize set the same price, the price index for domesticallyproduced goods evolves according to:
2
PDt = 4 1

p

opt
PDt

1
p

+

80

p ((1

+ ) PDt

1)

1
p

3
5

p

:

(A.12)

The productive structure of the foreign economy is isomorphic. Thus, the …nal good is comi1+ p
hR
1
1
;
prised of a bundle of intermediate goods according to the production function YDt = 0 YDt (f ) 1+ p df

and the price of this …nal good is output of the of …nal goods is denoted by PDt =

R1
0

PDt (f )

1
p

p

df

A.3. Traded Goods
Household consumption Ct in the home economy depends both on its consumption of the domesticallyproduced …nal output good CDt and on its consumption of the foreign …nal output good MCt (i.e.,
consumer goods imports) according to the CES utility function:
Ct =

C
C

(1

! C ) 1+

1
1+ C

CDt

C
1+ C

+ !C

1
1+ C

1+

C

MCt

:

(A.13)

The quasi-share parameter ! C in equation (A.13) may be interpreted as determining household
preferences for home relative to foreign goods, or equivalently, the degree of home bias in household
consumption expenditure. The domestically-produced …nal good is purchased at a price of PDt ,
while the foreign imported good is purchased at a price of PM t ; given the …xed exchange rate
and our assumption of producer currency pricing, the law of one price holds, so that PM t = PDt :
Households choose CDt and MCt to minimize the cost of producing the consumption good Ct taking
the prices PDt and PM t as given. This familiar cost-minimization problem implies the following
demand schedules for the imported and domestically-produced good:
MCt = ! C

PM t
PCt

(1+ C )
C

Ct

and

CDt = (1

!C )

PDt
PCt

(1+ C )
C

Ct ;

(A.14)

while the consumer price index PCt , is given by:
PCt =

(1

1
1+ C

! C )PDt

1
1+ C

+ ! C PM t

1+

C

:

(A.15)

Similarly to households, the home government also produces …nal government goods (and services) Gt using both the domestically-produced …nal good GDt and imports of the foreign …nal
good MGt according to the CES production function:
81

:

Gt =

(1

G
G

! G ) 1+

1
1+ G

GDt

G
1+ G

+ !G

1+

1
1+ G

MGt

G

:

(A.16)

The parameter ! G measures the import share of government consumption; thus, total home imports
depend both on the demand of households, and of the government.

The government’s demand

schedules for both the domestically-produced …nal good and for imported goods are isomorphic to
that of households:
PM t
PGt

MGt = ! G

(1+ G )
G

Gt

and

GDt = (1

!G)

(1+ G )
G

PDt
PGt

Gt ;

(A.17)

although it is important to note that the degree of home bias in government spending ! G may di¤er
from that in private spending ! C ; and that the government’s willingness to substitute between home
and traded goods (

(1+
G

G)

) may also di¤er from that of households (

(1+
C

C)

). The price index

for government purchases is given by:

PGt =

(1

1
1+ G

! G )PDt

1
1+ G

+ ! G PM t

1+

G

:

(A.18)

We de…ne the terms-of-trade as
t

so that an increase in

t

=

P
PM t
= Dt ;
PDt
PDt

(A.19)

implies that the home economy can buy less imports for any given level

of exports.

A.4. Fiscal Policy
The government …nances its nominal spending on goods and services PGt Gt through a consumption
sales tax, labor tax, and lump-sum tax (we assume that seignorage revenue is de minimis). Thus,
evolution of nominal government debt, BG;t , is determined by:
BG;t = (1 + it

1 ) BG;t 1

+ PGt Gt
82

C;t PCt Ct

N;t Wt Lt

Tt :

(A.20)

We assume that the consumption sales tax

C;t

and labor tax

N;t

are determined exogenously, so

that lump-sum taxes adjust to satisfy the government’s intertemporal budget constraint.

Thus,

the …scal rule has no e¤ect on macro variables (other than the stock of debt and the lump-sum tax
level itself).

A.5. Aggregate Resource Constraints
The aggregate resource constraint for the domestic economy is given by:

YDt = CDt + GDt +

[MCt + MGt ] ;

(A.21)

where exports are weighted by the relative population size of the foreign to home country

as

the variables are expressed in per capita terms. Similarly, the resource constraint for the foreign
economy is given by:
YDt = CDt + GDt +

[MCt + MGt ] :

where exports are weighted by the relative population size of the home to foreign country

(A.22)
: The

total population is normalized to unity, i.e.,

+

= 1:

(A.23)

We also make the assumption that trade is balanced for both private consumption and government services, which implies that:
!C =

!C ;

(A.24)

!G =

!G:

(A.25)

and

Given complete …nancial markets, the current account and net foreign assets are always equal

83

to zero. The nominal trade balance (in absolute levels) is given by

T Bt

PDt [MCt + MGt ]

PM t [MCt + MGt ] :

(A.26)

A.6. Monetary Policy
The currency union central bank is assumed to adhere to a Taylor-type policy rule subject to the
ZLB. Given that we start out with a log-linearized version of the model, it is convenient to simply
specify the reaction function as a linear relation (aside from the zero lower bound), expressing
variables in deviation from baseline form:
iCU
= max
t

CU
t

i;

+

CU
x xt

;

(A.27)

Here i denotes the steady-state (net) nominal interest rate (equal to r +

where r

1=

1);

CU
t

is currency union in‡ation, and xCU
is the currency union output gap. Currency union in‡ation
t
CU
t

is itself a population-weighted average of the in‡ation rate

Ct

in both the home and foreign

country:
CU
t

=

Ct

+

Ct :

(A.28)

where each country in‡ation rate is simply the log percentage change in the respective consumption
price index (i.e.,

Ct

= ln(PCt =PCt

1 )).

The CU output gap xCU
is the di¤erence between currency
t

union output ytCU and its potential level ytCU;pot ; with both variables again simply populationweighted averages of the respective country variables:
ytCU = yDt +

yDt ;

(A.29)

and:
pot
ytCU;pot = yDt
+

84

;pot
yDt
:

(A.30)

Appendix B. The Large-Scale Open Economy Model
The large-scale model closely follows Erceg and Lindé (2013) aside from some features of the …scal
policy speci…cation. As in the benchmark model described in Appendix A, the model consists of two
countries –home and foreign –that share a common currency. The larger-scale model extends the
benchmark model on a number of dimensions, including allowing for endogenous investment, handto-mouth (HM) or “Keynesian”households, sticky wages as well as sticky prices, trade adjustment
costs, and incomplete …nancial markets across the two countries. Although the model we focus on
in Section 6 abstracts from a …nancial accelerator, the appendix concludes with a brief description
of how the model may be modi…ed to include a …nancial accelerator (Section B.6).

B.1. Firms and Price Setting
B.1.1. Production of Domestic Intermediate Goods
As in the simple model, there is a continuum of di¤erentiated intermediate goods (indexed by
i 2 [0; 1]) in the home country, each of which is produced by a single monopolistically competitive
…rm. In the domestic market, …rm i faces a demand function that varies inversely with its output
price PDt (i) and directly with aggregate demand at home YDt :
(1+

PDt (i)
YDt (i) =
PDt
where

p

p

p)

YDt ;

(B.31)

> 0, and PDt is an aggregate price index de…ned below.

Each producer utilizes capital services Kt (i) and a labor index Lt (i) (de…ned below) to produce
its respective output good.

The production function is assumed to have a constant-elasticity of

substitution (CES) form:

YDt (i) =

1

1

1+
!K
Kt (i) 1+ + ! L 1+ (Zt Lt (i)) 1+

85

1+

:

(B.32)

The production function exhibits constant-returns-to-scale in both inputs, and Zt is a countryspeci…c shock to the level of technology. Firms face perfectly competitive factor markets for hiring
capital and labor. Thus, each …rm chooses Kt (i) and Lt (i), taking as given both the rental price of
capital RKt and the aggregate wage index Wt (de…ned below). Firms can costlessly adjust either
factor of production, which implies that each …rm has an identical marginal cost per unit of output,
M Ct . The (log-linearized) technology shock is assumed to follow an AR(1) process:
zt =

z zt 1

+ "z;t :

(B.33)

We assume that purchasing power parity holds, so that each intermediate goods producer i
sets the same price PDt (i) in both blocks of the currency union, implying that the foreign import
price PM t (i) = PDt (i) and that PM t = PDt . The prices of the intermediate goods are determined
by Calvo-style staggered contracts (see Calvo, 1983). In each period, a …rm faces a constant
probability, 1

p,

of being able to re-optimize its price (PDt (i)). This probability of receiving a

signal to reoptimize is independent across …rms and time. If a …rm is not allowed to optimize its
prices, we follow Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003), and
assume that the …rm must reset its home price as a weighted combination of the lagged and steady
state rate of in‡ation PDt (i) = ^
Dt 1 PDt

1 (i)

=

p

1

Dt 1

p

PDt

1 (i)

This formulation allows for structural persistence in price-setting if

for the non-optimizing …rms.
p

exceeds zero.

When a …rm i is allowed to reoptimize its price in period t, the …rm maximizes:

max Et

PDt (i)

1
X
j=0

j
t;t+j p

"

j
Y

^ 1 (PDt (i)
Dt+h

h=1

#

M Ct+j )YDt+j (i) :

(B.34)

The operator Et represents the conditional expectation based on the information available to agents
at period t. The …rm discounts pro…ts received at date t + j by the state-contingent discount factor
t;t+j ;
B .2

for notational simplicity, we have suppressed all of the state indices.B.2 The …rst-order

We de…ne

t;t+j

to be the price in period t of a claim that pays one dollar if the speci…ed state occurs in period t+j

86

condition for setting the contract price of good i is:
1
X

Et

Qj

j
t;t+j p

^ 1 PDt (i)
Dt+h

h=1

j=0

(1 +

M Ct+j

p)

!

YDt+j (i) = 0:

(B.35)

B.1.2. Production of the Domestic Output Index
Because households have identical Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, it is convenient to assume that a
representative aggregator combines the di¤erentiated intermediate products into a composite homeproduced good YDt :

YDt =

Z

1

1+

1

YDt (i) 1+

p

p

di

:

(B.36)

0

The aggregator chooses the bundle of goods that minimizes the cost of producing YDt , taking the
price PDt (i) of each intermediate good YDt (i) as given. The aggregator sells units of each sectoral
output index at its unit cost PDt :
PDt =

Z

1

PDt (i)

1
p

p

di

:

(B.37)

0

B.1.3. Production of Consumption and Investment Goods
Final consumption goods are produced by a representative consumption goods distributor. This
…rm combines purchases of domestically-produced goods with imported goods to produce a …nal
consumption good (CAt ) according to a constant-returns-to-scale CES production function:
CAt =

C
1+ C

!C

1
1+ C

CDt

+ (1

!C )

C
1+ C

('Ct MCt )

1
1+ C

1+

C

;

(B.38)

where CDt denotes the consumption good distributor’s demand for the index of domesticallyproduced goods, MCt denotes the distributor’s demand for the index of foreign-produced goods,
(see the household problem below); then the corresponding element of
that the speci…ed state will occur.

87

t;t+j

equals

t;t+j

divided by the probability

and 'Ct re‡ects costs of adjusting consumption imports. The …nal consumption good is used
by both households and by the government.B.3 The form of the production function mirrors the
preferences of households and the government sector over consumption of domestically-produced
goods and imports. Accordingly, the quasi-share parameter ! C may be interpreted as determining
the preferences of both the private and public sector for domestic relative to foreign consumption
goods, or equivalently, the degree of home bias in consumption expenditure. Finally, the adjustment
cost term 'Ct is assumed to take the quadratic form:
2
0
MCt
'MC
@ M CDt a
'Ct = 41
Ct 1
2
C

12 3

1A 5 :

Dt 1

(B.39)

This speci…cation implies that it is costly to change the proportion of domestic and foreign goods
in the aggregate consumption bundle, even though the level of imports may jump costlessly in
response to changes in overall consumption demand.

We assume that the adjustment costs for

each distributor depend on distributor’s current import ratio
in the previous period

MCt
CDt

1
1

a

MCt
CDt

relative to the economy-wide ratio

; so that adjustment costs are external to individual distributors.

Given the presence of adjustment costs, the representative consumption goods distributor
chooses (a contingency plan for) CDt and MCt to minimize its discounted expected costs of producing the aggregate consumption good:
8
>
>
1
<
X
(PDt+k CDt+k + PM t+k MCt+k )
min
Et
t;t+k
>
CDt+k ;MCt+k
>
k=0
:
"
+PCt+k CA;t+k

C
1+ C

!C

1
1+ C

CDt+k + (1

!C )

C
1+ C

('Ct+k MCt+k )

(B.40)

1
1+ C

1+

C

#)

:

The distributor sells the …nal consumption good to households and the government at a price PCt ,
which may be interpreted as the consumption price index (or equivalently, as the shadow cost of
producing an additional unit of the consumption good).
B .3

Thus, the larger-scale model constrains the import share of government consumption to equal that of private
consumption.

88

We model the production of …nal investment goods in an analogous manner, although we allow
the weight ! I in the investment index to di¤er from that of the weight ! C in the consumption
goods index.B.4

B.2. Households and Wage Setting
We assume a continuum of monopolistically competitive households (indexed on the unit interval),
each of which supplies a di¤erentiated labor service to the intermediate goods-producing sector
(the only producers demanding labor services in our framework) following Erceg, Henderson and
Levin (2000). A representative labor aggregator (or “employment agency”) combines households’
labor hours in the same proportions as …rms would choose. Thus, the aggregator’s demand for
each household’s labor is equal to the sum of …rms’ demands. The aggregate labor index Lt has
the Dixit-Stiglitz form:
Lt =

Z

1

1+

1

( Nt (h)) 1+

w

w

;

dh

(B.41)

0

where

w

> 0 and Nt (h) is hours worked by a typical member of household h. The parameter

is

the size of a household of type h, and e¤ectively determines the size of the population in the home
country. The aggregator minimizes the cost of producing a given amount of the aggregate labor
index, taking each household’s wage rate Wt (h) as given, and then sells units of the labor index to
the production sector at their unit cost Wt :
Wt =

Z

1

Wt (h)

1
w

w

dh

:

(B.42)

0

The aggregator’s demand for the labor services of a typical member of household h is given by
Wt (h)
Nt (h) =
Wt

1+ w
w

Lt = :

(B.43)

We assume that there are two types of households: households that make intertemporal consumption, labor supply, and capital accumulation decisions in a forward-looking manner by maxiB .4

Government spending is assumed to fall exclusively on consumption, so that all investment is private investment.

89

mizing utility subject to an intertemporal budget constraint (FL households, for “forward-looking”);
and the remainder that simply consume their after-tax disposable income (HM households, for
“hand-to-mouth” households). The latter type receive no capital rental income or pro…ts, and
choose to set their wage to be the average wage of optimizing households. We denote the share of
FL households by 1-& and the share of HM households by &.
We consider …rst the problem faced by FL households. The utility functional for an optimizing
representative member of household h is

Et

1
X

1
0 Zt+j

where the discount factor

O
Ct+j
(h)

1

j=0

1

1

j

(1

Nt+j (h))1

satis…es 0 <

O
{Ct+j

+

0F

1

C

1

+

ct+j

M Bt+j+1 (h)
PCt+j

)

(B.44)

;

< 1: As in Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007), we

allow for the possibility of external habit formation in preferences, so that each household member
cares about its consumption relative to lagged aggregate consumption per capita of forward-looking
agents CtO 1 . The period utility function depends on an each member’s current leisure 1 Nt (h), his
end-of-period real money balances,

M Bt+1 (h)
,
PCt

and a preference shock,

ct .

The subutility function

F (:) over real balances is assumed to have a satiation point to account for the possibility of a
zero nominal interest rate; see Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) for further discussion.B.5 The
(log-linearized) consumption demand shock

ct

=

ct

is assumed to follow an AR(1) process:

ct 1

+"

c ;t:

(B.45)

Forward-looking household h faces a ‡ow budget constraint in period t which states that its
combined expenditure on goods and on the net accumulation of …nancial assets must equal its
B .5
For simplicity, we assume that 0 is su¢ ciently small that changes in the monetary base have a negligible impact
on equilibrium allocations, at least to the …rst-order approximation we consider.

90

disposable income:
PCt (1 +

O
Ct ) Ct

(h) + PIt It (h) + M Bt+1 (h)

BDt (h) + PBt BGt+1
= (1

N t )Wt (h) Nt (h)

PIt

BGt +

+

t (h)

Kt

Kt (h)

M Bt (h) +

PBt BF t+1 (h)

+ T Rt (h) + (1

Consumption purchases are subject to a sales tax of

s t;t+1 BDt+1 (h)

BF t (h)

bt

PDt

R

(B.46)

Kt )RKt Kt (h)+

It (h):
Ct :

Investment in physical capital augments

the per capita capital stock Kt+1 (h) according to a linear transition law of the form:
Kt+1 (h) = (1
where

)Kt (h) + It (h);

(B.47)

is the depreciation rate of capital.

Financial asset accumulation of a typical member of FL household h consists of increases in
nominal money holdings (M Bt+1 (h)

M Bt (h)) and the net acquisition of bonds. While the

domestic …nancial market is complete through the existence of state-contingent bonds BDt+1 , crossborder asset trade is restricted to a single non-state contingent bond issued by the government of
the foreign economy.B.6
The terms BGt+1 and BF t+1 represents each household member’s net purchases of the government bonds issued by the home and foreign governments, respectively. Each type of bond pays one
currency unit (e.g., euro) in the subsequent period, and is sold at price (discount) of PBt and PBt ,
respectively. To ensure the stationarity of foreign asset positions, we follow Turnovsky (1985) by
assuming that domestic households must pay a transaction cost when trading in the foreign bond.
The intermediation cost depends on the ratio of economy-wide holdings of net foreign assets to
nominal GDP, PDt YDt , and are given by:

bt

= exp

b

BF t+1
PDt YDt

:

(B.48)

If the home country is an overall net lender position internationally, then a household will earn
a lower return on any holdings of foreign bonds; conversely, if the home country is a net debtor
B .6

The domestic contingent claims BDt+1 are in zero net supply from the standpoint of home economy as a whole.

91

position, home households pay a higher return on their foreign liabilities. Given that the domestic
government bond in the home economy and foreign bond have the same payo¤, the price faced by
home residents net of the transaction cost is identical, so that PBt =

PBt
bt

: The e¤ective nominal

interest rate on domestic bonds (and similarly for foreign bonds) hence equals it = 1=PBt
Each member of FL household h earns after-tax labor income, (1
Nt

(1

N t )Wt (h) Nt (h),

1.
where

is a stochastic tax on labor income. The household leases capital at the after-tax rental rate
Kt )RKt ,

where

write-o¤ of PIt

Kt

Kt

is a stochastic tax on capital income. The household receives a depreciation

per unit of capital. Each member also receives an aliquot share

t (h)

of the

pro…ts of all …rms and a lump-sum government transfer, T Rt (h) (which is negative in the case of a
tax). Following Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), we assume that it is costly to change
the level of gross investment from the previous period, so that the acceleration in the capital stock
is penalized:
1
It (h) =
2

(It (h) It
I
It 1

2
1)

:

(B.49)

In every period t, each member of FL household h maximizes the utility functional (B.44) with
respect to its consumption, investment, (end-of-period) capital stock, money balances, holdings
of contingent claims, and holdings of domestic and foreign bonds, subject to its labor demand
function (B.43), budget constraint (B.46), and transition equation for capital (B.47). In doing so,
a household takes as given prices, taxes and transfers, and aggregate quantities such as lagged
aggregate consumption and the aggregate net foreign asset position.
Forward-looking (FL) households set nominal wages in staggered contracts that are analogous
to the price contracts described above. In particular, with probability 1

w,

each member of a

household is allowed to reoptimize its wage contract. If a household is not allowed to optimize its
wage rate, we assume each household member resets its wage according to:
Wt (h) = ! tw 1 ! 1
92

w

Wt

1 (h);

(B.50)

where ! t

1

is the gross nominal wage in‡ation rate in period t

1, i.e. Wt =Wt

1,

and ! =

is the

steady state rate of change in the nominal wage (equal to gross price in‡ation since steady state
gross productivity growth is assumed to be unity). Dynamic indexation of this form introduces
some element of structural persistence into the wage-setting process. Each member of household h
chooses the value of Wt (h) to maximize its utility functional (B.44) subject to these constraints.
Finally, we consider the determination of consumption and labor supply of the hand-to-mouth
(HM) households. A typical member of a HM household simply equates his nominal consumption
spending, PCt (1 +

HM
Ct ) Ct

(h), to his current after-tax disposable income, which consists of labor

income plus lump-sum transfers from the government:
PCt (1 +

HM
Ct ) Ct

(h) = (1

N t )Wt (h) Nt (h)

+ T Rt (h):

(B.51)

The HM households are assumed to set their wage equal to the average wage of the forwardlooking households. Since HM households face the same labor demand schedule as the forwardlooking households, this assumption implies that each HM household works the same number of
hours as the average for forward-looking households.

B.3. Monetary Policy
As in the simple benchmark model, the currency union central bank is assumed to adhere to a
Taylor-type policy rule although we allow here for some inertia in the interest rate reaction function
that is captured by the term

CU
i it 1 :

iCU
= (1
t

i) (

CU
t

+

CU
x xt

+

CU
i it 1

+ "M;t :

(B.52)

The monetary policy shock, "M;t ; which we use when we estimate some of the model parameters in
Section 6.2, is assumed to be normally and idependently estimated with zero mean and standard
deviation

M.

93

When monetary policy is subject to the ZLB, the policy rule is modi…ed as follows:
iCU
= max
t

i; (1

CU
t

i) (

+

CU
x xt

+

CU
i it 1

;

(B.53)

where i is the steady state nominal interest rate: as before, iCU
measures the currency union policy
t
rate as a deviation from steady state, so that iCU
=
t

i implies that the policy rate is zero when

expressed in levels.

B.4. Fiscal Policy
The government does not need to balance its budget each period, and issues nominal debt BGt+1
at the end of period t to …nance its de…cits according to:
PBt BGt+1

BGt = PCt Gt + T Rt

N t Wt Lt

(M Bt+1

Ct PCt Ct

Kt (RKt

PIt )Kt

(B.54)

M Bt );

where Ct is total private consumption. Equation (B.54) aggregates the capital stock, money and
bond holdings, and transfers and taxes over all households so that, for example, T Rt =
The taxes on capital

Kt

to (trend) GDP, trt =

and consumption

T Rt
Pt Y ,

Ct

R1
0

T Rt (h)dh.

are assumed to be …xed, and the ratio of real transfers

is also …xed.B.7 Check footnote for comment! Government purchases

have no direct e¤ect on the utility of households, nor do they a¤ect the production function of the
private sector.
When we estimate the model, the process for the (log of) government spending is given by an
AR(1) process:
(gt

g) =

G (gt 1

g) + "g;t ;

where "g;t is independently normally distributed with zero mean and standard deviation

(B.55)
G.

B.8

B .7
Given that the central bank uses the nominal interest rate as its policy instrument, the level of seigniorage is
determined by nominal money demand.
B .8
When we simulate the e¤ects of higher spending in Sections 6.3 and 6.4, we instead assume that spending follows
an MA(12) process, i.e. gt g = 11
s=0 "g;t s .

94

We assume that policymakers in the core and periphery adjust labor income taxes to stabilize
the debt/GDP ratio and the de…cit. Speci…cally, the labor tax rate evolves according to:

Nt

N

=

1 ( Nt 1

N)

+ (1

1 ) [ 2 (bGt

bG ) +

3(

bGt+1

bG )] :

(B.56)

B.5. Resource Constraint and Net Foreign Assets
The home economy’s aggregate resource constraint can be written as:
YDt = CDt + IDt +
where

It

It

+

Mt ;

(B.57)

is the adjustment cost on investment aggregated across all households. The …nal con-

sumption good is allocated between households and the government:
CAt = Ct + Gt ;

(B.58)

where Ct is (per capita) private consumption of FL (optimizing) and HM households:
Ct = (1

&)CtO + &CtHM :

(B.59)

Total exports may be allocated to either the consumption or the investment sector abroad:
Mt = MCt + MIt :

(B.60)

The evolution of net foreign assets can be expressed as:
PB;t BF;t+1

= BF;t + PM t

Mt

PM t Mt :

(B.61)

bt

This expression can be derived from the budget constraint of the FL households after imposing
the government budget constraint, the consumption rule of the HM households, the de…nition of
…rm pro…ts, and the condition that domestic state-contingent non-government bonds (BDt+1 ) are
in zero net supply
Finally, we assume that the structure of the foreign country is isomorphic to that of the home
country.
95

B.6. Production of capital services
In an augmented variant of the model, we incorporated a …nancial accelerator mechanism into both
country blocks of our benchmark model following the basic approach of Bernanke, Gertler and
Gilchrist (1999). Thus, the intermediate goods producers rent capital services from entrepreneurs
(at the price RKt ) rather than directly from households. Entrepreneurs purchase physical capital
from competitive capital goods producers (and resell it back at the end of each period), with the
latter employing the same technology to transform investment goods into …nished capital goods
as described by equations B.47) and B.49).

To …nance the acquisition of physical capital, each

entrepreneur combines his net worth with a loan from a bank, for which the entrepreneur must
pay an external …nance premium (over the risk-free interest rate set by the central bank) due
to an agency problem.

Banks obtain funds to lend to the entrepreneurs by issuing deposits to

households at the interest rate set by the central bank, with households bearing no credit risk
(re‡ecting assumptions about free competition in banking and the ability of banks to diversify
their portfolios). In equilibrium, shocks that a¤ect entrepeneurial net worth –i.e., the leverage of
the corporate sector –induce ‡uctuations in the corporate …nance premium.B.9

B.7. Solution Method and Calibration
To analyze the behavior of the model, we log-linearize the model’s equations around the nonstochastic steady state. Nominal variables are rendered stationary by suitable transformations.
To solve the unconstrained version of the model, we compute the reduced-form solution of the
model for a given set of parameters using the numerical algorithm of Anderson and Moore (1985),
which provides an e¢ cient implementation of the solution method proposed by Blanchard and
B .9

We follow Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2008) by assuming that the debt contract between entrepreneurs
and banks is written in nominal terms (rather than real terms as in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1999). For
further details about the setup, see Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), and Christiano, Motto and Rostagno
(2008). An excellent exposition is also provided in Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2007).

96

Kahn (1980). When we solve the model subject to the non-linear monetary policy rule (??), we
use the techniques described in Hebden, Lindé and Svensson (2009). An important feature of the
Hebden, Lindé and Svensson algorithm is that the duration of the liquidity trap is endogenously
determined.B.10
The model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency.
country size parameter

As in the simple benchmark model, the

= 1=3; so that the periphery (the home country) constitutes 1/3 of euro

area output. The trade share of the periphery is set to 15 percent of periphery GDP. This pins
down the trade share parameters ! C and ! I for the home country under the additional assumption
that the import intensity of consumption is equal to 3/4 that of investment. The trade share of
the foreign economy is thus 7.5 percent. We assume that

C

=

I

= 2, consistent with a long-run

price elasticity of demand for imported consumption and investment goods of 1:1. The adjustment
cost parameters are set so that 'MC = 'MI = 1, which slightly damps the near-term relative price
sensitivity. The …nancial intermediation parameter

b

is set to a very small value (0:00001), which

is su¢ cient to ensure the model has a unique steady state.
The utility functional parameter

is set equal to 1 to ensure that the model exhibit balanced

growth, while the parameter determining the degree of habit persistence in consumption is estimated
to be { = 0:877 (as discussed in the text). The Frisch elasticity of labor supply is set to 0.4 (so
= 2:5): The utility parameter

0

is set so that employment comprises one-third of the household’s

time endowment, while the parameter

0

on the subutility function for real balances is set at an

arbitrarily low value (so that variation in real balances do not a¤ect equilibrium allocations). We
set the share of HM agents & = 0:65; implying that these agents account for about one third of
aggregate private consumption spending (the latter is much smaller than the population share of
HM agents because the latter own no capital).
B .1 0

In future work, it would be of interest to solve the model in a fully non-linear form.

97

The parameter determining investment adjustment costs is estimated to be
depreciation rate of capital
percent). The parameter
is set to

I

= 1:941: The

is set at 0:03 (consistent with an annual depreciation rate of 12
in the CES production function of the intermediate goods producers

2; implying an elasticity of substitution between capital and labor (1 + )= , of 1/2.

The quasi-capital share parameter ! K – together with the price markup parameter of

= 0:20

P

– is chosen to imply a steady state investment to output ratio of 15 percent. In the augmented
version of the model with a …nancial accelerator, our calibration of parameters follows Bernanke,
Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). In particular, the monitoring cost,

, expressed as a proportion of

entrepreneurs’ total gross revenue, is set to 0:12. The default rate of entrepreneurs is 3 percent
per year, and the variance of the idiosyncratic productivity shocks to entrepreneurs is 0:28:
As discussed in the text, the Calvo price contract duration parameter is estimated to be
0:944, while the wage contract duration parameter is estimated to be
of price indexation

p

= 0:65 and wage indexation indexation

w

=

= 0:871: We set the degree

= 0:65; while the wage markup

= 1=3:B.11 The parameters of the monetary rule are set such that
With the discount factor set at

w

p

= 2:5,

x

= 0, and

i

W

= 0:7:

= 0:99875 and the in‡ation target at 2 percent, the steady state

nominal interest rate is 2.5 percent.
The parameters pertaining to …scal policy are intended to roughly capture the revenue and
spending sides of euro area government budgets. The share of government spending on goods and
services is set equal to 23 percent of steady state output. The government debt to GDP ratio, bG ,
is set to 0:75, roughly equal to the average level of debt in euro area countries at end-2008. The
ratio of transfers to GDP is set to 20 percent. The steady state sales (i.e., VAT) tax rate
set to 0:2, while the capital tax
B .1 1

K

C

is

is set to 0:30. Given the annualized steady state real interest

Given strategic complementarities in wage-setting, the wage markup in‡uences the slope of the wage Phillips

Curve.

98

rate (of 0.5 percent), the government’s intertemporal budget constraint then implies that the labor
income tax rate

N

in (B.56) by setting

equals 0:42 in steady state. We assume an unaggressive tax adjustment rule
1

= 0:985 and

2

=

3

= :1.

Finally, the …rst order autoregressive coe¢ cient

g

on the government spending shock is esti-

mated to be 0.92, while the persistence of the consumption demand shock is set to 0.9, and the
technology shock 0.975 (noting that we assume that government spending follows a moving average
when simulating the e¤ects of a core government spending hike).

99

