NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Elliott Ash
Massimo Morelli
Richard Van Weelden
Working Paper 21422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title “Re-election Through Division.” We
would like to thank Yisehak Abraham, Tim Chan, Lorenzo Lagos, Matthew Salant, and Mariela Sirkis
for helpful research assistance. We would like to thank Ricardo Alonso, Odilon Camara, Micael Castanheira,
Paola Conconi, Olle Folke, Justin Fox, Shigeo Hirano, Sean Gailmard, Francesco Giovannoni, Navin
Kartik, Ethan Kaplan, Brian Knight, Patrick Legros, Patrick LiBihan, John Matsusaka, Nolan McCarty,
Pablo Montagnes, Suresh Naidu, Andrea Prat, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Ken
Shotts, Matthew Stephenson, Francesco Squintani, Balazs Szentes, Erik Snowberg, Mike Ting, Stephane
Wolton, and various seminar audiences for helpful comments. Morelli thanks the Carlo F. Dondena
Center for Research in Social Dynamics and Public Policies for support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Elliott Ash, Massimo Morelli, and Richard Van Weelden. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Elections and Divisiveness: Theory and Evidence
Elliott Ash, Massimo Morelli, and Richard Van Weelden
NBER Working Paper No. 21422
July 2015
JEL No. P16
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effort allocation choices of incumbent politicians when voters are uncertain
about politician preferences. There is a pervasive incentive to "posture" by over-providing effort to
pursue divisive policies, even if all voters would strictly prefer to have a consensus policy implemented.
As such, the desire of politicians to convince voters that their preferences are aligned with the majority
of the electorate can lead them to choose strictly pareto dominated effort allocations. Transparency
over the politicians' effort choices can re-enforce the distortions, and for some parameters can be bad
both for incentivizing politicians to focus on socially efficient tasks and for allowing voters to select
congruent politicians. We take our theoretical results to the data with an empirical analysis of how
Members of the U.S. Congress allocate time across issues in their floor speeches. Consistent with
the theory, we find evidence of political posturing due to elections among U.S. Senators. We also
demonstrate empirically that, among U.S. House Members, increased transparency can lead to more
divisive speech.
Elliott Ash
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
eta2103@columbia.edu
Massimo Morelli
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street, 720 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mm3331@columbia.edu

Richard Van Weelden
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
5757 S. University Ave
Chicago, IL
rvanweelden@uchicago.edu

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

1

“Most citizens want a secure country, a healthy economy, safe neighborhoods, good
schools, affordable health care, and good roads, parks, and other infrastructure.
These issues do get discussed, of course, but a disproportionate amount of attention goes to issues like abortion, gun control, the Pledge of Allegiance, medical
marijuana, and other narrow issues that simply do not motivate the great majority
of Americans.”
Fiorina et al. (2006, p. 202).
“Can’t we wait on the things that we’re going to yell at each other about and start
on the things that we agree on?”
Austan Goolsbee, Meet the Press, August 7, 2011.

1. Introduction
As the above quotes illustrate, there is a widespread perception that the political process
involves excessive amounts of time devoted to narrow and divisive issues. If this is true, it raises
the question of why politicians spend so much time on these issues. Moreover, it is sometimes
argued that the emphasis on divisive issues could be a response to electoral pressures (e.g.,
Hillygus and Shields 2014). This suggests that, far from pulling candidates toward the center,
concern for re-election may distract politicians from dealing with important issues that lack a
substantial dimension of ideological conflict. In this paper we seek to understand why, and to
what extent, electoral pressures drive the focus on divisive issues.
We provide a positive theory of incumbent politicians’ allocation of effort and resources across
policy issues — issues that differ in terms of importance as well as in terms of how divisive they
are in public opinion. When voters are uncertain about politicians’ preferences, and politician
preferences affect their policy choices in the future, politicians have an incentive to over-provide
effort on divisive issues, at the expense of common-values ones, in order to signal that they hold
preferences that make them more electable.1 This is true even if those issues are comparatively
1

For an example of a common-values issue that is chronically unaddressed consider investments in U.S. infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, aviation, rail, drinking water, waste water, and solid waste. The American Society of
Civil Engineers has consistently given U.S. infrastructure a D or D+ grade since 1998 citing “a significant backlog
of overdue maintenance across our infrastructure systems, a pressing need for modernization.” (Clark 2013).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

2

less important. We then exploit variation in the time to re-election for U.S. Senators to demonstrate empirically that, consistent with our theory, Senators focus more time on divisive issues
when elections are more imminent.
To address our motivating question, we need a new theory of how electoral pressures can induce distortions in policymaking. By and large the previous literature on electoral pressures has
focused on the incentives for politicians to “pander” (e.g., Canes-Wrone et al. 2001, Maskin and
Tirole 2004), whereby politicians, who may have better information than voters about the effects
of different policies, distort this information in an effort to signal competence or congruence with
the electorate. Our paper asks instead which policy issues politicians focus on, and generates
different predictions. Rather than finding that policymakers will take relatively extreme actions
(e.g., Acemoglu et al. 2013, Fox and Stephenson 2014), or that valuable information of policymakers is lost (e.g., Canes-Wrone and Shotts 2007, Fox 2007, Morelli and Van Weelden 2013),
our model predicts that a greater electoral motive will increase congruence between politicians’
actions on a given issue and the voters, but, at the same time, distort their focus from commonvalues issues toward those that are more divisive. Consequently, distortions in policymaking may
not take the form of changes in policies on a given issue, but rather a misalignment between the
focus given to different issues and their relative importance. This observation motivates a new
empirical question, as the relative focus given to different issues cannot be measured by studying
the positions taken (e.g. roll call votes). We investigate how electoral pressures influence the
effort exerted across different dimensions of policymaking by looking at floor speeches made by
U.S. Senators and Members of the House of Representatives.
The literature on politicians’ choice of which issues to focus on is relatively small and mainly focuses on salience concerns with fixed candidate policies. Colomer and Llavador (2011), Aragones
et al. (2015), and Dragu and Fan (2014) all focus on politicians’ attempts in campaigns to add
salience to issues on which their party has an advantage.2 More generally, there is a large literature in economics and political science stemming from Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), on how
agents allocate effort across tasks.3 This literature focuses on signaling competence rather than

2

Dragu and Fan (2014) predict that in two party elections only the minority party has an incentive to increase the
salience of issues with a high heterogeneity and variance of opinions (and sometimes even when the party does
not have an expected advantage), something distinct from our incumbents’ incentive to focus on divisive issues.
3
See Caillaud and Tirole (2002), Ashworth (2005), and Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2006), among others.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

3

preferences and, to our knowledge, none of these papers consider the allocation of effort between
divisive and common-values issues. Our paper is the first to analyze this tradeoff.
In our model, an incumbent politician decides how to allocate effort across two issues, a
common-values issue and a divisive issue. Like voters, politicians vary in their policy preferences
on the divisive issue but share the same preferences on the common-values one. The voters
observe the incumbent’s actions, draw inferences about her type, then vote on whether to reelect her or not. Politicians are more likely to be re-elected if they are seen to have preferences
that are aligned with the median voter at the time of the next election.
Voter uncertainty about politician preferences on divisive issues, coupled with the potential
for policy disagreements in a future period, motivates politicians to focus effort on divisive issues
rather than common-values ones. We refer to this excessive exertion of effort on divisive issues
at the expense of common-values issues as posturing. Politicians posture because more highly
divided preferences on an issue means greater uncertainty about her preferences, increasing the
electoral value of signaling. We show that even when there exist very important common-values
issues that everybody agrees should be solved first, incumbent politicians over-provide effort
on divisive issues to signal their preferences. Hence, posturing may involve first-period effort
allocations that are strictly pareto dominated.4 With a sufficiently strong re-election motive,
there is a pooling equilibrium in which all politicians posture by focusing on the divisive issue.
A pooling equilibrium not only induces distortions in the politician’s behavior; it also impedes
the ability of voters to screen politicians and retain those with more aligned policy preferences.
In the first part of the paper we assume that voters can observe the effort allocation chosen by
the incumbent politician. In the second part we ask what happens when voters cannot observe
politicians’ effort allocation, but only the policy consequences that result. In some cases it is
more difficult than others to observe the actions taken by politicians, and this observability can
be influenced by various institutional and legal factors. Although the degree of transparency
can influence the political process in many ways, our analysis focuses on the allocation of effort
between common-values and divisive issues. We show that increased transparency can have
ambiguous effects on politician behavior, sometimes increasing the electoral benefit from socially

4

As has been discussed in the previous literature, electoral pressures can have both positive and negative effects on
politician behavior, and there is often a friction between incentivizing politicians to implement desirable policies
today and selecting candidates who will implement desirable policies in the future (e.g., Fearon 1999).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

4

inefficient posturing.5 While the incentive to posture still exists when politician effort choices
are non-transparent, increased transparency may not only increase posturing, but also decrease
the amount voters learn about policymakers in the process. The intuition is that, as posturing
is more advantageous when effort choices are more transparent, greater transparency increases
the likelihood that the equilibrium involves pooling with maximal posturing. So, for appropriate
parameters, transparency can be harmful both for policymaking in the current period and for
selecting congruent politicians in the future.
The paper concludes with an empirical study motivated by the posturing theory. We proxy
for effort exerted across issues with the amount of speech dedicated to different issues on the
House/Senate floor, using a measure of divisive speech based on Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010)
and Jensen et al. (2012). We use panel data with legislator fixed effects, and therefore our
estimates measure the within-legislator responses to posturing-related treatments. From the
theory we expect effort on divisive issues to increase with the strength of electoral incentives
— which we identify using the staggered election cycle in the U.S. Senate. We find that when
Senators are up for election, they allocate more floor speech to divisive issues relative to other
years in their term. This result is consistent with electorally induced posturing.
In the second part of our empirical analysis we measure the effect of greater transparency on
divisiveness. The theory is less clear about the effect of transparency, but identifies conditions
under which increased transparency can lead to increased divisiveness. To identify higher transparency empirically, we use the instrument for news coverage of U.S. House members developed
by Snyder and Stromberg (2010). We find evidence that House members engage in more divisive
speech when there is higher news transparency. This result complements previous work on the
benefits of transparency: for example, Snyder and Stromberg (2010) find that increased transparency increases politician effort, consistent with the predictions of models of accountability
(e.g. Ferejohn 1986). While there are many benefits of transparency, we identify a possible
downside in terms of how effort is divided across issues. The theoretical possibility that transparency can induce distortions has been noticed (e.g., Prat 2005, Fox 2007, Fox and Van Weelden
2012), but not empirically explored, in the previous literature.

5

Dan Rostenkowski, the longtime chairman of the House Ways and Means committee, shared this concern, arguing
that “as much as people criticize the back room, the dark room, or the cigar or smoke-filled room, you get things
done when you’re not acting” (Koeneman 2013).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

5

In sum, we provide a rationale for why electoral pressures and transparency can incentivize
politicians to focus excessive effort on divisive issues and then present empirical evidence in
support of that rationale. However, our empirical results should be of broader interest than as a
test of our model of divisive politics. To the extent that an increased focus on divisive issues is
socially harmful (e.g. Fiorina et al. 2006), our results provide important empirical verification for
the argument that electoral pressures can induce distortions in policymaking. A large theoretical
literature has explored the risks of socially harmful pandering, and the ways in which increased
transparency can exacerbate these distortions (see Ashworth 2012 for an overview). However
there has been little empirical work to document these theoretical findings. This is because
pandering is challenging to test empirically, given that its predictions concern the unobservable
private information of policymakers.6 Our results provide an important step in understanding
how electoral pressures can induce distortions from an empirical perspective.
Our results also speak to the debate on the causes of electoral polarization. While there is
extensive evidence documenting the significant and increased polarization between the parties
(McCarty et al. 2006), it is less clear whether this polarization reflects deep divisions in the
broader electorate. While some authors (Fiorina et al. 2006, Lee 2009, Bafumi and Herron 2010)
argue that political disagreements are excessive given the degree of ideological heterogeneity
in the electorate, others (Abramowitz 2010, Jacoby 2014) document substantial disagreements
among voters as well. We find that the electoral process can be a force to magnify policy
disagreements. However, the electoral process only magnifies, it does not create, polarization:
the excessive focus on divisive issues only arises because politicians feel compelled to signal their
preferences on divisive issues that voters do care about.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present the model and section 3 analyzes
the equilibrium. Section 4 extends the model to heterogenous constituencies. Section 5 reports
the empirics and section 6 concludes. An online appendix includes the proofs of the theoretical
results and additional detail on the empirical specification.

6

Canes-Wrone and Shotts (2004) and Rottinghaus (2006) however provide evidence of pandering by showing that,
consistent with these models, politicians are more responsive to public opinion on issues on which voters are more
informed.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

6

2. Model
We consider a two-period model in which a politician takes action to influence policy in each
period, with an election between periods. In each period the incumbent politician has to decide
how to allocate effort, or other scarce resources such as money or personnel, between two issues,
A and B. On issue A, the politician allocates effort wA ∈ [0, 1]; on issue B the politician chooses
wB ∈ [−1, 1] to reflect both the amount of time she spends on issue B (|wB | ∈ [0, 1]) as well as
whether to spend the time she devotes to B on increasing (wB > 0) or decreasing (wB < 0) the
policy in that dimension. We assume that the politician is constrained to choose wA + |wB | ≤ W ,
where W ∈ (0, 2). We normalize the status quo policy to be 0 in each dimension, and assume
that if effort wA is exerted on issue A the policy will be pA = 1 with probability wA and 0 with
probability 1 − wA . Similarly devoting effort wB ≥ 0 (wB < 0) to issue B results in policy pB = 1
(pB = −1) with probability |wB | and pB = 0 with probability 1 − |wB |.7
When W is small, the policy the politician pursues is unlikely to have an effect; when W ≈ 2,
she is able to change the policy in both dimensions with high probability if she chooses; for
intermediate values of W the politician faces a tradeoff where she can influence policy but may
not be able to do everything she wants. Thus the parameter W is a measure of the power of the
office in question. For example, the Prime Minister in a unicameral parliamentary system, as
the head of both the executive and legislative branch, is likely to have a higher W than the U.S.
President, especially in a period of divided government. Similarly, within the same institutional
system, a Member of Congress or Parliament would no doubt have a lower W than the President
or Prime Minister.
In addition to caring about policy, voters receive some additional payoff from having a politician
who is high valence—someone who is an able administrator or who they like personally. We
assume the distribution of valence among politicians is normally distributed with mean 0 and
variance σ 2 > 0. The politician’s valence is unknown to both the politician and voters initially,
but is revealed to everyone when the politician is in office and constant across periods. As the
incumbent does not know her own valence when choosing how to allocate effort in the initial
7We

could allow politicians the option to decrease the policy in the A dimension as well, but this would be
uninteresting as all voters and politicians have a common interest in pA not decreasing. Moreover, while we
assume that the mapping between effort and policy change is the same for both issues this is not necessary. We
could allow this to be asymmetric — for example, assuming the probabilities of policy change are αA wA and
αB |wB | respectively — and the results would still hold just with additional parameters and algebra.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

7

period, and voters learn the incumbent’s (time invariant) valence regardless of her action, the
valence component serves only to ensure that voters are (generically) not indifferent between
re-electing the incumbent and not. This ensures that the probability of re-election will vary
continuously with the voters’ beliefs about the politician’s type.
In each period, t ∈ {1, 2}, the stage game utility of voter i is
j
B
B
−γ|θt − pA
t | − (1 − γ)|xi − pt | + vt ,
j
B
where pA
t and pt are the policies implemented in period t, vt is the valence of politician j who

is in office in period t, and θt and xB
i are the preferred policies in each dimension for voter i. So
θt ∈ {0, 1} reflects whether all voters prefer policy pA = 1 or pA = 0 in period t. Conversely,
the voters may be type xB = −1 or xB = 1 reflecting their preferred policy in dimension B. To
keep the analysis simple we assume that preferences in dimension B do not depend on the state,
although this is not necessary for our analysis.
In period 1 a strict majority of voters, m1 ∈ (1/2, 1), are type xB
i = 1 and so prefer higher
policies in the B dimension. The assumption that m1 ≥ 1/2 is without loss of generality, so the
meaningful assumption is that the electorate is not perfectly divided on issue B (m1 6= 1/2).
We also assume that the fraction of type xB
i = 1 voters in period 2 is m2 and that P r(m2 >
1/2) = 1 − η and P r(m2 < 1/2) = η, where η ∈ [0, 1/2). When η > 0, there is a possibility
that vote preferences may shift before the next election, but, as η < 1/2, majority opinion is
correlated across periods. The parameter η reflects the degree of uncertainty about which side
of the issue majority opinion will be on the divisive issue in the next period. As there is likely
greater uncertainty about voter preferences further in the future, η is smaller when the next
election is more imminent — this will be important for deriving comparative statics that we test
in our empirical analysis.
We assume that θ1 = 1 so that, in the current period, it is in the interest of all voters to
have the A issue addressed, and the probability that θ2 = 1 is q ∈ (0, 1). This means that,
with some probability, the voters will be content with the status quo policy on A in the second
period. As our analysis focuses on the behavior of politicians in the first period we assume that
θ1 = 1 so voters would benefit from (appropriately directed) effort on two different tasks, making
the politician’s multi-task problem non-trivial. In the second period, it is important that the
politician’s type matters for voters’ payoffs. We ensure this by assuming that q < 1 and so

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

8

different types choose different effort allocations with positive probability in the second period.
Finally, we assume that γ ∈ (1/2, 1) so that all voters care more about issue A than issue B.
This is not necessary for our results, but corresponds to the case where all players prefer A to be
done first, and so biases against effort focused on B. When γ < 1/2, politicians still focus first
on the B issue, and this effort allocation is optimal for a majority of voters. We focus on the case
in which γ > 1/2 in order to provide a theory of why politicians may not address common-values
issues even if they are more important.
Politicians are drawn from a (possibly proper) subset of the voters themselves, and so, like the
voters, the preferences of the politicians are homogenous on the A dimension and heterogenous
on the B dimension. We assume that fraction mP ∈ (1/2, 1) of the politicians are type xB = 1
and that 1 − mP are type xB = −1.8
In addition to having preferences over policy, the politician receives a positive benefit φ from
B
being in office. So the stage game utility of politician j if (pA
t , pt ) is implemented is
B
B
φ − γ|θt − pA
t | − (1 − γ)|xj − pt |,

if they are in office, and, if politician k 6= j is in office,
B
B
k
−γ|θt − pA
t | − (1 − γ)|xj − pt | + vt .

If out of office then a politician is identical to a voter with the same policy preferences, but in
office she receives a benefit φ from holding office regardless of her own valence. The parameter
φ could include monetary and non monetary rewards from being elected, or could be a reduced
form of the continuation value of remaining in office. For simplicity we assume that effort is not
costly for the elected politician — the incentives to exert costly effort by incumbent politicians
have been studied in the previous literature.
Voters form beliefs about the type of the politician. As there are only two types we define
µ ≡ P r(xB
j = 1),
to be the voters’ beliefs that the incumbent politician is type 1. The game is repeated with
discount factor δ ∈ (0, 1). The timing is as follows.
8We

assume that a majority of politicians hold the same policy preferences as the majority of the period 1 voters.
This plays no role in the mechanism we consider, but, if mP < 1/2, then, because type 1 politicians would have
more to lose from not securing re-election, it is possible, for some parameters, to support other equilibria in which
there is additional costly signaling to convince the voters that the re-election motive is strong.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

9

(1) In period 1 a politician is randomly selected to be in office for that period. The politician
knows her own type, but voters only know the type distribution.
(2) The politician decides how to allocate effort (wA and wB ). Two subcases:
(a) The voters observe the effort decision — transparency case;
(b) Voters do not observe the effort decision — no transparency case.
(3) The incumbent’s valence v j is realized and publicly observed. The politician’s valence is
constant across periods.
(4) The policies are determined, with all players receiving their utilities for period 1. Voters
observe outcomes and update beliefs about the politician.
(5) The fraction of type xB = 1 voters in period 2, m2 is realized, and an election takes place
by majority rule over whether or not to re-elect the incumbent. If the incumbent is not
re-elected a random replacement is drawn.
(6) θ2 is realized, and the politician decides how to allocate effort in period 2.
(7) The policy is realized with all players receiving their payoff for period 2.
Notice that we specify the game so that the status quo in period 2 is not affected by the
outcome in the period 1. This is natural if new policy issues arise each period and preferences
are correlated across the issues faced in different periods. Moreover, assumptions about the
second period status quo do not drive the results. Regardless of the second period status quo,
politicians of different types disagree on the optimal effort allocation with positive probability
in the second period,9 making the politician’s type relevant to voters. Hence signaling incentives
exist in the first period, the period our analysis focuses on.
Finally, before proceeding to the analysis, note that we have assumed the election takes place by
majority rule and abstracted from parties or the selection of candidates. However, an alternative
application of our model is to primary elections. Suppose that, instead of a fear of losing the
general election, the greatest threshold the incumbent must cross to be re-elected is to secure
renomination by her party.10 If the incumbent wins the primary she will be re-elected in the
general election with certainty, whereas if the incumbent is defeated in the primary a random
9When

θ2 = 0 type 1 politicians are incentivized to exert effort to increase the policy in the B dimension, and
type −1 to decrease it. Regardless of the status quo policy in the second period at least one of those alternatives
is feasible and so majority-type voters receive a higher expected payoff from majority-type politicians.
10
The tea party and Club for Growth have backed successful Republican primary challenges in recent elections,
notably against Bob Bennett in 2010 and Richard Lugar in 2012. Such threats also exists for Democratic incumbents. For example, Blanche Lincoln lost her bid for re-election after a difficult primary challenge in 2010.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

10

draw from the same party replaces her on the ticket and wins the general election. While stark,
this is a reasonable approximation to heavily gerrymandered districts, or in conservative states
with possible tea party challenges. With this interpretation of our model, majority opinion
reflects the majority within the primary electorate in the incumbent’s party.
3. Analysis
3.1. Politician Second Period Behavior and the Voters’ Re-Election Decision. We
look for Perfect Bayesian Equilibria, restricting attention to those in which all voters always
hold the same beliefs about the politician’s type. We begin by solving for politician behavior in
period 2, at which point the politician is unaccountable to voters. Consequently, regardless of
the observability of the politician’s effort choice, the politician will choose the effort allocation
that maximizes her policy payoff. As γ > 1/2, all politicians, as well as all voters, care more
about issue A than issue B. Hence, the politician focuses first on addressing issue A, if any
change is desired on that issue (θ2 = 1). The politician will then spend any left over effort on
the B dimension, with the type 1 politician exerting effort to implement pB = 1 and the type
−1 politician to implement pB = −1. We then have the following lemma.
Lemma 1. Politician Action in the Second Period
In period t = 2,
(1) a politician of type 1 will choose wA = min{W, 1} and wB = W − wA when θ2 = 1, and
wB = min{W, 1} and wA = 0 when θ2 = 0.
(2) a politician of type −1 will choose wA = min{W, 1} and wB = −(W − wA ) when θ2 = 1
and wB = − min{W, 1} and wA = 0 when θ2 = 0.
Note that, as q ∈ (0, 1), the second period behavior of different politician types differs with
positive probability regardless of W . This makes the politician’s type relevant to the voters.
We next consider the decision faced by the voters. Voters who are type xB = 1 (xB = −1) will
support the incumbent if she is sufficiently likely to be type 1 (type −1) relative to a random
replacement. How high a probability voters must place on the politician being their desired type
depends on her valence. We assume that all voters vote for the candidate they prefer, and that
the politician is re-elected if and only if she receives at least half the votes. Note that this means
that the politician will be re-elected if and only if the majority type at the time of the election

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

11

(which, is type 1 with probability 1 − η > 1/2) supports her re-election. As the next lemma
shows, the probability the incumbent is re-elected is strictly increasing in µ, the voters’ belief
that she is type 1, and greater (less) than 1/2 if she is more (less) likely to be type 1 than a
randomly drawn replacement.
Lemma 2. Voter Behavior
The incumbent’s re-election probability is strictly increasing in µ, with P r(re − elect|µ = mP ) =
1/2.
We now turn to analyzing the first period effort choice, first in the model with transparent
effort, then in the case in which only the outcome is observable.
3.2. Equilibrium with Observable Effort Choices. We first analyze the case with transparent effort—when voters observe (wA , wB ) as well as (pA , pB ). As this is a signaling game it will
admit many equilibria, especially when re-election concerns are paramount (φ is high), depending
on voters’ off-path beliefs. However, applying criterion D1 from Cho and Kreps (1987) generates
a unique equilibrium prediction—the equilibrium is unique up to the beliefs at certain off-path
information sets. As standard in this literature, we focus on the D1 equilibrium. Criterion D1
simply says that, if the voters see an out of equilibrium effort allocation, they should believe it
was taken by the type of politician who would have an incentive to choose that allocation for the
least restrictive set of beliefs. A formal definition is included in the Appendix. We henceforth
refer to an equilibrium satisfying D1 as simply an equilibrium.
We now solve for equilibrium behavior. As the type 1 politician receives positive utility from
increasing pB , while the type −1 politician receives a negative payoff from doing so, the type
1 politician has a greater incentive to choose wB > 0. There is one caveat to this however.
As politicians care about the policy implemented after leaving office, a politician has a greater
incentive to secure re-election if her replacement is less likely to be the same type. So, if φ is
very low and mP is close to one, a majority politician receives little benefit from re-election, and
so has less incentive to posture even though it is comparatively less costly. However, when φ is
not too small—greater than some non-negative level φ̂—the benefits from re-election are large
enough that type 1 politicians have a greater incentive to posture.
Consider first the case in which φ is low (but greater than φ̂), so politicians are more concerned
with the policy implemented in the current period than with securing re-election. Consequently,

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

12

in equilibrium, both types focus the bulk of their energies on issue A. Notice, however, that the
equilibrium must involve the type 1 politician separating themselves by placing strictly positive
effort on B. As the type 1 politician has a strictly greater incentive to choose B than the type
−1 politician, criterion D1 requires that if wB is greater than the equilibrium level, even by an
arbitrarily small amount, the voters infer that the incumbent is type 1, leading to a discrete jump
in her re-election probability. Hence, the equilibrium is a separating, with type −1 focusing on
A and type 1 exerting just enough effort on B to reveal their type.
Now consider the case in which φ is high, and so the primary concern of politicians is to secure
re-election. Then, although type 1 politicians still have an incentive to try to separate by putting
additional effort on issue B, a type −1 politician is no longer willing to reduce her re-election
probability by focusing effort on her preferred policy and revealing herself to be the type −1. As
the type −1 politician always has an incentive to mimic type 1, and the type 1 politician always
has an incentive to try to separate by increasing wB , the only possible equilibrium is a pooling
equilibrium in which all politicians put maximal effort on issue B.
Finally note that, by Lemma 2, emphasizing B in a separating equilibrium results in reelection with a higher probability than in a pooling equilibrium. For intermediate levels of
office-motivation, then, it is not possible to have an equilibrium that is either separating, as the
type −1 politician would have an incentive to mimic type 1, or pooling, as the type −1 politician
would not be incentivized to posture. For this range of parameters the equilibrium is partiallypooling, with the type 1 politician emphasizing issue B, and the type −1 politician randomizing
between focusing on A and mimicking the type 1’s action.
The above discussion leads to the following equilibrium characterization.
Proposition 1. Characterization of Equilibrium
There exists φ̂(W ) ≥ 0 such that, when φ > φ̂(W ), there is a unique equilibrium up to the
beliefs at off-path information sets. Further, there exist φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W ) with φ̂(W ) ≤
φ̄(σ, η, W ) ≤ φ∗ (σ, η, W ) such that, in the first period,
(1) if φ ∈ (φ̂(W ), φ̄(σ, η, W )], type 1 politicians choose wB > 0 and wA = W − wB and the
type −1 politicians choose wA = min{W, 1}, wB = −(W − wA ).
(2) if φ ∈ (φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )), type 1 politicians choose wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB
and the type −1 politician randomizes with a non-degenerate probability between wB =
min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB and wA = min{W, 1}, wB = −(W − wA ).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

13

(3) if φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ) all politicians choose wB = min{W, 1} and wA = W − wB .
Moreover, there exists W̄ ∈ (1, 2] such that 0 ≤ φ̂(W ) < φ̄(σ, η, W ) < φ∗ (σ, η, W ) for all
W ∈ (0, W̄ ). Finally, there exists γ̄ > 1/2 such that W̄ = 2 when γ < γ̄.
Proposition 1 characterizes the equilibrium behavior and the resulting inefficiencies. As γ >
1/2, all voters and politicians agree that issue A is more important and would receive a greater
utility benefit from effort spent on A than B. So, in the first period, if wA < min{W, 1}, as
happens for many parameter values, the result is that a pareto dominated effort allocation is
chosen. When, as in part (3), the office motivation is strong, and both types exert full effort
on issue B—which we refer to as a posturing equilibrium—the effect is particularly pronounced.
Not only is there the largest possible distortion of effort away from issue A, but this distortion
is driven by the incentives for politicians to signal to voters. However, since both types posture,
voters don’t learn anything about the incumbent politician from this socially wasteful signaling.11
We now consider how φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W ) vary with the parameters. As it is only
possible to support separating equilibria when φ ≤ φ̄(σ, η, W ), and only possible to support an
equilibrium other than the posturing one when φ < φ∗ (σ, η, W ), φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W ) are
indices of how likely (in a world of random parameter values) it is to have an equilibrium without
pervasive posturing. When η and σ increase it is more difficult to support posturing because
the voters’ beliefs about the incumbent have less impact on her re-election probability, either
because valence is more important (higher σ) or because voter preferences are more likely to shift
(higher η). Perhaps more interesting is the effect of W , the institutional authority parameter.
Proposition 2. Comparative Statics
(1) φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W ) are both increasing in η and σ.
(2) Defining φ̄0 (η, W ) ≡ limσ→0 φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗0 (η, W ) ≡ limσ→0 φ∗ (σ, η, W ), φ̄0 (η, W ) and
φ∗0 (η, W ) are strictly increasing in W on (0, 1) and strictly decreasing on (1, W̄ ).
Part (2) of Proposition 2 shows that, when valence shocks are small, φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W )
are non-monotonic in W . If W is small, it is difficult to support a separating equilibrium. Since
11While

a posturing equilibrium always exists if the office motivation is strong enough, when W ≈ 2 and γ ≈ 1
a separating equilibrium may not exist for any φ. Since issue A will be addressed with probability close to 1
even if wB = 1, and exerting effort on B provides little disutility to the type −1 politician, to have a separating
equilibrium requires lower office motivation than necessary to induce signaling. A separating equilibrium always
exists, for appropriate levels of office motivation, when W is not too close to 2 (W ≤ W̄ ∈ (1, 2]), or γ is not too
close to 1 (γ < γ̄).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

14

politicians effort choices are unlikely to influence policy, they have a greater incentive to choose
the allocation most likely to get them re-elected — in this case, that means pooling on B.12
As W increases, effort choices are more likely to have policy consequences, so the incentive for
the politician to allocate effort to her preferred policy increases. However, if W is greater than
1, further increases in W make it more difficult to support a separating equilibrium. This is
because, when W is large, politicians are capable of getting both pA = 1 and pB = 1 with high
probability. As the greatest cost of effort spent to implement pB = 1 is when it comes directly
at the expense of effort that could be allocated to the A policy, the costs of posturing are lower
when W is large. When W = 1 the policy consequences are starkest and so the equilibrium is
separating for the widest range of parameters.
3.3. First Period Behavior with Unobservable Effort Choices. We now consider the
incentives when the effort allocation is not transparent. That is, we assume that the voters
can observe only the outcomes (pA and pB ) but not the effort allocations (wA and wB ).13 As
the incentive for the politician to take each action depends on the voters’ beliefs after each
outcome, the beliefs after off-path outcomes can still play a key role in determining the politician’s
incentives. Further, since a non-status-quo policy can only result if a politician exerts positive
effort on the issue, off-path information sets could arise depending on the politicians’ strategies.
In our analysis, we focus on the case in which φ is large, so the dominant concern is to secure
re-election. Then, if the politician’s effort allocation were transparent, the result would be
a posturing equilibrium in which both types focus effort on issue B. As this setting is further
removed from the original sender-receiver setting of Cho and Kreps (1987), rather than adapt the
refinement further, we simply focus attention on equilibria in which the type 1 politician’s action
corresponds to the transparency case. We then consider the behavior of type −1 politicians.
The effect of transparency depends critically on W . When the effort allocation is transparent,
if the voters observe any effort allocation other than that chosen by type 1, they know with
certainty that the politician deviated, and so is type −1. With non-transparency if the type −1
politician deviates this (may) not be observed with certainty. Consequently, parameter values
12Fox

and Stephenson (2011) identify a similar effect. They present a model in which judicial review, by insulating
politicians from their policy choices, can increase electoral induced distortions.
13An alternative form of non-transparency, observing w A and w B but not pA and pB would be uninteresting in
our model. Conditional on observing the effort allocation, the policy outcomes are purely random, and so the
voters do not update based on them.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

15

that admit a posturing equilibrium with transparent effort will not necessarily generate the same
behavior when effort choices are non-transparent. In particular, when W < 1, we have the
following result.
Proposition 3. Transparency Can Increase Effort and First Period Welfare
∗
A0
For any W < 1, there exists a φA0
0 (σ, η, W ) ≥ φ (σ, η, W ) such that, for all φ > φ0 (σ, η, W ),

there is a unique pure-strategy equilibrium in which the type 1 politician chooses wB = W . In
this equilibrium a type −1 politician chooses wA = 0 and wB ∈ (0, W ).
Proposition 3 characterizes the unique pure-strategy equilibrium in which type 1 politicians
focus on B when W < 1 and the re-election motive is strong.14 For high values of φ, when
W < 1, the lack of transparency creates further welfare losses in the first period: not only will
no politician exert effort on A, but type −1 politicians exert less than full effort securing pB = 1.
This is because, with non-transparency, there cannot be a pooling equilibrium. If both types
chose the same effort allocation, then, regardless of the realized outcome pB ∈ {0, 1}, voters
would not update about the politician. Because the type −1 politician strictly prefers pB = 0
to pB = 1 from a policy perspective, but the re-election probability would be the same, she
would have an incentive to deviate and choose wA = wB = 0 rather than wB = W . So we can
rule out a pooling equilibrium. Further, the type −1 politician cannot choose wA > 0 in any
equilibrium. This is because, if the type 1 politician focuses entirely on B, pA = 1 could never
occur if the politician is type 1, and so would reveal the politician as type −1 with certainty. As
the politician would not be willing to reveal this when re-election concerns are paramount, the
equilibrium must involve the type −1 politician choosing wA = 0 and wB < W . As such, when
W < 1, transparency over the effort allocation is beneficial for first period welfare. However, this
transparency impedes the selection of type 1 politicians since we have a pooling equilibrium when
effort is transparent but, when effort is non-transparent, the voters update based on the policy
outcome, pB . That transparency can involve tradeoffs between the incentives in the current
period and selection for the future is well known, but the tradeoff is generally that transparency
can be bad for incentives but good for sorting. Here we find the opposite.
While transparency has ambiguous effects on welfare when W is low, a sharper and unambiguous result holds when W > 1. As noted above, in order to support a posturing equilibrium with
14There

are also mixed strategy equilibria: because the effort choice is not transparent, any two strategies leading
to the same probability distribution over pB are equivalent for voter updating and politician payoff.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

16

transparency, we need only check that the politician does not have an incentive to deviate to her
most preferred policy and reveal herself to be type −1 with certainty. Hence we can support a
posturing equilibrium if and only if the policy gain to the politician from deviating is not enough
to justify the corresponding decrease in her re-election probability. When the effort allocation
is non-transparent, the type −1 politician still has this deviation available, but she has other
potential deviations as well. In particular, she could deviate to choose wA = 1 and wB = W − 1,
and voters will only realize she deviated if pB 6= 1. Greater office motivation is necessary to
prevent this deviation than to prevent a deviation to her most preferred effort allocation. This is
because a deviation is observed if and only if pB 6= 1. As the type −1 politician reduces her effort
on B from wB = 1 she will initially transfer this effort on her main policy goal: securing pA = 1.
Once she has ensured this with certainty, however, by setting wA = 1, further decreasing wB gives
less of a policy benefit but the same re-election cost. Hence, the minimal φ necessary to support
a posturing equilibrium is higher with non-transparency. We get the following proposition.

Proposition 4. Transparency Can Increase Posturing
There exist φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) and φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) with φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) > φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ) such
that, an equilibrium in which both types always choose allocation wB = 1, wA = W − 1 exists if
and only if φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). When φ ∈ [φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ), φ∗N A (σ, η, W )), an equilibrium exists in
which the type 1 politician chooses wB = 1, wA = W − 1 and the types −1 randomizes between
the allocations wA = 1, wB = W − 1 and wB = 1, wA = W − 1.

When φ > φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) the benefits from holding office are great enough that no politician
would want to risk pB = 0 and likely electoral defeat. Hence, regardless of the transparency
regime, in equilibrium, politicians pool on maximal effort on issue B and voters cannot update
about them. In contrast, on the range φ ∈ [φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ), φ∗N A (σ, η, W )), for the equilibrium
described, the welfare implications of non-transparency is unambiguous for a majority of voters.
Type −1 politicians place more effort on A, which gives higher payoff to everyone in the first
period. Further, because pA = 1 is more likely, and pB = 1 is less likely, when the politician is type
−1, voters learn about the politician’s type. Hence, non-transparency over actions is beneficial
in this range, both in terms of the first period action, and in terms of selecting a politician

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

17

whose preferences are aligned with the majority in the future.15 As non-transparency decreases
the reputational benefit from posturing, this breaks the equilibrium with pooling on maximal
posturing, leading to more efficient policy choices by politicians, and more voter learning.
So we have shown that, when W > 1, greater transparency can increase posturing by elected
officials and decrease the amount voters can learn from this behavior. For example, it is likely
that the advent of cable news caused politicians to focus more time on trivialities and polarizing
debates; similarly, we may worry that if cabinet meetings were televised, or the minutes were
publicly released, that concern about signaling popular preferences would distract members from
working to advance the most important goals.16 While our model considers only one dimension
of policymaking, and only one of many ways transparency can affect the policymaking process,
our results speak to this concern, while also demonstrating that voters may actually learn less
when these debates are more transparent.
4. Extension: Posturing and Polarization
So far we have considered only the decision of a single incumbent, and found that both types
posture by focusing effort on the majority position on the divisive issue. We now extend the
model to include multiple districts, allowing majority opinion to be on opposite sides on the
divisive issue in different districts. All citizens in all districts agree on the common-values issue.
We interpret type xj = −1 as the Democrat position and xj = 1 as the Republican position.
There are Republican districts and Democrat districts. In Republican districts the fraction of
voters and incumbents of type xj = 1, m1 and mP respectively, are greater than 1/2, whereas in
the Democratic districts both are less than 1/2. As in the baseline model, the majority position
in the district is reversed by the time of the election with probability η ∈ [0, 1/2). The following
result follows immediately from Proposition 1 and Proposition 2.17

15Prat

(2005) also finds that transparency can be harmful both in terms of the first period action and selection but
for a very different reason. Prat (2005) finds that increased transparency can increase the risk of “conformism"
whereby the politician would be unwilling to take an action that goes against the voters’ prior.
16Kaiser’s (2013) account of the passage of the Dodd-Frank act bears this out. He argues that televising the
debate made it very difficult to focus on the important parts of banking regulation.
17For simplicity we state Proposition 5 with transparent effort. When effort is non-transparent a similar result
obtains, but the statement of incumbent behavior is slightly more complicated when W < 1.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

18

Proposition 5. Posturing with Heterogeneous Districts
Under transparency when φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ), an incumbent of either type in a Republican district
chooses wB = min{W, 1} and wA = W − wB , and an incumbent of either type in a Democrat district chooses wB = − min{W, 1} and wA = W + wB , in the first period. Furthermore φ∗ (σ, η, W )
is decreasing in η.
Proposition 5 then predicts that when incumbents represent different constituencies, with
different views on the divisive issue, Republicans and Democrats will focus on pushing the policies
on contentious issues in opposite directions. While many concerns have been expressed about
the polarization of American politics (e.g. Fiorina et al. 2006, McCarty et al. 2006), our results
suggest that one concern may be that it distracts politicians from common-values issues. If
different politicians are posturing to different constituencies, Republicans and Democrats will
focus their attention on pursuing diametrically opposed goals on the issues on which voters
disagree, ignoring important common-values issues in the process. It is the focus on diametrically
opposed goals for Republicans and Democrats that we test empirically in the next section.

5. Empirical Evidence of Political Posturing
This section reports an empirical investigation of political posturing motivated by the theoretical results described in the previous sections. Our approach is to construct a measure of
political posturing among Members of Congress by analyzing the divisiveness of their speech. We
then explore two questions derived from our theoretical framework. First, do stronger electoral
concerns induce greater political posturing by incumbents? Second, do incumbents engage in
more or less posturing when their actions are more transparent?
On the first question, our theory provides a clear testable hypothesis: We expect greater posturing when electoral concerns are stronger. In particular Proposition 5 predicts that legislators
in Republican states will focus on pushing the policy on the divisive issue in one direction, and
legislators in Democratic states will focus on pushing policy in the other direction — provided
the concern for re-election is sufficiently strong. Our empirical approach is to use the staggered
election cycle in the U.S. Senate as exogenous variation in the strength of electoral incentives.
We measure the within-senator change in divisiveness during election years, relative to earlier
years in the term.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

19

For the second question we don’t have as clear a hypothesis. Proposition 4 shows that increased
transparency is associated with more divisive speech, but only when some conditions are met
(high office motivation and high W ). We examine the effect of transparency empirically in the
House of Representatives, exploiting variation in the overlap between Congressional districts and
local media markets to generate an index of transparency. We then test whether House members
engage in more divisive speech or less divisive speech when the media coverage is stronger. If
transparency is associated with greater divisiveness in our sample of Congressmen, that would
be consistent with our posturing model when office motivation and W are high.
[Table 1 (Legislator Characteristics and Treatment Variables)]
Our sample of politicians for the election analysis is the set of 331 Senators working for the
years 1973 through 2012 (the 93rd through 112th congressional sessions). To identify the effect
of stronger electoral incentives, we exploit the staggering of elections. Senators face re-election
every six years, with one third of the Senators up for re-election in any given election cycle.
This gives variation in the time to re-election, with stronger electoral pressures when the next
election is more imminent. This is formalized in the model as greater uncertainty about voter
policy preferences at the time of an election that is further in the future.18 Previous papers
demonstrating that the staggered election cycle can affect Senator behavior include Kuklinski
(1978), Elling (1982), Thomas (1985), Levitt (1996), Conconi et al. (2014), and Bouton et al.
(2014). Other papers have used congressional speech to explore political language, including
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Quinn et al. (2010), Jensen at al. (2012), Taddy (2013), and
Gentzkow et al. (2015). Quinn et al. (2010) look at how the topics of speech differ for Senators
who are up for election, but in a more qualitative fashion using cross-sectional data. Jensen et
al. (2012) and Gentzkow et al. (2015) look at time-series variation in polarization in the House
of Representatives over time, but do not look at within-legislator changes in divisive speech.
Building on the approach in these papers, we use fixed effects for each Senator and see how
the behavior of a Senator varies according to her electoral cohort. If cohort status is as good as
randomly assigned (conditional on the fixed effects), we obtain consistent estimates of the effect
of being up for election on the outcome variables of interest. In our regression framework, we
represent the election treatment by the variable Eit for electoral cohort, which equals one for the
18An

alternative rationale is that voters are more likely to forget the statements that occurred further in time
before the election. Voter forgetfulness over short time spans is documented in Lodge et al. (1995) and Bechtel
and Hainmueller (2011).

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

20

first cohort, two for the second cohort, and three for the third cohort (that is, currently up for
election). This specification provides a simple linear model of the strength of electoral incentives
and is motivated by the upward trend in divisiveness over the election cycle illustrated in Figure
1 below.
Our sample of politicians for the transparency analysis is the set of 653 U.S. House Members
working for the years 1991 through 2002 (the 102nd through 107th congressional sessions). To
identify changes in transparency we use the measure of newspaper coverage constructed by Snyder
and Stromberg (2010), which exploits the arbitrary overlap between congressional districts and
newspaper distribution markets. In particular, our empirical definition of transparency is the
natural log of Snyder and Stromberg’s (2010) “congruence” measure, which gives the average
overlap between the newspaper markets and each congressional district i at year t:
!
X
(1)
Tit = log
M arketShareitm ReaderShareitm
m∈M

where M arketShareitm is the share of the news market filled by newspaper m and ReaderShareitm
is the newspaper’s reader share in member i’s district. Snyder and Stromberg demonstrate that
higher newspaper coverage due to higher market-district overlap is associated with more articles
and higher voter knowledge about their representative, as well as higher legislator effort on some
measures. We use logs so that the coefficients may be interpreted as elasticities—using the level
of the measure generates similar results. Our preferred specification uses House Member fixed
effects and identifies changes in the transparency measure due to changes in newspaper market
share and due to redistricting.
Our measures of political effort allocation are constructed from the material in the Congressional Record attributed to each legislator for the years 1973 through 2012. We designed the
speech segmenting algorithm to include only floor speech (rather than other written materials
read into the Record, for example bill text and the material in the Extensions of Remarks). We
do this because we want our measure to reflect effort exerted by the member. We also drop
speeches given by the Speaker of the House, the Presiding Officer in the Senate, and non-voting
members.19
19The

Record does not include the speech from committee hearings, so committee assignment should not be a
significant source of omitted variable bias. Any effects on speech due to party influence should be uncorrelated
with our treatment variables (the election schedule and the transparency measure). We know anecdotally that
Senators have substantial discretion over their floor speeches.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

21

The theoretical model concerns policy actions, while the outcome variables in our regressions
are constructed from floor speech. The link between the theory and empirics therefore assumes
that floor speech matters for policy. This is a matter of debate, with some scholars (e.g., Cohen
1999, Jacobs and Shapiro 2000) arguing that rhetoric is often unrelated to policy, and others
(e.g., Maltzman and Siegelman 1996, Quinn et al. 2009) arguing that it correlates well with
policymaking. Compared to other venues for political speech (e.g. press releases, campaign
events), the Congressional floor is likely where speech and policy are most closely related. To
the extent that legislators are defending their own votes, and persuading their colleagues to vote
with them, floor speech measures the effort allocated across different votes and issues. Moreover,
legislators use floor speeches to introduce legislation, as well as to explain and justify bills they
introduced or co-sponsored. In these cases the divisiveness of speech can proxy for the divisiveness
of the legislation introduced. Importantly, this measure of divisiveness is a continuous measure
of time spent on different issues – unlike roll call votes, which reflect a binary policy choice on
a given issue. So, if speech tracks policy, then the divisiveness of speech proxies for the relative
effort exerted across issues of different divisiveness.
The methods for constructing the speech data are described in detail in Appendix C. After
selecting P = 3000 high-information phrases, we score each phrase p by chamber c and session
t on a metric of divisiveness χ2pct based on Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010). We then construct
the speech divisiveness for congressman i during session t as the log of the frequency-weighted
divisiveness of the phrases used by the congressman during session t. That measure is given by

(2)

Yitc = log

P
X
fipt χ2pct
p=1

Fit

!
,

where fipt is the normalized frequency of phrase p for congressman i during session t, and Fit is the
total number of phrases used (from the set of 3000 selected for the analysis). Jensen et al. (2012)
use a similar measure to estimate the history of polarization in the House of Representatives.
The chamber index c ∈ {S, H} for Yitc reflects that phrase divisiveness χ2pct can be computed
from the language of either the Senate (S) or the House (H). In our empirical analysis, when
studying the speech of a particular chamber, we prefer to use the phrase divisiveness metric
constructed from speech in the other chamber. This avoids any issues with a member’s own
speech influencing the level of the metric. See Appendix C for more details.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

22

[Table 2 (Most and Least Divisive Phrases )]
To demonstrate the usefulness of the method, we report in Table 2 the most and least divisive
phrases, where scores are averaged across sessions using the pooled data set. The divisive phrases
are divided between those associated with Republicans and those associated with Democrats. The
selected phrases follow our intuitions about the conservative and liberal policy focuses of each
party. Take abortion-related phrases: For Republicans, we see ‘embryonic stem cell’ and ‘partial
birth abortion;’ for Democrats, we see ‘late term abortion’ and ‘woman’s right to choose.’ We
see a similar intuitive trend for taxes: the Republican list includes ‘capital gains tax,’ ‘largest
tax increase,’ and ‘marriage tax penalty;’ the Democrat list includes ‘give tax break,’ ‘tax breaks
(for the) wealthy,’ and ‘tax cuts (for the) wealthiest.’ In the list of least divisive language, meanwhile, we see innocuous phases and references to common-values policies such as ‘federal highway
administration,’ ‘homeland security appropriation,’ and ‘law enforcement community.’ These intuitive phrase rankings are encouraging for the use of this metric as a measure of divisiveness.
The full list of phrases is available from the authors upon request.
[Table 3 (Speech Statistics)]
Table 3 reports summary statistics on congressional speech. Because there are fewer of them,
Senators speak a lot more than House members. The minimum frequency numbers may be
concerning, but our results are not affected by dropping the observations with the lowest frequencies. The Speech Divisiveness rows give the measures constructed from Senate speech and
House speech, respectively. Encouragingly, these measures have a similar distribution and are
strongly correlated with each other. The negative numbers reflect that the measures are in logs—
a divisiveness measure smaller in absolute value means higher divisiveness. Perhaps expectedly,
House members have a higher average divisiveness than Senators. The Minimum and Maximum
columns show some outliers—dropping these outliers does not affect the results. Figures A1 and
A2 (in Appendix C) give the trends in average divisiveness for both chambers, demonstrating
that Republicans and Democrats have similar levels and trends in speech divisiveness.
In our Senate elections regressions, we model divisiveness Yitc for Senator i during session t as

(3)

Y cit = αi + αt + ρE Eit + εit

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

23

where Y cit is defined in (2), αi is a Senator fixed effect, αt is a year fixed effect, and Eit is the
election cohort variable. Since the outcome variable Yitc is a log measure, the estimate ρ̂E can be
interpreted as the average percent increase in Senator speech divisiveness from moving into the
next election cohort (closer to the next scheduled election). If ρ̂E = 0, then electoral incentives
do not affect the tendency to use divisive phrases. If ρ̂E < 0, then electoral incentives mitigate
divisive rhetoric. If ρ̂E > 0, as suggested by the theory, then electoral incentives increase the
tendency of Senators to use divisive language.
Next, for the House of Representatives, we model speech divisiveness as
(4)

Y cit = αi + αt + ρT Tit + εit

where Yitc and the fixed effects are the same as (3), and Tit , defined in (1), gives the transparency
measure for member i at t. Since both Tit and Yitc are in logs, the estimate ρ̂T can be interpreted
as the average percent change in divisiveness due to a one percent increase in transparency. If
ρ̂T = 0, then transparency is unrelated to divisiveness. If ρ̂T < 0, then transparency reduces
divisive rhetoric. If ρ̂T > 0, then transparency increases the tendency of House members to use
divisive language. As stated in Proposition 4, the theoretical prediction on ρT depends on the
parameters.
The error term εit includes omitted variables and randomness. Our identifying assumption
is that, conditional on the inclusion of fixed effects, εit is uncorrelated with the treatment
variables—the election schedule for the Senate, and the transparency measure for the House.
In our regressions we cluster the error term by state, allowing for arbitrary serial correlation
across a state’s congressmen and over time.20
[Table 4 (Election Effects on Senator Speech Divisiveness)]
The results from regressing divisive phrases on the time until the next Senate election are
reported in Table 4. Columns 1 and 2 include year fixed effects; Columns 3 and 4 include year
and Senator fixed effects. Columns 1 and 3 use the Senate-language divisiveness measure YitS as
the outcome variable, while Columns 2 and 4 use the House-language divisiveness measure YitH as
the outcome variable. The four specifications generate similar estimates for the effect of election
20Clustering

by Member of Congress rather than state generates the same results. Clustering by state is a more
conservative specification because it allows for correlation in the outcome variable for congressmen representing
same-state voters, who likely have correlated political preference shocks.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

24

cohort on speech divisiveness. Encouragingly, the estimates don’t change much when including
legislator fixed effects, supporting the assumption of exogenous treatment to election cohort.
Our preferred specification is Column 4, which includes legislator fixed effects and uses the
House-language divisiveness measure as the outcome variable. The coefficient is positive and
statistically significant at the 1% level (p = .001); we can reject the null hypothesis that ρE = 0
in favor of the alternative that ρE > 0. A coefficient of 0.0579 implies that speech divisiveness
increases by 5.79% on average as a Senator moves to a cohort nearer to the next election.
[Figure 1 (Senator Speech Divisiveness by Election Cohort)]
To demonstrate this graphically, Figure 1 plots the average speech divisiveness for senators in
the first 12 years (the first six sessions) of their career, residualized with senator fixed effects.
For both the first and second terms of office, there is a clear increase in divisiveness as the next
election becomes more imminent. Moreover, there is a drop in divisiveness from the third to
fourth session, reflecting that divisiveness decreases after securing re-election. The same trends
are observed for future years in the career, and regardless of whether senators who left office are
excluded from the sample. Along with the regression estimates, this graphical evidence supports
the theory of electorally induced posturing.
The election results can be contrasted with the previous literature arguing that roll call votes
tend to be more moderate for election-cohort Senators (e.g., Thomas 1985). While the time
period considered is different— for example, Thomas (1985) looks at the period from 1954 to
1977, while we look at 1973 to 2012 — it is consistent with our model for elections to induce
both more moderate voting and more divisive issue emphasis. In our model, legislators choose
policies more aligned with the majority of voters on the divisive issues when electoral pressures
are stronger; the distortions emerge in terms of an excessive focus on divisive issues, rather than
politicians taking misaligned votes on those issues.
[Table 5 (Effect of Transparency on House Speech Divisiveness)]
We now turn to our study of transparency. The results from regressing the use of divisive
phrases on the House transparency measure are reported in Table 5. The specifications are
analogous to those in Table 4: Columns 1 and 2 include year fixed effects, while Columns 3
and 4 add House Member fixed effects. Columns 1 and 3 use YitS as the outcome variable, while
Columns 2 and 4 use YitH as the outcome variable. The inclusion of legislator fixed effects makes a
difference in the case of transparency, reflecting that we are capturing the within-member effect

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

25

of changes in transparency, rather than differences across legislators that have different levels
of news coverage in their districts. Still, the fact that the estimates are of the same sign is
encouraging support for the validity of the results.
Our preferred specification is Column 3, which includes legislator fixed effects and uses the
Senate-language divisiveness measure as the outcome variable. The coefficient is positive, but
only significant at the 10% level (p = .062). Column 4, using YitH , gives a positive estimate
that is significant at the 5% level (p = .038). Together, these estimates lend more support
for the hypothesis that ρT > 0 than the hypothesis that ρT ≤ 0. The evidence that increased
transparency leads to greater posturing, however, is not as strong as the evidence for the electoralcohort effect. A Column 3 coefficient of 0.0785 implies that for a 1% increase in transparency,
speech divisiveness increases by .08% on average.
[Figure 2 (House Member Speech Divisiveness by Transparency Level)]
Figure 2 plots the average speech divisiveness by House members, residualized for year and
legislator fixed effects and grouped by the level of Tit in bins of width 1. The binned means, as
well as the fitted line, illustrate that increases in transparency across years are associated with
increases in the within-member divisiveness of House speech.
It is interesting to contrast these transparency results with Snyder and Stromberg’s (2010)
finding that higher transparency is associated with greater discretionary federal funds to the
district and more moderate voting records. Our results suggest that, while improved transparency
can have many benefits, including increased legislator effort, these benefits must be balanced
against a potential downside. Increased transparency can distort how effort is allocated toward
more divisive issues.
6. Conclusions
We have considered the incentives of politicians to “posture” by focusing their efforts on issues
that present the greatest opportunity to signal their preferences to voters, even if they are not the
most important issues facing the country. We have shown that this incentive can lead politicians
to spend their time pursuing policies that are not only harmful to the minority, but also an
inefficient use of time from the majority’s perspective. In addition, we have shown that greater
transparency about how politicians’ allocate their time may increase socially inefficient posturing,
while at the same time impeding the selection of congruent politicians. Finally we have verified

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

26

empirically that incumbent politicians engage in more divisive speech when electoral pressures
are stronger or their actions are more likely to be observed.
While we have focused on only one component of the policymaking process, our analysis
raises important issues for the design of political institutions. Given that our results emphasize
the difficulty incentivizing electorally accountable politicians to focus attention on commonvalues issues, our findings highlight the potential advantage of delegating common-values tasks
to individuals who are politically insulated or whose authority is task specific. This can be
accomplished, perhaps, by delegating to city managers that are, at least somewhat, politically
insulated and who have clearly defined tasks (e.g., Vlaicu and Whalley 2013) or by leaving such
issues in the hands of a competent bureaucracy. The design of such institutions, and a full
analysis of the tradeoffs, is an important avenue for future research.
From an empirical perspective, our work raises a number of interesting questions. Motivated
by our theory, it would be interesting to see which issues incumbents talk about closer to elections
and whether the increased focus on divisive issues holds even for those issues that are relatively
less important. Such an analysis could be completed by classifying the speech according to different issue topics, and using public opinion data to rank the issues by importance. Additionally,
it would be interesting to understand the extent to which changes in speech patterns reflect that
different policies are being pursued. In future research we hope to explore the implications of
our empirical findings for policy and economic outcomes.
References
Abramowitz, Alan (2010). The Disappearing Center. Yale University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2013). “A Political Theory of Populism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 2, 771-805.
Aragones, Enriqueta, Michel Castaneira and Marco Giani (2015). “Electoral Competition Through
Issue Selection.” American Journal of Political Science, 59, 1, 71-90.
Ashworth, Scott (2005). “Reputational Dynamics and Political Careers.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 28, 2, 441-466.
Ashworth, Scott (2012). “Electoral Accountability: Recent Theoretical and Empirical Work.”
Annual Review of Political Science, 15, 183–201.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

27

Ashworth, Scott and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita (2006). “Delivering the Goods: Constituency
Service with Electoral and Institutional Variation.” Journal of Politics, 68, 1, 168-179.
Bafumi, Joseph and Michael Herron (2010). “Leapfrog Representation and Extremism: A Study
of American Voters and Their Members in Congress.” American Political Science Review, 104,
3, 519-542.
Bechtel, Michael M. and Jens Hainmueller (2011). “How Lasting Is Voter Gratitude? An Analysis
of the Short- and Long-Term Electoral Returns to Beneficial Policy.” American Journal of
Political Science, 55, 4, 852-868.
Bouton, Laurent, Paola Conconi, Francisco Pino, and Maurizio Zanardi (2014). “Guns and
Votes.” NBER Working Paper 20253.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice, Michael Herron, and Kenneth Shotts (2001). “Leadership and Pandering: A Theory of Executive Policymaking.” American Journal of Political Science, 45, 3,
532-550.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice and Kenneth Shotts (2004). “The Conditional Nature of Presidential
Responsiveness to Public Opinion.” American Journal of Political Science, 48, 4, 690-706.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice and Kenneth Shotts (2007). “When Do Elections Encourage Ideological
Rigidity?” American Political Science Review, 101, 2, 272-288.
Caillaud, Bernard and Jean Tirole (2002). “Parties as Political Intermediaries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 4, 1453-1489.
Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps (1987). “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 102, 2, 179-221.
Clark, Meagan (2013). “Civil Engineers Give US Infrastructure Near-Failing Grade.” International Business Times, December 14 2013.
Cohen, Jeffrey (1999). Presidential Responsiveness and Public Policymaking: The Public
and the Polices that Presidents Choose. University of Michigan Press.
Colomer, Josep and Humberto Llavador (2011). “An Agenda-Setting Model of Electoral Competition.” Journal of the Spanish Economic Association, 3, 1, 73-93.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

28

Conconi, Paola, Giovanni Facchini, and Maurizio Zanardi (2014). “Policymakers’ Horizon and
Trade Reforms: The Protectionist Effect of Elections.” Journal of International Economics, 94,
1, 102-118.
Dragu, Tiberiu and Xiaochen Fan (2014). “An Agenda-Setting Model of Electoral Competition.”
Working Paper.
Elling, Richard (1982). “Ideological Change in the United States Senate: Time and Electoral
Responsiveness.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 7, 1, 75-92.
Fearon, James (1999). “Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians: Selecting Good
Candidates versus Sanctioning Poor Performance.” In Democracy, Accountability, and Representation,
eds. A. Przeworski, S.C. Stokes and B. Manin. Cambridge University Press.
Ferejohn, John (1986). “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice, 50, 1,
5-25.
Fiorina, Morris, with Saumel Adams and Jeremy Pope (2006). Culture War? The Myth
of a Polarized America. Yale University Press.
Fox, Justin (2007). “Government Transparency and Policymaking.” Public Choice, 131, 1-2,
23-44.
Fox, Justin and Matthew Stephenson (2011). “Judicial Review as a Response to Political Posturing.” American Political Science Review, 105, 2, 397-414.
Fox, Justin and Matthew Stephenson (2014). “The Distributional Effects of Minority Protective
Judicial Review.” Journal of Theoretical Politics, forthcoming.
Fox, Justin and Richard Van Weelden (2012). “Costly Transparency.” Journal of Public Economics, 94, 9-10, 142-150.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2010). “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica, 78, 1, 35-71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse Shapiro, and Matt Taddy (2015). “Measuring Polarization in HighDimensional Data: Method and Application to Congressional Speech.” Working Paper.
Goolsbee, Austan (2011). Meet the Press, August 7, 2011.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

29

Hillygus, D. S. and Todd G. Shields (2014), The Persuadable Voter: Wedge Issues
in Presidential Campaigns, Princeton University Press.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991). “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
7, 24-52.
Jacobs, Lawrence and Robert Shapiro (2000). Politicians Don’t Pander: Political
Manipulation and the Loss of Democratic Responsiveness. University of Chicago Press.
Jacoby, William H. (2014). “Is There a Culture War? Conflicting Value Structures in American
Public Opinion.” American Political Science Review, 108, 4, 754.
Jensen, Jacob, Ethan Kaplan, Suresh Naidu, and Laurence Wilse-Samson (2012). “The Dynamics
of Political Language.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-81.
Kaiser, Robert (2013). An Act of Congress: How America’s Essential Institution Works,
and How it Doesn’t, Knopf.
Koeneman, Keith (2013). First Son: The Biography of Richard M. Daley. University of Chicago
Press.
Kuklinski, James (1978). “Representativeness and Elections: A Policy Analysis.” American
Political Science Review, 72, 1, 165-77.
Lee, Frances E. (2009). Beyond Ideology: Politics, Principles, and Partisanship in the US Senate.
University of Chicago Press.
Levitt, Stephen (1996). “How do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Preferences,
Party Affiliation, and Senator Ideology.” American Economic Review, 425-441.
Lodge, Milton, Marco Steenberge, and Shawn Brau (1995). “The Responsive Voter: Campaign
Information and the Dynamics of Candidate Evaluation.” American Political Science Review,
89, 2, 309-326.
Maltzman, Forrest and Lee Siegelman (1996). “The Politics of Talk: Unconstrained Floor Time
in the U.S. House of Representatives.” Journal of Politics, 58, 3, 819-830.

ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

30

Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole (2004). “The Politician and the Judge.” American Economic
Review, 94, 4, 1034-1054.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal (2006). Polarized America:
The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches. MIT Press.
Morelli, Massimo and Richard Van Weelden (2013). “Ideology and Information in Policymaking.”
Journal of Theoretical Politics, 25, 3, 412-436.
Prat, Andrea (2005). “The Wrong Kind of Transparency.” American Economic Review, 95, 3,
862-877.
Rottinghaus, Brandon (2006). “Rethinking Presidential Responsiveness: The Public Presidency
and Rhetorical Congruence, 1953–2001.” Journal of Politics, 68, 3, 720-732.
Quinn, Kevin, Burt Monroe, Michael Colaresi, Michael Crespin, and Dragomir Radev (2010).
“How to Analyze Political Attention with Minimal Assumptions and Costs." American Journal
of Political Science, 54, 1, 209-228.
Taddy, Matt (2013). “Multinomial Inverse Regression for Text Analysis." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 108, 503, 755-770.
Thomas, Martin (1985). “Election Proximity and Senatorial Roll Call Voting.” American Journal
of Political Science, 29, 1, 96-111.
Vlaicu, Razvan and Alex Whalley (2013). “Hierarchical Accountability in Government: Theory
and Evidence.” SSRN Working Paper 1925005.

TABLE 1
Legislator Characteristics and Treatment Variables

Mean

Summary Statistics
Std. Dev.
Minimum

Maximum

Senators
Year
Experience
Republican
Election Cohort

1992.1890
10.8240
0.4529
1.9561

11.6473
9.3855
0.4979
0.8252

1973
0
0
1

2011
50
1
3

1995.9290
8.5913
0.4660
-2.0709

3.4111
8.0860
0.4989
1.1744

1991
0
0
-5.516

2001
52
1
0

House Members
Year
Experience
Republican
Transparency

Observation is a congressman-session. Sample includes 331 senators and 653 House
members. Experience refers to the number of years since joining Congress. Republican
equals one for Republican Congressmen. Election Cohort equals 1, 2, or 3 depending
on senator election cohort status. Transparency is the (log) measure of news coverage
constructed by Snyder and Stromberg (2010).

TABLE 2
Most and Least Divisive Phrases, 1973-2012
Divisive Phrases Associated with Republicans
adult stem cell
balanced budget constitution
billion barrel oil
capital gain tax
center medicare medicaid
embryonic stem cell
federal debt stood
federation independent business
free enterprise system
global war terror
gross national product

health saving account
income tax rate
iraq study group
largest tax increase
marginal tax rate
marriage tax penalty
medical saving account
national drug control
national federation independent
oil natural gas
partial birth abortion

personal income tax
right bear arm
small business owner
special interest group
stand adjournment previous
stood trillion hundred
tax increase history
trade promotion authority
trillion cubic foot
wage price control
windfall profit tax

Divisive Phrases Associated with Democrats
allocation current level
billion trade deficit
boehlert boehner bonilla
child health insurance
civil right movement
civil service discharged
committee interior insular
comprehensive test ban
conduct hearing entitled
cost prescription drug
credit card company

cut social security
distinguished republican leader
education health care
give tax break
johnson sam jones
late term abortion
managed care plan
martin luther king
minimum wage worker
nuclear arm race
oversight government reform

prescription drug cost
prescription drug plan
resolve committee union
tax break wealthy
tax cut wealthiest
tax cut wealthy
test ban treaty
trade deficit billion
veteran health care
victim domestic violence
woman right choose

Least Divisive Phrases
banking finance urban
chemical weapon convention
civil service commission
committee held hearing
committee worked hard
dedicated public servant
defense appropriation subcommittee
democracy human right
federal highway administration
finance urban affair
fiscal budget request

forward continuing work
great deal money
hard work dedication
homeland security appropriation
important step forward
improve health care
international financial institution
law enforcement assistance
law enforcement community
made great stride
major step forward

merchant marine fishery
passed signed law
played important role
played key role
protect national security
public private partnership
public private sector
renewable energy source
research development administration
theater missile defense
worked long hard

List of 33 most divisive Republican trigrams, most divisive Democrat trigrams, and least divisive
trigrams, as scored by Pearson's Chi-squared metric (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010), using the average
score pooled across the years in the sample. This ranking uses speech from both the senate and house.

TABLE 3
Speech Statistics

Mean

Summary Statistics
Std. Dev.
Minimum

Maximum

Senators
Phrases Used
Summed Frequency
Speech Divisiveness (S)
Speech Divisiveness (H)

985.922
3902.801
-12.0835
-11.826

440.47
3306.333
0.777
0.675

1
1
-17.527
-18.227

2306
26435
-9.844
-9.465

326.373
821.571
-10.775
-10.548

230.367
968.512
0.6645
0.7323

1
2
-16.393
-18.244

1475
11974
-8.1004
-8.536

House Members
Phrases Used
Summed Frequency
Speech Divisiveness (S)
Speech Divisiveness (H)

Observation is a congressman-session. Phrases Used refers to the number of phrases (out of the
3000-phrase vocabulary) used in a session. Summed Frequency refers to the total number of
times a phrase in the vocabulary is used in a session. Speech Divisiveness (S) refers to the (log)
measure constructed using Senate speech, and Speech Divisiveness (H) refers to the (log)
measure constructed using House speech. See details in Appendix C.

TABLE 4
Election Effects on Senator Speech Divisiveness

Election Cohort

adj. R-sq.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0343*
(0.0171)
[0.051]

0.0407**
(0.0159)
[0.014]

0.0565***
(0.0177)
[0.002]

0.0579***
(0.0157)
[0.001]

0.129

0.144

0.436

0.352

Divisiveness Measure
Senate
House
Senate
House
X
X
X
X
Year Fixed Effects
X
X
Senator Fixed Effects
Standard errors (clustered by state) in parentheses, p-values in brackets. * p <0.1, **
p<0.5, *** p<0.01. The sample includes 331 senators, 20 sessions, and 1,771 senatorsessions. Election Cohort equals 1, 2, or 3 depending on senator cohort status.
Divisiveness Measure refers to the speech source used to score the divisiveness of phrases
(Senate speech or House speech).
Figure 1
Senator Speech Divisiveness by Election Cohort

This figure plots average senator speech divisiveness over the course of the first two terms (six
sessions, 12 years) of a senator's career. The values plotted are the mean residuals from a
regression of senator speech divisiveness on a senator fixed effect, grouped by the first 6 sessions.
Includes only senators that began their career in the first cohort (excluding senators appointed or
elected to finish out an existing term). Error spikes indicate standard errors. Speech divisiveness
measure is constructed from House speech.

TABLE 5
Effect of Transparency on House Speech Divisiveness

Transparency

adj. R-sq.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0221
(0.0166)
[0.191]

0.0252
(0.0192)
[0.197]

0.0785*
(0.0411)
[0.062]

0.0970**
(0.0455)
[0.038]

0.042

0.041

0.243

0.407

Divisiveness Measure
Senate
House
Senate
House
X
X
X
X
Year Fixed Effects
X
X
Member Fixed Effects
Standard errors (clustered by state) in parentheses, p-values in brackets. * p <0.1, ** p<0.5.
The sample includes 653 House members, 6 sessions, and 1,697 member-sessions.
Transparency refers to the transparency measure constructed by Snyder and Stromberg (2010),
as described in the text. Divisiveness Measure refers to the speech source used to score the
divisiveness of phrases (Senate speech or House speech).
Figure 2
House Member Speech Divisiveness by Transparency Level

This figure plots the residuals from a regression of House member speech divisiveness on a year fixed
effect and member fixed effect, grouped in bins of width 1. Red line gives linear fit. Error spikes
indicate 95% confidence intervals. Speech divisiveness constructed from Senate speech.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND
EVIDENCE”

Abstract. This Appendix consists of three parts. Appendix A provides the formal definition
of criterion D1 which was described informally in the main text. In Appendix B we provide the
proofs of our theoretical results. Appendix C provides additional details about the specifications
for the Empirical Analysis. For online publication only.

Appendix A: Criterion D1
In Appendix A we give the definition of criterion D1 that is incorporated into our definition
of equilibrium in Section 3.2. As our model is not a standard sender-receiver game we must
precisely define how criterion D1 is applied to our setting. While Cho and Kreps (1987) define
D1 in terms of Sequential Equilibrium, because our game has a continuum of potential actions,
we analyze it using Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium. For our purposes, the only relevant restriction
on off-path beliefs from Sequential Equilibrium is that all voters hold the same beliefs at all
information sets, and we restrict attention to equilibria with that property.
In order to facilitate the definition, we first define u∗ (xB ) to be the expected utility of a type
xB politician in a given Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium. Further we define u(wA , wB , µ|xB ) to be
the expected utility, given the equilibrium strategies of the other players, of a type xB politician
from choosing allocation (wA , wB ) in period 1 if the belief the voters form about her type from
choosing that allocation is µ and her behavior in the second period is unchanged.
Definition 1. Criterion D1 (Cho and Kreps 1987)
A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium satisfies criterion D1 if,
(1) at all information sets all voters hold the same beliefs, µ, about the politician’s type.
(2) if for some off-path allocation (wA , wB ), and xB ∈ {−1, 1},
{µ ∈ [0, 1] : u(wA , wB , µ| − xB ) ≥ u∗ (−xB )} ( {µ ∈ [0, 1] : u(wA , wB , µ|xB ) > u∗ (xB )},
then µ(xB |wA , wB ) = 1.
In essence, criterion D1 says that if voters observe an out of equilibrium effort level they should
believe that effort level was taken by the type of politician who would have an incentive to choose
that allocation for the broadest range of beliefs.
1

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

2

Appendix B: Proofs
We begin with the results of section 3.1, proving Lemmas 1 and 2 on second period behavior
at the voters’ decision.
Proof of Lemma 1. Immediate. 
Proof of Lemma 2. We consider the expected second period payoff to a voter of type xB
i = x ∈
{−1, 1} from a type x and a type −x incumbent and a random replacement. If the incumbent
is type x with valence v j then the expected payoff is

−q[(1 − W )γ + (1 − γ)] − (1 − q)(1 − γ)(1 − W ) + v j if W ≤ 1,
x
(1)
ux =
−q(1 − γ)(2 − W ) + v j
if W > 1.
Similarly, if the incumbent is type −x with valence v j the expected payoff is

−q[(1 − W )γ + (1 − γ)] − (1 − q)(1 − γ)(1 + W ) + v j if W ≤ 1,
x
(2)
u−x =
−qW (1 − γ) − 2(1 − q)(1 − γ) + v j
if W > 1.
So the payoff to a type x voter if the incumbent is type x with probability µx is
(3)

ux (µx , v j ) = uxx µx (wA , wB ) + ux−x (1 − µx (wA , wB )) + vj .

Combining these equations with the fact that a random replacement has expected valence of 0,
the expected payoff from a random replacement is
(4)

uxr = mP ux1 + (1 − mP )ux−1 .

−1
1
1
Combining (??) and (??), and defining µ ≡ µ1 , it follows that u−1
r −u (1−µ1 , 0) = u (µ1 , 0)−ur .
To calculate retention probabilities, we note that with probability 1 − η the majority of the
voters are type 1, in which case the incumbent is re-elected if and only if vj ≥ u1r − u1 (µ, 0).
Similarly with probability η the majority of the voters are type −1, and the incumbent is re−1
1
1
elected if and only if vj ≥ u−1
r − u (1 − µ, 0) = u (µ, 0) − ur . So the re-election probability
is

(5)

η + (1 − 2η)P r(v j ≥ u1r − u1 (µ, 0)).

As u11 > u1−1 , u1 (µ, 0) is strictly increasing in µ, and so the re-election probability is strictly
increasing in µ. Further, given that u1 (mP , 0) = u1r and vj is non-negative with probability 1/2,
the re-election probability if µ = mP is η + (1 − 2η)1/2 = 1/2. 
Having established that the probability of retention is increasing in µ we now define the
probability of re-election when voters are sure of the incumbent’s type as follows:
(6)

X(σ, η, W ) ≡ P r(re − elect|µ = 1),

(7)

Y (σ, η, W ) ≡ P r(re − elect|µ = 0).

By Lemma 2 it follows that Y (σ, η, W ) < 1/2 < X(σ, η, W ).
We now turn to first period behavior. We begin by characterizing the unique equilibrium—
where equilibrium requires off-path beliefs to be consistent with D1, and the uniqueness is up to
the beliefs at off-path information sets—in the game with transparent effort. We then proceed
to consider the non-transparency case.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

3

Proof of Results with Transparent Effort. We now turn to characterizing first period behavior and proving that there is a unique equilibrium. As this is somewhat involved we break the
argument into several pieces, and begin with some supporting lemmas. The first lemma shows
that in any equilibrium type 1 politicians must always choose wA + wB = W . This will allow us
to rule out equilibria in which type 1 politicians have surplus effort they do not use.
Lemma 3. In any equilibrium wA + wB = W for any allocation (wA , wB ) chosen by type 1 on
the equilibrium path in period 1.
Proof. Suppose there exists an allocation (w∗A , w∗B ) with w∗A +w∗B < W chosen on the equilibrium
path by type 1 in period 1 in an equilibrium. Let π ∗ ∈ [Y (σ, η, W ), X(σ, η, W )] be the probability
with which the politician is re-elected after choosing (w∗A , w∗B ). Now define ux (wA , wB , π) to be the
utilities to the politicians of each type, x ∈ {−1, 1}, from implementing a given policy (wA , wB ) if
the probability of re-election after choosing policy (wA , wB ) is π. There are two cases to consider:
(a) u−1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ ) less than the equilibrium payoff for type −1; (b) u−1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ ) equal to
the equilibrium payoff for type −1. We now show that it not possible to have an equilibrium
with either (a) or (b).
Consider case (a). For type −1 to be optimizing, (w∗A , w∗B ) can only be chosen by type 1,
and hence π ∗ = X(σ, η, W ). Moreover, by continuity, there exists (w0 , w00 ) such that w0 ≥ w∗A
and w00 ≥ w∗B , with at least one of the inequalities strict, such that u−1 (w0 , w00 , π ∗ ) is strictly
less than the equilibrium payoff of type −1. As such, type −1 would not choose (w0 , w00 ) even
if it induced re-election with probability π ∗ = X(σ, η, W ). Note, however, that since the first
period payoff for type 1 is higher by choosing (w0 , w00 ) than (w∗A , w∗B ), type 1 would have a strict
incentive to choose (w0 , w00 ) over (w∗A , w∗B ) if the re-election probability was π ∗ . As the set of
beliefs for which type −1 would have an incentive to choose (w0 , w00 ) are then a proper subset
of the beliefs for which type 1 would, criterion D1 requires that voters believe the incumbent is
type 1 with certainty after observing (w0 , w00 ). This leads to re-election probability X(σ, η, W ),
giving type 1 a strict incentive to not choose (w∗A , w∗B ). Hence, there cannot exist an equilibrium
of the specified form satisfying (a).
Now consider case (b), and let (w0 , w00 ) be such that w0 ≥ w∗A and w00 ≥ w∗B , and at least one
of the inequalities strict. Define
π1 = inf{π 0 : u1 (w0 , w00 , π 0 ) > u1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ )}
and
π−1 = min{π 0 : u−1 (w0 , w00 , π 0 ) ≥ u−1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ )}
Then π1 defines the probability of re-election for which type 1 would have a strict incentive to
choose (w0 , w00 ) if π > π1 . Similarly π−1 defines the minimum probability of re-election for which
type −1 would have a weak incentive to choose (w0 , w00 ).
We now show that π1 < min{π−1 , X(σ, η, W )}. First, note that the benefit of securing reelection is

φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 − q)W
if W ≤ 1,
B1 (W ) =
φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 + q(W − 2)) if W > 1,

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

4

to type 1 and


φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W
if W ≤ 1,
φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 + q(W − 2)) if W > 1,
to type −1. Hence, u1 (w0 , w00 , π 0 ) > u1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ ) if and only if
B−1 (W ) =

γ(w0 − w∗A ) + (1 − γ)(w00 − w∗B ) > δ(π ∗ − π 0 )B1 (W ),
Conversely, u−1 (w0 , w00 , π 0 ) > u−1 (w∗A , w∗B , π ∗ ) if and only if
γ(w0 − w∗A ) + (1 − γ)(w∗B − w00 ) > δ(π ∗ − π 0 )B−1 (W ).
Now since w0 ≥ w∗A , w00 ≥ w∗B , with at least one inequality strict, we can see immediately that
γ(w0 − w∗A ) + (1 − γ)(w00 − w∗B ) > 0, and so π1 < π ∗ ≤ X(σ, η, W ). Similarly, because
γ(w0 − w∗A ) + (1 − γ)(w00 − w∗B ) ≥ γ(w0 − w∗A ) + (1 − γ)(w∗B − w00 ),
and, as mP > 1/2,
B1 (W ) > B−1 (W ),
we have that π1 < π−1 . So we can conclude that π1 < min{π−1 , X(σ, η, W )}.
We conclude by showing that, since π1 < min{π−1 , X(σ, η, W )}, we cannot have an equilibrium
in which type 1 ever chooses (w∗A , w∗B ). To see this, note that (w0 , w00 ) cannot be on path: As
π1 < min{π−1 , X(σ, η, W )}, if type 1 ever chooses (w∗A , w∗B ) over (w0 , w00 ) then type −1 must
strictly prefer (w∗A , w∗B ) over (w0 , w00 ) and so type −1 can never choose (w0 , w00 ). As the voters
would then assign beliefs that the politician is type 1 with certainty, she would be re-elected with
probability X(σ, η, W ), and, as π1 < X(σ, η, W ), the politician would have a strict incentive to
choose (w0 , w00 ) over (w∗A , w∗B ). Further, (w0 , w00 ) cannot be off the equilibrium path—if it were,
by criterion D1 the voters must believe the politician is type 1 with certainty after observing
(w0 , w00 ). As the probability of re-election would then be X(σ, η, W ), type 1 would have a strict
incentive to deviate to (w0 , w00 ). This shows that we cannot have an equilibrium of the specified
form satisfying (b), which completes the proof.

Next we show that, as choosing B instead of A is less costly for type 1 than type −1, a
deviation to exerting less effort on B is beneficial for a larger set of beliefs for type −1 than type
1. For this we define

max{(1 − q)(2γmP − 1)W, 0}
if W ≤ 1,
(8)
φ̂(W ) ≡
max{(1 + q(W − 2))(2γmP − 1), 0} if W > 1.
Our next Lemma shows that, if φ > φ̂(W ), then the set of beliefs for which a type 1 politician
is willing increase his effort on issue B is strictly larger than for type −1. This shows that there
cannot be an equilibrium in which both types choose the same two different effort allocations
on the equilibrium path. Moreover, as our definition of equilibrium includes criterion D1, it will
help pin down off-path beliefs.
Lemma 4. Consider an allocation wB and wA = W − wB , and suppose the probability of being
re-elected after that allocation is π. Then, if φ > φ̂(W ), at any allocation (w0 , w00 ) with w00 < wB ,
one of the following must hold:
(1) both types would prefer (W − wB , wB ) to allocation (w0 , w00 ) for all beliefs.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

5

(2) both types would prefer (w0 , w00 ) to (W − wB , wB ) for all beliefs.
(3) the set of beliefs for which a type −1 strictly prefers (w0 , w00 ) to (W − wB , wB ) is a proper
superset of those for which a type 1 weakly prefers (w0 , w00 ) to (W − wB , wB ).
Proof. Consider an allocation wB and wA = W − wB and another allocation w0 , w00 where w00 <
wB , and let π ∈ [Y (σ, η, W ), X(σ, η, W )] be the probability of being re-elected by implementing
wB , wA = W − wB . We must show that, the set of beliefs the voters could hold after observing
(w0 , w00 ) for which type −1 would prefer (w0 , w00 ) to wB , wA = W − wB is either a proper superset
of the beliefs for which type 1 would weakly prefer (w0 , w00 ), or alternatively that, for both types,
(w0 , w00 ) is preferred for either all beliefs, or for no beliefs, voters could hold.
We prove this separately for the case in which W ≤ 1 and when W > 1. Consider first the
case in which W ≤ 1. Then type −1 would have a strict incentive to choose (w0 , w00 ) if and only
if the re-election probability π 0 is such that
(w0 + wB − W )γ + (wB − w00 )(1 − γ) > δ(π − π 0 )[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W ],
or equivalently
−(w0 + wB − W )γ − (wB − w00 )(1 − γ)
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W ]
Now consider type 1. She will have a weak incentive to choose (w0 , w00 ) if and only if the re-election
probability π 0 is such that
π 0 − π > π−1 ≡

(w0 + wB − W )γ − (wB − w00 )(1 − γ) ≥ δ(π − π 0 )[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W ],
or equivalently
−(w0 + wB − W )γ + (wB − w00 )(1 − γ)
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W ]
< π1 . To see this, note that we can write

π 0 − π ≥ π1 ≡
We now show that π−1

00

π−1

wB − w
(W − w00 − w0 )γ
−
,
=
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W ] δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W ]

and
00

π1

(W − w00 − w0 )γ
(wB − w )(2γ − 1)
=
−
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W ] δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W ]

Next note that, as mP > 1/2 it follows that
W − w00 − w0
W − w00 − w0
≤
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W ]
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W ]
Hence, given that wB > w00 , it is sufficient to show that
1
(2γ − 1)
>
.
φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W
φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)(1 − mP )W
Cross multiplying, this holds whenever
φ > φ̂(W ) = (1 − q)(2γmP − 1)W.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

6

As we have now established that π−1 < π1 when φ > φ̂(W ) we can conclude that either the set
of beliefs which give type −1 a strict preference for (w0 , w00 ) are a proper subset of those which
give the type −1 a weak incentive—or that, for both types, (w0 , w00 ) is preferred for either all
beliefs, or for no beliefs, that the voters could hold.
Now consider the case in which W > 1. Then type −1 would have a strict incentive to
preference for (w0 , w00 ) if and only if the re-election probability π 0 ∈ [Y (σ, η, W ), X(σ, η, W )] is
such that
(w0 + wB − W )γ + (wB − w00 )(1 − γ) > δ(π − π 0 )[φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 + q(W − 2))],
or equivalently
−(w0 + wB − W )γ − (wB − w00 )(1 − γ)
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 + q(W − 2))]
Now consider type 1. She will have a weak incentive to prefer (w0 , w00 ) if and only if the re-election
probability π 0 is such that
π 0 − π > π−1 ≡

(w0 + wB − W )γ − (wB − w00 )(1 − γ) ≥ δ(π − π 0 )[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 + q(W − 2)],
or equivalently
−(w0 + wB − W )γ − (wB − w00 )(1 − γ)
π − π ≥ π1 ≡
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 + q(W − 2))]
We now show that π−1 < π1 , as we did for the case W ≤ 1. To see that this, note that
0

00

π−1

wB − w
(W − w00 − w0 )γ
−
=
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (q(W − 1) + (1 − q))] δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 + q(W − 2))]

and
00

π1 =

(wB − w )(2γ − 1)
(W − w00 − w0 )γ
−
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(q(W − 1) + (1 − q))] δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 + q(W − 2))]

As
W − w00 − w0
W − w00 − w0
≤
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (q(W − 1) + (1 − q))]
δ[φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 + q(W − 2))]
and wB > w00 it is sufficient to show
2γ − 1
1
<
.
P
P
φ + 2(1 − γ)(1 − m )[1 + q(W − 2)]
φ + 2(1 − γ)m [1 + q(W − 2)]
Cross multiplying and simplifying, this holds when
φ > φ̂(W ) = [1 + q(W − 2)](2γmP − 1).
As we have π−1 < π1 when φ > φ̂, we can conclude that either the set of beliefs which give
type −1 a strict preference for (w0 , w00 ) are a proper subset of those which give type −1 a weak
incentive—or that, for both types, (w0 , w00 ) is preferred for either all beliefs or no beliefs the
voters could hold.

We use Lemmas 3 and 4 to prove the next supporting Lemma. Namely we prove that in any
equilibrium either: type 1 politicians choose wB = min{W, 1} or reveal themselves with certainty.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

7

This will allow us to pin down the behavior of type 1, allowing us to subsequently characterize
the equilibrium by looking at type −1.
Lemma 5. If φ > φ̂(W ), there does not exist an equilibrium in which type 1 ever chooses
wB < min{W, 1} on the equilibrium path and is re-elected with probability π < X(σ, η, W ).
Proof. We show, by contradiction, that there cannot exist an equilibrium in which type 1 ever
chooses an allocation w∗B < min{W, 1} and is re-elected with probability less than X(σ, η, W )
after taking that action. Note that, by Lemma 3, in any equilibrium type 1 must choose (w∗A , w∗B )
such that w∗A + w∗B = W .
Suppose type 1 chooses allocation w∗B < min{W, 1}, w∗A = W −w∗B on the equilibrium path, and
suppose the probability of re-election after choosing that action is π ∗ ∈ [Y (σ, η, W ), X(σ, η, W )).
Note that, as the probability of re-election is strictly less than X(σ, η, W ) type −1 must also
choose w∗B < min{W, 1}, w∗A = W −w∗B on the equilibrium path. Now, by continuity, there exists
an allocation (W − w0 , w0 ) with w0 > w∗B such that a type 1 politician’s utility from choosing
(W − w0 , w0 ) and being elected with probability X(σ, η, W ) is strictly higher than from choosing
and (w∗A , w∗B ) and being re-elected with probability π ∗ . Note that, by Lemma 4, the set of
π 0 ≤ X(σ, η, W ) that a politician who chose (W − w0 , w0 ) could be re-elected with for which type
1 has a weak incentive to choose (w∗A , w∗B ) over (W − w0 , w0 ), is a proper subset of beliefs for
which type −1 has a strict incentive to choose (w∗A , w∗B ) over (W − w0 , w0 ). This means that in
any equilibrium either (W − w0 , w0 ) is on-path, in which case only type 1 would ever choose it,
or it is off-path, in which case to be consistent with criterion D1 the voters must believe that an
incumbent who chose (W − w0 , w0 ) is type 1 with certainty. Either way the re-election probability
would be X(σ, η, W ) and type 1 would have an incentive to deviate.
This completes the proof that in any equilibrium in which type 1 chooses (w∗A , w∗B ) with w∗B <
min{W, 1} on the equilibrium path, type 1 must be re-elected after (w∗A , w∗B ) with probability
X(σ, η, W ).

With these the lemmas we can determine when a separating, pooling, and partial-pooling
equilibria exist, allowing us to characterize equilibrium behavior. As Proposition 1 consists of
three parts, we prove when each type of equilibrium exists in sequence as separate lemmas. We
begin by considering separating equilibria, and show that the equilibrium must be minimally
separating and only exists when the benefits from holding office are not too large.
Lemma 6. If φ > φ̂(W ), then there exists a Separating Equilibrium if and only if φ < φ̄(σ, η, W ) ≡
max{φ1 (σ, η, W ), φ̂(W )}, where
(
W
− 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W
if W ≤ 1,
δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y (σ,η,W ))
(9)
φ1 (σ, η, W ) ≡
1−(W −1)(2γ−1)
− 2(1 − γ)mP [1 + q(W − 2)] if W > 1.
δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y (σ,η,W ))
In this equilibrium, type −1 chooses wA = min{W, 1}, wB = min{W, 1} − W and type 1 chooses
wB ≡ w∗ (δ, φ) = max{w∗0 (δ, φ), W − 1} > 0 where w∗0 (δ, φ) is equal to
(10)

δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W )
if W ≤ 1,
(2γ − 1)(W − 1) + δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)mP [1 + q(W − 2)]) if W > 1.

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

8

and wA = W − wB . Moreover, there exists W̄ ∈ (1, 2] such that φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ) for all
W ∈ (0, W̄ ). Finally, there exists γ̄ > 1/2 such that, if γ < γ̄ then W̄ = 2.
Proof. We begin by showing that, if φ ∈ (φ̂(W ), φ̄(σ, η, W )), the behavior described can be
supported in an equilibrium. First note that, since the politician is revealed to be type 1 with
certainty when wB = w∗ (δ, φ), wA = W − w∗ (δ, φ), and all politicians strictly prefer to implement
wB = w∗ (δ, φ), wA = W − w∗ (δ, φ) to any allocation with wB > w∗ (δ, φ), allocations with
wB > w∗ (δ, φ) are equilibrium dominated for both types. The beliefs after such allocations then
are not relevant for the equilibrium behavior. Next note that, under the specified strategies, a
type −1 that chooses (W − w∗ (δ, φ), w∗ (δ, φ)) would be re-elected with probability X(σ, η, W ),
and by following her prescribed strategy of (min{W, 1}, min{W, 1} − W ) she is re-elected with
probability Y (σ, η, W ). The benefit to a type −1 of increasing her re-election probability from
Y (σ, η, W ) to X(σ, η, W ) is

δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W )
if W ≤ 1,
δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)mP [q(W − 1) + (1 − q)]) if W > 1.
However, by (??), the cost of implementing (W −w∗ (δ, φ), w∗ (δ, φ)) instead of (min{W, 1}, min{W, 1}−
W ) is at least

=

γ[min{W, 1} + w∗0 (δ, φ) − W ] + (1 − γ)(w∗0 (δ, φ) + W − min{W, 1})
δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W )
if W ≤ 1,
P
δ[X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W )](φ + 2(1 − γ)m [q(W − 1) + (1 − q)]) if W > 1.

As the benefits of deviating are less than or equal to the costs, type −1 has no incentive to deviate.
Moreover, since φ > φ̂(W ) this implies that type 1 strictly prefers (W − w∗ (δ, φ), w∗ (δ, φ)) to
(min{W, 1}, min{W, 1} − W ).
Now consider the beliefs after wB = w0 < w∗ (δ, φ) where w0 6= min{W, 1} − W . There are two
cases to consider: when w∗ (δ, φ) = W − 1 and when w∗ (δ, φ) < W − 1. In the first case type 1
secures maximal re-election probability by following her most preferred effort allocation and so
all other effort allocations are equilibrium dominated for type 1. Hence specifying that µ = 0 for
any w0 < w∗ (δ, φ) is consistent with criterion D1.
When w∗ (δ, φ) < W −1 then, given the specified beliefs, type −1 is indifferent between choosing
wB = min{W, 1} − W and wB = w∗0 (δ, φ) in the initial period. Hence, by Lemma 4, the set of
beliefs for which type 1 would have a weak incentive to deviate to wB = w0 are a proper subset
of those for which type −1 would have a strict incentive to deviate, and so the voters must infer
that a politician who chose any w0 < w∗ (δ, φ) is type −1 with certainty. As type −1 would then
prefer to implement (min{W, 1}, min{W, 1}−W ) to any other allocation generating those beliefs,
type −1, and hence also type 1, would have a strict incentive not to choose any w0 < w∗ (δ, φ))
with w0 6= min{W, 1} − W . As such, the above strategies constitute an equilibrium.
Having now established that the above strategies constitute an equilibrium we now turn to
showing that there is no other separating equilibrium. Note first that, by Lemma 3, type 1 must
always choose an allocation such that wA +wB = W . Moreover, since in a separating equilibrium
the type is perfectly revealed from the allocation, and since type 1 receives strictly different first
period payoffs from different allocations that satisfy wA + wB = W it follows that type 1 must

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

9

be playing a pure strategy. Consider an equilibrium in which type 1 chooses wB = ŵ > w∗ (δ, φ)
and wA = W − ŵ. Now consider the effort allocation wB = w0 ∈ (w∗ (δ, φ), ŵ), wA = W − w0 . We
show that such an allocation is equilibrium dominated for type −1, but not type 1. Consider first
type −1. We have shown that a type −1 politician is indifferent between choosing wB = w∗ and
wA = W − w∗ and being re-elected with probability X(σ, η, W ) and (min{W, 1}, min{W, 1} − W )
with probability Y (σ, η, W ). Further, as type −1 strictly prefers the allocation wB = w∗ , wA =
W − w∗ to wB = w0 , wA = W − w0 , she would then have a strict incentive not to choose
wB = w0 , wA = W − w0 for any voter beliefs. So wB = w0 , wA = W − w0 is equilibrium
dominated for type −1. Now consider type 1. Note first that the politician prefers allocation
wB = w0 , wA = W − w0 to wB = ŵ, wA = W − ŵ in period 1, so if the beliefs were such
that she would be re-elected with probability X(σ, η, W ) by choosing wB = w0 , wA = W − w0
she would have an incentive to choose that allocation. Therefore, wB = w0 , wA = W − w0
is equilibrium dominated for type −1, but not type 1, and so the voters must believe that
any politician who took that action was type 1 with certainty. Hence, after observing allocation
wB = w0 ∈ (w∗ (δ, φ), ŵ), wA = W − w0 voters must believe the incumbent is type 1 with certainty
so the probability of re-election is the same as from choosing wB = ŵ and wA = W − ŵ. But, as
the type 1 politician receives greater utility in the first period by increasing wA and decreasing
wB , she would not be optimizing by choosing wB = ŵ. We can then conclude that it is not
possible to support a separating equilibrium with wB > w∗ (δ, φ).
Finally, note that w∗0 (δ, φ) is increasing in φ, and, in order to have an equilibrium, we must have
w∗ (δ, φ) ≤ min{W, 1}. As w∗0 (δ, φ1 ) = min{W, 1}, by equations (??) and (??), a separating equilibrium exists if and only if φ ∈ (φ̂(W ), φ̄(σ, η, W )] where φ̄(σ, η, W ) = max{φ1 (σ, η, W ), φ̂(W )}.
We now consider the conditions under which φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ), and so there exists a nonempty interval for which a separating equilibrium exists. Note first that by equation (??), and
the fact that X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ) < 1, it follows immediately that φ1 (σ, η, W ) > 0. Recalling
the definition of φ̂(W ) from equation (??) when W ≤ 1, φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ) if and only if
W
φ1 (σ, η, W ) =
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W > (1 − q)(2γmP − 1)W.
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))
This inequality follows immediately because
(1 − q)(2γmP − 1)W < (2γmP − 1)W < W − 2(1 − γ)mP W
W
<
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W.
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))
Hence φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(σ, η, W ) whenever W ≤ 1.
Similarly, when W > 1 then φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ) if and only if
1 − (W − 1)(2γ − 1)
(1 + (W − 2)q)(2γmP − 1) <
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + (W − 2)q),
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))
or equivalently
1 − (W − 1)(2γ − 1)
(1 + (W − 2)q)(2mP − 1) <
.
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

10

As this inequality holds strictly when W = 1, by continuity there exists W̄ ∈ (1, 2] such that
this inequality is satisfied for all W < W̄ . Finally, since W < 2 and X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ) < 1
this inequality is satisfied for all W ∈ (1, 2) if


1
P
γ < γ̄ ≡ 1 − (m − 1/2)δ ∈
,1 .
2
We can then conclude that there exists a W̄ ∈ (1, 2] and γ̄ ∈ ( 12 , 1) such that φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W )
for all W ∈ (0, W̄ ) and W̄ = 2 if γ < γ̄.

So a separating equilibrium exists if and only if re-election pressures are not too strong and
that when a separating equilibrium exists it can be uniquely characterized. We now consider the
possibility of a pooling equilibrium. We show that the only possible pooling equilibrium involves
both types pooling on maximal effort on issue B, and that such an equilibrium exists if and only
if the benefits of holding office are sufficiently large.
Lemma 7. Suppose φ > φ̂(W ). There exists a pooling equilibrium if and only if φ > φ∗ (σ, η, W ) ≡
max{φ2 (σ, η, W ), φ̂(W )} where
(
2W
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W
if W ≤ 1,
δ(1−2Y (σ,η,W ))
(11)
φ2 (σ, η, W ) ≡
2(1−(W −1)(2γ−1))
P
− 2m (1 − γ)(1 + (W − 2)q) if W > 1.
δ(1−2Y (σ,η,W ))
In this equilibrium both types choose effort allocation wB = min{W, 1} and wA = W − wB .
Moreover, when W ∈ (0, W̄ ), φ∗ (σ, η, W ) > φ̄(σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ).
Proof. Since, in a pooling equilibrium, both politician types are re-elected with probability 1/2
(Lemma 2), by Lemma 5 we cannot have a pooling equilibrium unless all politicians choose
wB = min{W, 1} in period 1. We first determine the range of parameters for which there exist
off-path beliefs which incentivize both types to choose wB = min{W, 1} then verify that those
off-path beliefs satisfy criterion D1.
We show a pooling equilibrium with wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB and voters believing any
other effort must have been taken by type −1 can be supported if and only if φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ).
Since φ > φ̂(W ) we need only check that type −1 has no incentive to deviate, and if she were to
deviate it would be to (min{W, 1}, min{W − 1} − W ). This means that by deviating the benefit
in terms of policy today is

W
if W ≤ 1,
γ(2 − W ) + (1 − γ)W if W > 1.
However, the cost of reducing her re-election probability is


δ 12 − Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W )
if W ≤ 1,
1
P
δ 2 − Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2(1 − γ)m [q(W − 1) + (1 − q)]) if W > 1.
Hence, using that γ(2−W )+(1−γ)W = 1−(W −1)(2γ −1) we have that type −1 is incentivized
to choose wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB if and only if φ ≥ φ2 (σ, η, W ), where φ2 (σ, η, W ) is
defined by equation (??). Hence, when φ > φ̂(W ), there exist off-path beliefs which incentivize
both types to choose wB = min{W, 1} if and only if φ ≥ φ2 (σ, η, W ).

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

11

We now must show the beliefs supporting the politicians’ strategies are consistent with criterion
D1. Now, by Lemma 4, the range of beliefs for which type −1 would have a strict incentive to
choose any wB = w0 < min{W, 1} are a proper superset of those for which type 1 would have a
weak incentive to choose that allocation. Hence, in order to be consistent with criterion D1 the
voters must believe any wB < min{W, 1} was chosen by type −1—precisely the beliefs specified
above.
We can then conclude that, when φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ), in the unique pooling equilibrium all politicians choose wB = min{W, 1} in period 1 and, when φ < φ∗ (σ, η, W ), we cannot have a pooling
equilibrium. So a pooling equilibrium exists if and only if φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ) = max{φ2 (σ, η, W ), φ̂(W )}.
Finally, it follows immediately from comparing (??) and (??) that φ2 (σ, η, W ) > φ1 (σ, η, W ).
Hence, given that φ̄(σ, η, W ) = φ1 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ) when W ∈ (0, W̄ ), it follows that φ∗ (σ, η, W ) >
φ̄(σ, η, W ) > φ̂(W ) for all W ∈ (0, W̄ ).

So we have that when φ ≤ φ̄(σ, η, W ) there exists a unique separating equilibrium but no
pooling equilibrium, and, when φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ), there exists a unique pooling equilibrium but
no separating equilibrium. And, if φ ∈ (φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )), neither a separating or pooling
equilibrium can exist. We now explore the possibility of a semi-separating equilibrium. For this
range, there exists a unique semi-separating equilibrium in which type −1 randomizes so that the
politician is re-elected with probability between 1/2 and X(σ, η, W ) after choosing the posturing
allocation: the randomization probability is uniquely determined to make type −1 indifferent
and willing to randomize.
Lemma 8. There exists a partial-pooling equilibrium if and only if φ ∈ (φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W ))
and this equilibrium is unique. In this equilibrium, type 1 chooses wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W −wB
and type −1 randomizes with a non-degenerate probability between wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W −
wB and wA = min{W, 1}, wB = min{W, 1} − W in period 1.
Proof. By Lemma 5 we know that the equilibrium must either involve all type 1 politicians
choosing wB = min{W, 1} or have type 1 re-elected with probability X(σ, η, W ). Since we
cannot have a separating equilibrium, type 1 must choose wB = min{W, 1} in period 1. Since
type 1 always chooses wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W −wB , any other effort allocation would reveal the
politician to be type −1 with certainty. Hence the equilibrium must involve type −1 randomizing
between wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB and wA = min{W, 1}, wB = min{W, 1} − W . Let
ρ ∈ [0, 1] be the probability with which type −1 takes action wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB
and let π(ρ) be the associated probability of being re-elected after the voter observes wB =
min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB . The voters’ updated beliefs are
µ(1|wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB ) =

mP
mP + (1 − mP )ρ

As µ(1|wB = min{W, 1}, wA = W − wB ) is decreasing in ρ and equal to 1 when ρ = 0 and
mP when ρ = 1, the probability of re-election, π(ρ), is decreasing in ρ with π(0) = X(σ, η, W )
and π(1) = 1/2. We now show that we have a solution with ρ ∈ (0, 1) if and only if φ ∈
(φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )), and that the probability of randomization is unique. In order for type

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

12

−1 to be willing to randomize we must have that
(
PW
δ φ+2(1−q)(1−γ)m
if W ≤ 1,
W
π(ρ) − Y (σ, η, W ) =
φ+2mP (1−γ)(1+(W −2)q)
if W > 1.
δ
1−(W −1)(2γ−1)
Notice that the left hand side of this expression is decreasing in ρ and the right hand side is
constant. Note also that, when ρ = 0, π(ρ) = X(σ, η, W ), and so when φ > φ̄(σ, η, W ),
(
PW
δ φ+2(1−q)(1−γ)m
if W ≤ 1,
W
π(0) − Y (σ, η, W ) >
φ+2mP (1−γ)(1+(W −2)q)
δ
if W > 1,
1−(W −1)(2γ−1)
and, when ρ = 1, π(ρ) = 1/2, and so when φ < φ∗ (σ, η, W ),
(
PW
if W ≤ 1,
δ φ+2(1−q)(1−γ)m
W
π(1) − Y (σ, η, W ) <
φ+2mP (1−γ)(1+(W −2)q)
δ
if W > 1.
1−(W −1)(2γ−1)
Hence, there exists a unique solution with ρ ∈ (0, 1) when φ ∈ (φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )) and no
solution otherwise. We conclude that there exists a unique partial pooling equilibrium if φ ∈
(φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )), and there does not exist a partial pooling equilibrium otherwise.

We have now established that, for φ ∈ (φ̂(σ, η, W ), φ̄(σ, η, W )] the only equilibrium is the
minimally separating equilibrium. When φ ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ) the unique equilibrium is the pooling
equilibrium. And when φ ∈ (φ̄(σ, η, W ), φ∗ (σ, η, W )) the unique equilibrium is partial-pooling.
Hence we Combining the above characterizations completes the proof of Proposition 1.
Proof of Proposition 1. Follows immediately by combining Lemmas 6 – 8. 
Having characterized the equilibrium we now turn to the comparative statics result of Proposition 2.
Proof of Proposition 2. By (??) we get the probability of re-election for any µ is
P r(re − election|µ) = η + (1 − 2η)P r(v j ≥ u1r − u1 (µ, 0)).
Using that the beliefs in a separating equilibrium are µ = 0 and µ = 1, and the fact that v j is
normally distributed with variance σ 2 we get that



 η + (1 − 2η)F 2(1−γ)(1−mP )(1−q)W
if W ≤ 1,
σ


(12)
X(σ, η, W ) =
 η + (1 − 2η)F 2(1−γ)(1−mP )[1+q(W −2)]
if W > 1,
σ
(13)




 (1 − 2η)F − 2(1−γ)mP (1−q)W
if W ≤ 1,
σ


Y (σ, η, W ) =
P
 (1 − 2η)F − 2(1−γ)m [1+q(W −2)]
if W > 1,
σ

where F is the cdf of the standard Normal. This implies that
 



 F 2(1−γ)(1−mP )(1−q)W − F − 2(1−γ)mP (1−q)W
if W ≤ 1,
σ
σ




X(σ, η, W )−Y (σ, η, W ) = (1−2η)
 F 2(1−γ)(1−mP )[1+q(W −2)] − F − 2(1−γ)mP [1+q(W −2)]
if W > 1,
σ
σ

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

13

which is strictly decreasing in η.
Next recall that, by Proposition 1, when W ∈ (0, W̄ ), we have φ̄(σ, η, W ) = φ1 (σ, η, W ) and
φ∗ (σ, η, W ) = φ2 (σ, η, W ), where φ1 (σ, η, W ) and φ2 (σ, η, W ) are defined in equations (??) and
(??). Hence, as X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ) is strictly decreasing in η, φ̄(σ, η, W ) and φ∗ (σ, η, W )
are strictly increasing. This proves part 1.
Next note that since 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )(1 − q)W and 2(1 − γ)(1 − mP )[1 + q(W − 2)] are strictly
positive and independent of σ and −2(1 − γ)mP (1 − q)W ) and −2(1 − γ)mP [1 + q(W − 2)] are
strictly negative and independent of σ we can conclude that
lim X(σ, η, W ) = 1 − η,

σ→0

lim Y (σ, η, W ) = η.

σ→0

So we can see immediately that
(
φ̄0 (η, W ) ≡ lim φ1 (σ, η, W ) =
σ→0

W
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W
δ(1−2η)
1−(W −1)(2γ−1)
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 +
δ(1−2η)

if W ≤ 1,
(W − 2)q) if W > 1,

and
(
φ∗0 (η, W )

≡ lim φ2 (σ, η, W ) =
σ→0

2W
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP W
δ(1−2η)
2(1−(W −1)(2γ−1))
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1
δ(1−2η)

if W ≤ 1,
+ (W − 2)q) if W > 1.

Differentiating with respect to W ,
(
1
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP if W ≤ 1,
∂ φ̄0 (η, W )
δ(1−2η)
=
2γ−1
− δ(1−2η)
− 2mP (1 − γ)q
if W > 1,
∂W
and
∂φ∗ (η, W )
=
∂W

(

2
− 2(1 − γ)(1 − q)mP
δ(1−2η)
− 2(2γ−1)
− 2mP (1 − γ)q
δ(1−2η)

if W ≤ 1,
if W > 1.

It then follows by inspection that φ̄0 (η, W ) and φ∗0 (η, W ) are increasing in W on (0, 1) and
decreasing on (1, W̄ ). This proves part 2. 
Proof of Results with Non-Transparency. We now turn to proving the results from Section
3.3 when the effort allocation is not observed. We first show that when W < 1 in equilibrium
type −1 chooses wB < W but exerts no effort on issue A.
Proof of Proposition 3. We begin by defining


4
2
A0
P
φ0 (σ, η, W ) ≡
− 2(1 − q)(1 − γ)m W ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ).
3 δ(1 − 2Y (σ, η, W ))
For there to be an equilibrium of the form described, type −1 must be indifferent between pB = 1
and pA = pB = 0 and prefer either alternative to pA = 1. As the benefit to a type −1 of securing
re-election is φ + (1 − q)(1 − γ)mP W in period 2, in order to have type −1 indifferent between
B and 0 it must be that
1 − γ = (πB − π0 )δ[φ + (1 − q)(1 − γ)mP W ]

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

14

where πi is the probability of being re-elected after outcome i. Assume that after seeing pA = 1,
the incumbent is re-elected with probability πA = Y (σ, η, W ) regardless of pB . The above
indifference condition is equivalent to
1−γ
π B − π0 =
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − q)(1 − γ)mP W ]
Note that in order to have an equilibrium, in addition to the above indifference condition, we
must have that neither type wants to exert effort on A, and that type 1 prefers B to doing
nothing. Note however that πB > π0 , and φ > φA0
0 (σ, η, W ) > φ̂(σ, η, W ), so if type −1 is
optimizing it means that type 1 is as well.
We first show that there exists a unique wB ∈ [0, W ] such that type −1 is indifferent between
B and 0. To see this, note that the right hand side is constant in wB but
µ(pA = 0, pB = 1) =

mP W
mP W + (1 − mP )wB

is decreasing and
µ(pA = 0, pB = 0) =

mP (1 − W )
mP (1 − W ) + (1 − mP )(1 − wB )

is increasing in wB . As the probability of re-election is increasing in the probability perceived to
be type 1, πB − π0 is decreasing in wB . Furthermore, evaluating at wB = 0 and wB = W , we
see that πB − π0 is greater than X(σ, η, W ) − 1/2 when wB = 0 and equal to 0 when wB = W .
Moreover, by equations (??) and (??), we know that when φ > φA0 (σ, η, W ),
1−γ
X(σ, η, W ) − 1/2 ≥ 1/2 − Y (σ, η, W ) >
> 0.
δ[φ + (1 − q)(1 − γ)mP W ]
So by the intermediate value theorem we have a solution wB ∈ (0, W ), and since πB − π0 is
decreasing this solution is unique.
As the probability of re-election after pA = 1 is πA = Y (σ, η, W ), to show that type −1 would
not want to deviate to A it is sufficient to show that
1
πB − Y (σ, η, W ) ≥
.
δ[φ + 2(1 − q)(1 − γ)mP W ]
But, as πB > 1/2 and φ > φA0 (σ, η, W ), this follows immediately. We have then established that
there exists an equilibrium of the described form.
We now turn to showing that this is the unique pure strategy equilibrium of the specified
form. As we have already ruled out an equilibrium with wA = 0 and wB ∈ {0, W } it is sufficient
to show that we cannot have a pure-strategy equilibrium in which type −1 chooses wA > 0 or
wB < 0. Suppose there is an equilibrium in which type −1 chooses wA > 0 on issue A and
wB ∈ [0, W − wA ] on issue B. As pA = 1 never happens when the incumbent is type 1 we have
that the probability of re-election after pA = 1, regardless of pB is πA = Y (σ, η, W ). Next, note

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

15

that by Bayes’ rule,
µ(pA = 0, pB = 0) =

mP (1 − W )
< mP ,
mP (1 − W ) + (1 − mP )(1 − wA )(1 − wB )

mP W
> mP .
P
P
A
B
m W + (1 − m )(1 − w )w
Hence, the probability of re-election after pA = 0, pB = 1 is πB > 1/2, and the probability of
re-election after pA = pB = 0 is π0 < 1/2. Note that the probability of re-election for type −1 is
µ(pA = 0, pB = 1) =

wA Y (σ, η, W ) + (1 − wA )wB πB + (1 − wA )(1 − wB )π0 < wA Y (σ, η, W ) + wB πB + (1 − wA − wB )π0 .
If she deviates to effort allocation (0, wA + wB ) her probability of re-election is
(wA + wB )πB + (1 − wA − wB )π0 ,
and her first period policy payoff is decreased by (2γ − 1)wA . So, in order for (0, wA + wB ) not
to be a profitable deviation we must have


1
A
A
P
A
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ+2(1−q)mP (1−γ)W ),
w ≥ w (πB −Y (σ, η, W ))(φ+2(1−q)m (1−γ)W ) > w
2
which contradicts the assumption that φ > φA0 (σ, η, W ). As such, we cannot have an equilibrium
in which wA > 0.
Now consider the possibility of wB < 0. Then since pA = 1 or pB = −1 only happens if the
incumbent is type −1, we have πA = π−B = Y (σ, η, W ). As above we have πB > 1/2 > π0 >
Y (σ, η, W ). The re-election probability for type −1 is then
(1 − wA )(1 − wB )π0 + (wA + wB − wA wB )Y (σ, η, W ),
and the probability of re-election from (0, wA + wB ) is
(1 − wA − wB )π0 + (wA + wB )πB ,
so the cost in forgone election probability is at least
δ(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)W )(wA + wB − wA wB )(πB − Y (σ, η, W ).
As the cost in terms of first period policy payoff is
wA + 2wB (1 − γ) < wA + wB ,
given that wA + wB ≤ W < 1 this deviation is profitable unless
wA + wB > δ(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)W )(wA + wB − wA wB )(πB − Y (σ, η, W ),
(wA + wB )2
≥ δ(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)W )(wA + wB −
)(πB − Y (σ, η, W ),
4
3 A
≥
(w + wB )δ(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)W )(πB − Y (σ, η, W ).
4
However, this contradicts the assumption that φ > φA0 (σ, η, W ).
Having now ruled out every other possibility, we can conclude that when φ > φA0 (σ, η, W )
type −1 chooses wA = 0 and wB < W in the unique pure strategy equilibrium. 

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

16

We conclude with the result when effort is non-transparent and W > 1.

Proof of Proposition 4. We begin by defining
2
− 2mP (1 − γ)[1 + q(W − 2)].
(14)
φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) ≡
δ(1 − 2Y (σ, η, W ))
∗
and verifying that φN A (σ, η, W ) as defined in equation (??) is larger than
φ∗ (σ, η, W ) = max{φ̂(W ), φ1 (σ, η, W )}, where φ̂(W ) and φ1 (σ, η, W ) are given by equations (??)
and (??) respectively. Note that
2(1 − (W − 1)γ)
φ1 (σ, η, W ) =
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + (W − 2)q)
δ(1 − 2Y (σ, η, W ))
2
<
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + (W − 2)q) = φ∗N A (σ, η, W ),
δ(1 − 2Y (σ, η, W ))
and
2
1 + (W − 2)q
(2γmP − 1) < γmP <
− 2mP (1 − γ) < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ),
φ̂(W ) =
2
δ(1 − 2Y (σ, η, W ))
so it follows that φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) > φ∗ (σ, η, W ) as claimed.
We now show that we can support a pooling equilibrium in which type −1 chooses allocation
wB = 1, wA = W − 1 if and only if φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). First note that, given that in the
purported equilibrium the incumbent is re-elected with probability 1/2 if pB = 1 regardless of
pA . The harshest possible beliefs, to support such an equilibrium, induce re-election probability
Y (σ, η, W ) when pB = 0. So, in order to prevent type −1 from deviating to (wA = 1, wB = W −1),
we must have


1
(2 − W ) ≤ δ(2 − W )
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)),
2
or, equivalently, φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). So the above strategies cannot constitute an equilibrium if
φ < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). We now verify that there is no other profitable deviation, given these beliefs,
if φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). In equilibrium, as we have pooling behavior, the voter does not update
based on pA . Hence, the probability of re-election is 1/2 if pB = 1 and Y (σ, η, W ) if pB = 0.
Suppose type −1 deviates to (wA , wB ) where wB < 1. Then the benefit in terms of first period
payoff is
(wA + 1 − W )γ + (1 − wB )(1 − γ) ≤ (1 − wB ).
The cost, in terms of forgone re-election probability is


1
B
δ(1 − w )
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))
2
Hence, this deviation is not profitable if


1
δ
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)) ≥ 1,
2

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

17

or, equivalently, φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). Hence, we have that ype −1 is optimizing if and only if
φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). Moreover, since φ > φ̂(W ) when φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ), if type −1 is optimizing
then type 1 is optimizing as well. Hence we haven an equilibrium with both types pooling on
(W − 1, 1) if and only if φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ).
We now show that there exists φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) such that, for all
φ ∈ (φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ), φ∗N A (σ, η, W )), there exists an equilibrium in which type 1 chooses allocation
(W − 1, 1) and type −1 chooses effort allocation (1, W − 1) with probability r ∈ (0, 1], and
allocation (W − 1, 1) otherwise. Note that, given the above strategies,
µ(pA = 1, pB = 1) = mP ,
µ(pA , pB = 0) = 0,
mP
mP (1 − W )
=
.
µ(pA = 0, pB = 1; r) = P
m (1 − W ) + (1 − mP )(1 − r)(1 − W )
mP + (1 − mP )(1 − r)
Notice that µ(0, 1; r) is increasing in r and µ(0, 1; 1) = 1. We first show that types 1 and −1
are optimizing conditional on choosing allocation (wA , wB ) ∈ {(1, W − 1), (W − 1, 1)}. For each
r we then have πA = π0 = Y (σ, η, W ), πAB = 1/2, and πB = π(r), where π(r) is increasing in
r with π(0) = 1/2 and π(1) = X(σ, η, W ). Now note that, in order to have type −1 willing to
randomize we must have that her payoff from choosing (1, W − 1) is the same as (W − 1, 1).
As the difference in first period utility is W − 1, and the change in re-election probability is
(W − 1)(πB − πA ) randomization is optimal if and only if
1 = (π(r) − Y (σ))(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)).
Note that, since φ < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) we have


1
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ+2mP (1+q(W −2)) = δ(π(0)−Y (σ, η, W ))(φ+2mP (1−γ)(1+q(W −2)),
1>δ
2
and since π(r) is increasing, we have a solution with r ∈ (0, 1) if and only if
1 < δ(π(1)−Y (σ, η, W ))(φ+2mP (1+q(W −2)) = δ(X(σ, η, W )−Y (σ, η, W ))(φ+2mP (1−γ)(1+q(W −2)).
1
− 2mP (1 + q(W − 2)) there exists a unique r ∈ (0, 1) to make type
So if φ ≥ δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y
(σ,η,W ))
1
−1 indifferent. If φ < δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)) then type −1’s strategy
(σ,η,W ))
must involve r = 1.
Now note that, if type −1 is randomizing, type 1 has a strict preference for allocation (W −1, 1)
1
over (1, W − 1). If φ < δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y
− mP (1 + q(W − 2)) and so r = 1, we must check that
(σ,η,W ))
type 1 prefers allocation (W − 1, 1) to (1, W − 1). This requires that

2γ − 1 ≤ δ(π(1) − Y (σ, η, W ))(φ + 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))).
Notice that this is satisfied if and only if
2γ − 1
φ>
− 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)),
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

18

1
which, when φ > φ̂(W ) is strictly lower than δ(X(σ,η,W )−Y
− 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)) =
(σ,η,W ))
φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). Defining
(15)
2γ − 1
− 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))},
φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) = max{φ∗ (σ, η, W ),
δ(X(σ, η, W ) − Y (σ, η, W ))
we have established that neither type 1 or −1 wants to deviate between (W − 1, 1) and (1, W − 1)
when φ > φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ). It is immediate that φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ).
We now must show that neither type 1 or −1 can benefit from deviating to (wA , wB ) ∈
/
{(1, W − 1), (W − 1, 1)} when φ ∈ (φ∗∗ , φ∗N A ). Recall that under the above strategies πA =
Y (σ, η, W ), πAB = 1/2, and πB ∈ (1/2, X(σ, η, W )). Note that the beliefs when pA = pB = 0 or
pB = −1 are off the equilibrium path; we assign beliefs µ = 0 at either information set so that
π0 = π−B = Y (σ, η, W ). Note that, as the re-election probability is then Y (σ, η, W ) from any
strategy with wB ≤ 0, and we have established in Lemma 8 that when φ > φ∗ (σ, η, W ) both
types prefer to implement wB = 1, wA = W − 1 and be re-elected with probability 1/2 to any
effort allocation that ensures re-election probability Y (σ, η, W ), we can then restrict attention to
deviations with wB > 0.
The probability of re-election from choosing (wA , wB ) is then

wB (1 − wA )πB + wA wB πAB + wA (1 − wB )πA + (1 − wA )(1 − wB )π0 =
1
wB (1 − wA )πB + wA wB + (1 − wB )Y (σ, η, W ).
2
To see that type −1 has no incentive to choose (wA , wB ) ∈
/ {(1, W − 1), (W − 1, 1)}, note that
if type −1 chooses allocation (wA , wB ) her first period payoff is
−γ(1 − wA ) − (1 − γ)wB .
Her first period payoff from allocation (1, W − 1) however is −(1 − γ)(W − 1) and her re-election
probability is (W − 1) 21 + (2 − W )Y (σ, η, W ). Hence, for type −1 to prefer (wA , wB ) to (1, W − 1)
requires that
γ(1 − wA ) + (1 − γ)(1 + wB − W ) <
1
δ(wB (1 − wA )πB + (1 + wA wB − W ) − (1 + wB − W )Y (σ, η, W ))(φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))).
2
To verify that this inequality is violated for all wA it is sufficient to check for wA = min{1, W −
wB }. Note that when wA = W − wB this inequality reduces to
(1 + wB − W ) <
B

B

B

(1 + w − W )(w (πB − Y (σ, η, W )) + (1 − w )




1
− Y (σ, η, W )) (φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))).
2

But because type −1 weakly prefers (1, W −1) to (W −1, 1), and φ < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ), this inequality
cannot be satisfied. Similarly, when wA = 1, since 1 + wB − W ≤ 0 this reduces to


1
(1 − γ) >
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2mP (1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))),
2

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

19

Which violates the assumption that φ > φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ) ≥ φ∗ (σ, η, W ). So it is not optimal for type
−1 to deviate to any (wA , wB ) ∈
/ {(1, W − 1), (W − 1, 1)} when φ ∈ (φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ), φ∗N A (σ, η, W )).
We conclude by considering type 1. Her first period payoff from allocation (wA , wB ) is
−γ(1 − wA ) − (1 − γ)wB ,
while the first period payoff from (W − 1, 1) is −γ(2 − W ) with associated re-election probability
(W − 1) 12 + (2 − W )πB . Note that, as the first period payoff, and re-election probability, for type
1 are both increasing in wB we can restrict attention to cases in which wB = min{1, W − wA }
without loss of generality. The type 1 would only benefit from deviating if γ(W − 1 − wA ) + (1 −
γ)(1 − wB ) is strictly less than
δ[(wB (1 − wA ) + W − 2)πB + (wA wB + 1 − W )/2 + (1 − wB )Y (σ, η, W )]
(φ + 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))).
Note first that when wB = 1 this reduces to


1
A
γ(W − 1 − w ) < δ πB −
(W − 1 − wA )(φ + 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2)))
2
which, because γ > 1/2, can’t be satisfied when φ < φ∗N A (σ, η, W ). And, if wB = W − wA , using
the fact that πB > 1/2, it implies that


1
A
A
(2γ − 1)(1 + w − W ) > (1 + w − W )
− Y (σ, η, W ) (φ + 2(1 − mP )(1 − γ)(1 + q(W − 2))),
2
which can’t be satisfied when φ > φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ). So type 1 doesn’t have an incentive to deviate
to any (wA , wB ) ∈
/ {(1, W − 1), (W − 1, 1)}.
We can then conclude that it is an equilibrium for both types to choose (W − 1, 1) if and
only if φ ≥ φ∗N A (σ, η, W ) > φ∗ (σ, η, W ), and when φ ∈ (φ∗∗ (σ, η, W ), φ∗N A (σ, η, W )) it is an
equilibrium for type −1 to randomize between (W − 1, 1) and (1, W − 1) while type 1 always
chooses (W − 1, 1). 
Appendix C: Empirical Methods
Appendix C describes how the text data were assembled and used to construct our measure
of speech divisiveness.
The raw text of the Congressional Record were obtained from Jensen et al. (2012). Data
are stored and analyzed as a relational database. The segmentation and processing of text is
implemented using Python’s Natural Language Toolkit package. Our statistical estimates were
produced using Stata.
A script reads through the text, detects dates and speakers, and segments speeches for each
congressman. Next, we remove capitalization and punctuation, tokenize the text into sentences
and words, and use a “lemmatizer” to reduce words to their dictionary root when possible. This
is preferred by NLP practitioners to the relatively lossy Porter stemmer, which just removes word
suffixes.
[Table A1 - List of Excluded Words]

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

20

We have developed a relatively aggressive list of words for exclusion from the corpus. First we
remove any words fewer than 3 characters. Second we remove common “stop-words” such as “the”
and “which.” We also did our best to exclude procedural vocabulary, which could be correlated
with our treatment variables without indicating changes in policy effort. We also removed other
non-policy words that are common in the record, such as the names of states. Finally, some
common misspellings are included. A full list of excluded words (at least three letters long) is
included in Table A1.
An individual floor speech is represented as a list of sentences, each of which is a list of
words. Speeches with two or fewer sentences are excluded. Then for each congressman, all of
the sentences for a two-year congressional session are appended together as his speech output for
that session.
[Table A2 - Filtering the Feature Set]
From the tokenized sentences we then construct lists of two-word and three-word phrases
(bigrams and trigrams), not allowing for word sequences across sentence boundaries. The full
set of phrases has over 120 million features. To achieve a computationally feasible metric for
divisiveness of speech, we reduced the feature set as follows. We began by removing any phrases
that did not appear in at least ten of the twenty congressional sessions in our sample. Then we
ranked each phrase p in two ways. First, the overall frequency of the phrase in the corpus, fp .
Second, the point-wise mutual information (PMI) for the phrase, P M Ip . This metric is used by
linguists to uncover the most informative phrases from a corpus (Bouma 2009). For example,
one of the highest-PMI phrases in our corpus is “notre dame” — the words “notre” and “dame”
rarely occur except in the name of the university. We selected the phrases with the highest
frequency and the highest PMI, with some subjective judgement about where to set the cutoffs.
As a reasonably large and computationally feasible set of phrases, we selected 2000 bigrams and
1000 trigrams. The thresholds for these numbers were fp ≥ 2336, P M Ip ≥ 3.145 for bigrams,
and fp ≥ 1173, P M Ip ≥ 10.016 for trigrams.
The full phrase feature set for our empirical analysis are available on request from the authors.
These data include frequency and PMI for each phrase. Note that this set of phrase features is
more representative of the distribution of topics in the Congressional Record than that used in
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) and Jensen et. al (2012). In those papers, the authors selected
the most divisive phrases as ranked by the Chi-squared metric (see below). Instead, we construct our feature set using non-political metrics (frequency and PMI), and then score this set
of representative phrases by divisiveness.
The Chi-squared metric for the political divisiveness of a phrase is constructed as follows. We
begin with the phrase frequencies for each political party in each congressional chamber and each
R
congressional session. Define nD
plct and nplct as the number of times phrase p of length l is used
by Democrats and Republicans,
respectively,
session t in legislative chamber c (House or
P
P during
D
R
R
Senate). Let Nlct
= p nD
and
N
=
n
be
the summed frequencies of all phrases of
plct
lct
p plct
length l used by Democrats and Republicans, respectively, at session t in chamber c. Finally,
D
D
R
R
R
let ñD
plct = Nlct − nplct and ñplct = Nlct − nplct equal the total number of times phrases of length
l ∈ {2, 3} besides p (but still in the filtered sample) were used by Democrats and Republicans,
respectively, during session t in chamber c. Then construct Pearson’s χ2plct statistic for each

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

21

phrase p of length l ∈ {2, 3} at time t in chamber c as
χ2plct =

2
R
D
D
(nR
plct ñplct − nplct ñplct )
.
R
D
R
R
D
(nD
Nlct
Nlct
plct + nplct )(ñplct + ñplct )

As shown in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), this metric ranks phrases by their association with
R
particular political parties. If the frequencies nD
plct and nplct are drawn from multinomial distributions, χ2plct provides a test statistic for the null that phrase p is used equally by Democrats
and Republicans during session t in chamber c. That paper provides a lengthy discussion of the
measure.
Now that we have an annual divisiveness score for each phrase, we use these phrases to construct a measure of the divisiveness of congressman speech. Our approach is based on Jensen
et al. (2012), who use a similar method to measure historical levels of polarization in the U.S.
House. First define the raw frequency for phrase p by congressman i in chamber c during session
t as φcipt . Using the set of frequencies for phrase p in chamber c at year t, {φc1pt , φc2pt , φc3pt , ...},
c
construct the mean µcpt and standard deviation σpt
of the frequency for that phrase-chamber-year,
c
and define the normalized frequency fipt to have zero mean and standard deviation one:
c
fipt
:=

φcipt − µcpt
.
c
σpt

This will mean that each phrase has the same influence on our congressman divisiveness measure.
Define the number of phrases P , indexed by p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P }. In our case P = 3000. The
divisiveness of phrase p for chamber c at year t is χ2pct , where we drop l and ignore length since
all the phrases are scored on the same scale. Let
Fit =

P
X

fipt ,

p=1

the total number of phrases spoken by congressman i during t. We define politician divisiveness
as the frequency-weighted phrase divisiveness for the phrases used by the congressman. In
particular:
!
P
2
X
f
χ
ipt pct
Yitc = log
.
F
it
p=1
We have taken logs to obtain a unitless measure. Jensen et al. (2012) show the usefulness of this
aggregate measure in a range of contexts.
Note that the phrase divisiveness metric χ2pct can be based on the language of either chamber
c ∈ {H, S}. This will matter in our empirical analysis—when studying the posturing behavior
in a particular legislative chamber, we prefer to use the phrase divisiveness metric constructed
from speech in the other chamber. This allows us to avoid any issues with a congressman’s own
speech influencing the level of the metric.
[Figure A1 (Senator Speech Divisiveness, 1973-2012)]
[Figure A2 (House Member Speech Divisiveness, 1991-2002)]

APPENDIX FOR “ELECTIONS AND DIVISIVENESS: THEORY AND EVIDENCE”

22

Figures A1 and A2 give the trends in average divisiveness for the Senate and House of representatives, respectively. As seen in the figures, Republicans and Democrats have similar levels
and trends in speech divisiveness. Note that chamber-wide differences in divisiveness over time
will not affect our results, since we include year fixed effects in our regressions.
References
Bouma, Gerlof (2009). “Normalized (pointwise) Mutual Information in Collocation Extraction.”
Proceedings of GSCL, 31-40.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2010). “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica, 78, 1, 35-71.
Jensen, Jacob, Ethan Kaplan, Suresh Naidu, and Laurence Wilse-Samson (2012). “The Dynamics
of Political Language.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-81.

a's
able
about
above
absence
absent
absnce
according
accordingly
across
act
acting
actually
adding
adopt
affirm
after
afterwards
again
against
ago
agree
ain't
aisle
alabama
alaska
all
allow
allows
almost
alone
along
already
also
although

always

and
announce
announced
another
any
anybody

anyhow
anyone

anything
anyway
anyways
anywhere
apart
appear
appreciate
appro
appropriate
approve
april
are
aren't
arizona
arkansas
around
aside
ask
asked
asking
assistant
associated
ator
attend
august
available
away
awfully
aye
ayes
back
became
because
become
becomes
becoming
been

TABLE A1
List of Excluded Words
before
come
beforehand
comes
behind
complet
being
concerning
believe
confer
below
conference
bers
congress
beside
congressional
besides
connecticut
best
consent
better
consequently
between
consider
beyond
consideration
bill
considering
bloc
contain
both
containing
brief
contains
busi
corresponding
but
could
c'mon
couldn't
c's
coun
california
country
call
course
came
currently
can
dakota
can't
date
cannot
debat
cant
debate
carolina
december
cause
defeat
causes
delaware
cer
described
certain
desk
certainly
despite
chairman
device
chapter
did
chil
didn't
cial
different
clause
distinguish
clearly
dle
clerk
does
clotur
doesn't
colleague
doing
colorado
don't
com
done

dont
down
downwards
during
each
edu
effort
eight
eign
either
else
elsewhere
enactment
ence
enough
ent
entirely
eral
ernment
ers
especially
etc
even
ever
every
everybody
everyone
everything
everywhere
exactly
example
except
express
extend
far
favor
february
ference
few
fifth
first
five
floor
florida
followed

amdt
amend
amended
amendment
america
american
among
amongst
ance
List of words excluded from text before construction of bigrams and trigrams.

following
follows
for
former
formerly
forth
four
friday
from
further
furthermore
gentleman
gentlewoman
georgia
get
gets
getting
given
gives
goes
going
gone
got
gotten
greetings
gress
had
hadn't
hampshire
happens
hardly
has
hasn't
have
haven't
having
hawaii
he's
hello
hence
her
here
here's
hereafter
hereby

herein
hereupon
hers
herself
him
himself
his
hither
hopefully
house
how
howbeit
however
i'd
i'll
i'm
i've
idaho
ident
ignored
illinois
immediate
inasmuch
inc
include
increas
indeed
indiana
indicate
indicated
indicates
ing
ington
inner
inserting
insofar
instead
into
invok
inward
iowa
isn't
it'd
it'll
it's
its

itself
ity
january
jersey
join
joint
journal
july
june
just
kansas
keep
keeps
kentucky
kept
kill
know
known
knows
last
lately
later
lation
latter
latterly
least
legisla
legislative
less
lest
let
let's
lic
lieu
lieve
like
liked
likely
line
little
look
looking
looks
louisiana
ltd
madam

TABLE A1 (cont.)
List of Excluded Words
maine
ness
mainly
nevada
majority
never
make
nevertheless
many
new
march
next
maryland
nine
massachusetts nobody
may
non
maybe
none
mean
noone
meanwhile
nor
meet
normally
member
not
ment
note
merely
nothing
mexico
novel
michigan
november
might
now
minnesota
nowhere
minute
number
mississippi
objection
missouri
obviously
mittee
oclock
monday
october
montana
off
month
officer
more
often
moreover
ohio
most
okay
mostly
oklahoma
motion
old
move
once
much
one
must
ones
myself
only
name
onto
namely
oppos
nay
order
near
ordered
nearly
oregon
nebraska
other
necessary
others
need
otherwise
needs
ought
neither
our

ours
ourselves
out
outside
over
overall
override
own
page
particular
particularly
pass
passag
passage
past
pct
pennsylvania
peo
people
per
percent
perhaps
period
permission
placed
ple
please
plus
point
possible
pre
present
presid
president
presiding
presumably
printed
pro
probably
proceed
proceeded
program
propos
proposed
provide
provides

List of words excluded from text before construction of bigrams and trigrams.

provision
pur
purpose
que
question
quite
quorom
quorum
rather
read
really
reasonably
reconsider
record
regarding
regardless
regards
reject
relatively
remark
rep
report
requir
requisite
resolut
resolution
respectively
result
retary
revise
rhode
rise
roll
rollcall
rule
said
saturday
saw
say
saying
says
section
see
seeing
seem
seemed

seeming
seems
seen
self
selves
senat
senate
senator
send
sense
sensible
sent
september
sergeant
serious
seriously
serv
session
seven
several
shall
she
should
shouldn't
side
since
sion
sions
six
some
somebody
somehow
someone
something
sometime
sometimes
somewhat
somewhere
soon
sorry
speak
speaker
specified
specify
specifying
spend

stat
state
states
statu
still
strike
striking
sub
subchapter
subsection
subsequ
such
sunday
sup
support
sure
suspend
t's
table
take
taken
tary
tell
tem
tempore
tends
tennessee
ter
texas
than
thank
thanks
thanx
that
that's
thats
the
their
theirs
them
themselves
then
thence
there
there's
thereafter

TABLE A1 (cont.)
List of Excluded Words
thereby
twice
therefore
two
therein
unanimous
thereof
under
theres
unfortunately
thereupon
united
these
unless
they
unlikely
they'd
until
they'll
unto
they're
upon
they've
urge
think
use
third
used
this
useful
thorough
uses
thoroughly
using
those
usually
though
utah
three
uucp
through
various
throughout
vermont
thru
very
thursday
veto
thus
via
tiff
vide
time
vided
tion
virginia
tional
viz
tions
vol
title
vote
tive
wait
tleman
waive
today
want
together
wants
too
was
took
washington
toward
wasn't
towards
way
tried
we'd
tries
we'll
truly
we're
try
we've
trying
wednesday
tuesday
week
ture
welcome

well
went
were
weren't
what
what's
whatever
when
whence
whenever
where
where's
whereafter
whereas
whereby
wherein
whereupon
wherever
whether
which
while
whither
who
who's
whoever
whole
whom
whose
why
will
willing
wisconsin
wish
with
within
without
won't
wonder
word
would
wouldn't
wyoming
yea
year
yes
yet

List of words excluded from text before construction of bigrams and trigrams.

yield
york
you
you'd
you'll
you're
you've
your
yours
yourself
yourselves
zero

TABLE A2
Filtering the Feature Set
Feature Filtering Step

Set of Text Features

1 Entire Vocabulary

671,679 words

2 Words used in at least 10 separate sessions

56,392 words

3 Words used at least 50 times per session on
average when they appear

13,088 words

4 Full set of bigrams and trigrams using the
vocabulary from Step 3.

20,271,332 bigrams; 99,78,398 trigrams

5 Bigrams with total frequency >= 2336 and PMI
>= 3.14, trigrams with PMI >= 10 and total
frequency >= 1000

2000 bigrams, 1000 trigrams

Figure A1
Senator Speech Divisiveness, 1973-2012

This figure plots the mean senator speech divisiveness for each congressional session, separately by
political party. Error spikes indicate 25th and 75th percentiles. Speech divisiveness measure is
constructed from House speech.

Figure A2
House Member Speech Divisiveness, 1991-2002

This figure plots the mean House member speech divisiveness for each congressional session,
separately by political party. Error spikes indicate 25 th and 75th percentiles. Speech divisiveness measure
is constructed from Senate speech.

