                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CORPORATE VENTURE CAPITAL AS A REAL OPTION IN THE MARKETS FOR
                           TECHNOLOGY

                                          Marco Ceccagnoli
                                          Matthew J. Higgins
                                          Hyunsung D. Kang

                                         Working Paper 21424
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21424


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank Deloitte ReCap for their assistance and generous access to data. We also thank Ashish Arora,
Anne Assmus, Brent Bellows, Gary Dushnitsky, Mark Edwards, Stuart Graham, Carolin Haeussler,
Dietmar Harhoff, Sherry Knowles, Richard Manning, Bastian Rake, Frank Rothaermel, Mike Stonebrook,
Jerry Thursby, seminar participants at Georgia Institute of Technology and University of Passau and
conference participants at the Academy of Management for helpful comments and suggestions. Higgins
gratefully acknowledges funding from the Imlay Professorship. The authors are listed alphabetically
and the usual disclaimer applies. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marco Ceccagnoli, Matthew J. Higgins, and Hyunsung D. Kang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Venture Capital as a Real Option in the Markets for Technology
Marco Ceccagnoli, Matthew J. Higgins, and Hyunsung D. Kang
NBER Working Paper No. 21424
July 2015
JEL No. G34,L24,L65,O32

                                            ABSTRACT

Despite the fact that one of the main goals of corporate venture capital (CVC) investments in high-tech
industries is to gain a window on future technologies, the relationship between CVC investments and
strategies used to acquire technologies in the markets, such as licensing, has not been adequately
explored. To address this gap, we build on the real option literature suggesting that CVC investments
can be used as real options in the markets for technology. Accordingly, we formulate hypotheses
about key drivers of the option value of CVC investments and the decision to exercise the option.
Using a longitudinal dataset based on 604 dyads formed by a sample of global pharmaceutical firms
and their external technology partners, we find that corporate investors’ scientific capabilities,
technological domains, research pipelines, and the resolution of exogenous uncertainty related to
partner firms’ technologies impact investors’ decisions on CVC investments and ex post technology
acquisition. In our research setting, the most common way to exercise the option post-CVC investment
is via technology licensing.


Marco Ceccagnoli                                   Hyunsung D. Kang
Scheller College of Business                       Adelphi University,
Georgia Institute of Technology                    Hagedorn Hall
800 West Peachtree Street, NW                      P.O. Box 701
Atlanta, GA 30308                                  Garden City, NY 11530-0701
marco.ceccagnoli@scheller.gatech.edu               DKANG@ADELPHI.EDU

Matthew J. Higgins
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu
INTRODUCTION
     Increasingly firms utilize a number of mechanisms to reach out beyond their boundaries

in order to acquire technology. Increasingly, companies have utilized one such mechanism,

corporate venture capital (CVC), as a means of identifying early-stage research (e.g., Dushnitsky,

2006). Extant work has explicitly examined CVC investments as a window for future technology

(e.g., Gompers and Lerner, 1998; Dushnitsky and Lenox, 2005a, 2005b, and 2006; Wadhwa and

Kotha, 2006; Keil et al., 2008; Benson and Ziedonis, 2009; Basu et al., 2011) with several

surveys supporting this motivation (e.g., PricewaterhouseCooper, 2006; Corporate Strategy

Board, 2000). More recently, PricewaterhouseCooper (2014) reported that 95% of respondents

indicated that the “windows for future technologies or markets” was of “high or medium

importance” when considering strategic motivations for CVC investments.

          For corporate investors, CVC investments allow them to make limited risk investments in

early-stage companies and gather information about new technologies over time (Arora and

Gambardella, 1990; Dushnitsky and Lenox, 2005a). For example, in our research setting, the

pharmaceutical industry, the stated investment purpose of several CVC investment programs

include: “…direct investments in early-stage innovative life science companies that demonstrate

promise to deliver breakthrough products that may be future Sanofi pipeline candidates…” or

“…focus areas include therapeutic areas complimentary to those of Baxter’s existing medical

product or bioscience businesses as well as cutting edge technologies outside Baxter’s current

product portfolio…”; “Companies with innovative new technologies…”; and, “…as well as

emerging or more opportunistic area of innovation that have the potential to complement

AbbVie’s existing portfolio or to expand Abbvie’s future business reach.”1 This emphasis on

future technologies as a primary motivation was confirmed through interviews with multiple


1
    http://www.genengnews.com/keywordsandtools/print/3/31701/

                                                                                                  1
leading global pharmaceutical companies.2

        A growing body of literature considers what firms do with this newly acquired

information and how these investments relate to other external R&D strategies. For example,

firms may make CVC investments as a precursor to an eventual vertical acquisition (e.g., Arora

and Gambardella, 1990; Folta, 1998; Folta and Miller, 2002; Vassolo et al., 2004; Villalonga and

McGahan, 2005; Benson and Ziedonis, 2009 and 2010; Tong and Li, 2010). In this instance,

information gathered after an investment may lead to better target firm selection. Additionally, it

may also act as a monitoring mechanism for the progress of the underlying technology (Bottazzi

et al., 2004), providing information on when to acquire a target (Arora and Gambardella, 1990).

        A major gap in the literature is the analysis of the relationship between CVC and

technology licensing, the most common contract-based mechanism utilized to acquire existing or

ex post technology (e.g., Arora and Gambardella, 2010). This is surprising considering that one

of the main goals of CVC investments is to gain a ‘window on future technology’. Indeed, CVC

investors have the future option to license from versus acquiring the portfolio firm; licensing

confers the benefits of intellectual property rights (IPR) transfer without having to suffer the

transaction or integration costs (which can be significant) of an acquisition.

        As such, we use real option (RO) theory within a two-stage framework to analyze the

conditions under which pharmaceutical companies make CVC investments as a strategy to defer

technology purchase decisions characterized by greater levels of commitment and irreversibility

(e.g., R&D alliances, licensing, and acquisitions). Then, conditional on having chosen to make a

CVC investment, we explore conditions under which these corporate investors may choose to

2
  We are not suggesting that the windows for future technology is the only motivation for making CVC investments,
however in our research setting it is the primary reason. Other motivations exist, for example: (1) in order to drive
ecosystem adoption of company technologies; (2) provide existing businesses with commercial opportunities; and (3)
for pure financial returns. It is clear to us, however, from our conversations with companies, review of leading CVC
programs, and analysis of actual CVC contracts that the primary motivation is the window for future technologies.

                                                                                                                  2
“exercise” their ROs by acquiring the technology. In Figure 1 we draw our two-stage framework,

conditional on entering the external technology market and map the relevant literatures to this

framework. Our paper is the first to explore CVC investments in such a multi-stage framework

and relative to a more complete and realistic set of strategic choices firms face.

       More specifically, we start by suggesting that a firm’s ability to select external

technology, a component of their absorptive capacity, is a key driver of option value. In

particular, we argue that firms with weak scientific capabilities or technological knowledge that

is not closely related to the focal external technology are more likely to make a CVC investment

relative to an ex post technology acquisition. These firms are less capable in selecting external

technologies, thus unable to mitigate technological uncertainty thereby driving up the option

value of a CVC investment relative to ex post technology acquisition strategies.

       Next, we demonstrate that firms possessing a relatively greater proportion of early-stage

technologies in their pipelines are less likely to make CVC investments, relative to directly

engaging in ex post technology purchases through licensing or acquisition. Consistent with a

ROs perspective, we argue that firms that are in greater need for late-stage innovations face a

more limited timeframe upon which to exercise a CVC option. Any decrease in the time from

investment to potential exercise will decrease the RO value of such an investment.

       We use a ROs perspective to address the issue of what corporate investors ultimately do

with their CVC investments. We argue that conditional upon making CVC investments,

corporate investors are more likely to engage in ex post technology transactions with their

partner firms when the value of focal technology is high and the associated uncertainty is low. In

other words, CVC investments as ROs are more likely to be exercised when these two conditions

(i.e., high technology value and low uncertainty) are appropriately interacted. We also



                                                                                                    3
demonstrate, for the first time, that, in a context whereby future technology acquisition is a major

strategic CVC objective, licensing is the most likely exercise strategy (choice) that firms utilize,

filling a major gap in the CVC literature (see Figure 1).

       Finally, motivated by interviews with industry practitioners we expand the set of minority

equity investments that we include under the rubric of ‘CVC investments’. While some limit the

rubric solely to minority equity investments in small, private firms we also include minority

investments in small, public firms. Limiting our analysis solely to private firms excludes

investments that in reality practitioners are making for the same underlying motivation. This is

an industry whose product development cycle extends beyond a decade. In both cases, these

remain investments in small, research-focused firms with nascent technologies and high levels of

uncertainty regarding their eventual success. Our core results remain qualitatively consistent

between this broader definition of CVC and a more traditional one focused only on private firms.

RELATED LITERATURE
CVC investments as a window for future technology
       Our theory builds on two different research streams. First is the literature on markets for

technology (MFT). CVC investments can help corporate investors identify future technology

partners by reducing asymmetric information and uncertainty that may characterize MFT. This

reduction in risk eventually provides clarity to the corporate investor and they may then choose

to license the portfolio technology or acquire the portfolio firm. It is possible that an initial CVC

investment can lead to an R&D alliance (Maula et al., 2013). Finally, corporate investors may

choose not to engage in a subsequent activity (i.e., license, acquisition or R&D alliance) in which

case they can try to sell the portfolio investment or hold it passively.

       Reflecting back on Figure 1, these options are described on the second branch (2.E:

license; 2.F: acquisition; 2.G: R&D alliance; and, 2.H: hold in portfolio). A major contribution of


                                                                                                        4
this paper is the inclusion of licensing (2.E) as a post-CVC investment option. No other paper

identified in Figure 1, or that we are aware of, currently considers licensing in this second stage

or relative to these other options.3 In our research setting, licensing is the most popular form of

option execution.

         The importance of licensing as a technology acquisition strategy should not be surprising.

There exists significant work in the MFT literature extolling the benefits of licensing.4 Licensing

enables gains from trade, providing technology suppliers access to downstream capabilities of

buyers, to be balanced against transaction costs associated with contracting. Strong IPR are a key

facilitating factor of technology transactions between suppliers holding the IPR and buyers

possessing specialized complementary assets (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006). Effective patent

protection is an important driving factor of the diffusion of licensing in industries such as

biopharmaceuticals, where the propensity to patent is high (Cohen et al. 2000).

         Acquisition is another strategy involving a high degree of organizational integration

between technology suppliers and holders of downstream complementary capabilities (Arora and

Gambardella, 1990; Kale and Puranam, 2004). Acquisitions imply the transfer of technology

ownership rights across firm boundaries through equity-based, rather than contractual,

mechanisms. While acquisitions facilitate the transfer of human capital and its productivity, the

achievement of synergies is typically offset by implementation problems and integration costs

(e.g., Graebner et al., 2010). The net benefits of acquisition in term of innovation are often

questionable. On the other hand, licensing is an arm’s length contractual alternative that allows

the acquisition of specific technologies, avoids integration costs, and may complement the

3
   The closest paper to considering multiple post-CVC investment options is Van de Vrande and Vanhaverbeke
(2008). They consider acquisitions (2.F), R&D alliances (2.G) and hold in portfolio (2.H). Not only do they exclude
licensing (2.E) but their study is conditional on a CVC investment occurring. That is, they focus on the second-stage
investment choice we depict in Stage 2 of Figure 1.
4
   A recent review of both theoretical and empirical work on this topic is provided by Arora and Gambardella (2010).

                                                                                                                    5
internal R&D of the technology acquirer under certain conditions (Ceccagnoli et al., 2014).

CVC as real options
       The second research stream is the growing literature relating CVC to ROs (e.g., Folta,

1998; Folta and Miller, 2002; Vassolo et al., 2004; Van de Vrande et al., 2006; Van de Vrande

and Vanhaverbeke, 2009; Li and Mahoney, 2011). ROs are sequential investments in real assets

made under conditions of uncertainty that create potential opportunities for more significant

investments at some future date. They require ex ante criteria for deferral, exercise, and

abandonment but provide ex post flexibility for an investor to act in response to new information

that may affect the value of the underlying asset (Seth and Chi, 2005).

       In general, CVC investments can be viewed as ROs as they constitute relatively small

investments in novel and uncertain technologies (Allen and Hevert, 2007; Tong and Li, 2010).

CVC investments are analogous to call options, giving the corporate investor the right but not the

obligation to defer more formal commitments (Higgins, 2007). CVC investments also provide

corporate investors with privileged information about a venture (Tong and Li, 2010; Dushnitsky,

2006). This flow of information may reduce investor uncertainty and lead to “exercise” of the

RO (Folta and Miller, 2002).

       The general applicability of ROs theory to management decisions has been robustly

debated, especially in the context of R&D investments (e.g., McGrath, 1997; Folta, 1998; Adner

and Levinthal, 2004a and 2004b; McGrath et al., 2004). At the heart of this debate are

endogenous firm actions that might possibly influence option value (Gil, 2007). For example,

Adner and Levinthal (2004a and 2004b) (hereafter, A&L(a) and A&L(b)), argue that endogenous

actions can lead to an open ended investment which may possibly influence its timely

abandonment; a key feature, they argue, of limiting downside risk and applicability of ROs.

       In the aforementioned debate, A&L(a) lay out boundary conditions for the appropriate

                                                                                                 6
use of ROs theory. Within a two-by-two matrix they relate the irreversibility of an investment to

its degree of uncertainty, arguing that ROs are applicable across ranges of moderate to high

levels of uncertainty and moderate to high levels of irreversibility. As both of these factors

increase, the value of the underlying option increases (Folta et al., 2006).

         In general, investments in early-stage technology occur in highly uncertain environments

and are associated with a high degree of sunkness or irreversibility. This is exacerbated if a firm

also has to make investments in co-specialized assets that are highly irreversible (Santoro and

McGill, 2005). In our setting, this increase in option value is analogous to an increase in the

value of an option to defer a more formal commitment thereby increasing the likelihood of CVC.

As such, these features of early-stage R&D investing – high uncertainty and irreversibility – fit

solidly within the first boundary condition put forth by A&L (2004a: Figure 2a) thereby making

the option to defer a more formal commitment via a CVC investment valuable.

         A&L describe a second boundary condition that distinguishes ROs from path-dependent

opportunities. Again, in a two-by-two matrix (A&L, 2004a, Figure 2b), they relate the flexibility

of the target market with the flexibility of the underlying technical agenda. They argue that as

one moves from fixed to more flexibility along these dimensions the applicability of ROs

diminishes and the underlying investments become more path-dependent. In our setting, both of

these dimensions are each more fixed than flexible, well within the boundary specified by A&L

(2004a; Figure 2b).5

         The example in footnote five along with similar observations in our data are corroborated

by interviews with senior executives from leading pharmaceutical companies along with our

5
   For example, in 2008 GlaxoSmithKline made a venture capital investment in a small biotech company whose
singular focus was on microRNA-targeted therapeutics to treat Crohn’s Disease and ulcerative colitis. Both the
target market and technical agendas are predominantly fixed and well defined, even though the viability of the
underlying technology is still highly uncertain. This example is consistent with the types of deals we observe in our
data.

                                                                                                                   7
analysis of CVC investment contracts. Consistent with prior work (e.g., Ernst and Young, 2008;

Dushnitsky, 2006), these conversations describe highly specialized and formal organizational

units responsible for CVC investments with many of the key personnel having backgrounds in

venture capital. Moreover, these investment programs are highly professional (Ernst and Young,

2008) and follow the same types of rigorous investment criteria used by independent VCs. All of

our interviewees described ex ante investment processes that included expected performance

milestones, the conditions under which they would abandon an investment and what possible

“exercise” options they would consider. These discussions were consistent with the types of

processes described in the literature (e.g., evaluating exits (Basu et al., 2011) and abandoning

investments (Chemmanur et al., 2014)).

       How uncertainty is resolved during the investment period is also important for the

applicability of ROs theory. By definition uncertainty is positively related to the variance of an

underlying asset; greater variance increases an option’s value. For financial options the variance

is reflected in and calculated from historical equity prices. However, in the case of ROs, variance

is due to uncertainty in the underlying real asset. With our focus on early-stage R&D investments,

uncertainty derives from such factors as: the age of the firm, maturity of the technology, the

development stage and/or technological distance of the underlying technology from the investor.

       The ROs literature has categorized uncertainty into two types, exogenous and

endogenous, which may be resolved during the option period (e.g., Folta, 1998; Gil, 2007;

Ziedonis, 2007). These types of uncertainty are distinguished from one another based on whether

resolution is independent of the actions of the corporate investor. In the case of exogenous

uncertainty it may resolve itself over the option period independent of corporate investor action

(Folta, 1998). For example, Ziedonis (2007) describes an example where a firm weighs an



                                                                                                     8
investment decision in the face of pending legislation that it is unable to influence but will

nevertheless affect its returns. In this instance, uncertainty relating to the legislation is unaffected

by the firm’s decision to invest.

          In a research setting similar to our own, Folta and Miller (2002) explore pharmaceutical

company acquisitions of biotechnology firms for which they hold a minority equity stake.

Viewed through the lens of RO theory, these firms hold an option on future acquisition.

Following Folta (1998), they measure exogenous uncertainty by volatility in sub-field stock

market returns, finding that when uncertainty is reduced, acquisitions (i.e., exercise of the option)

are more likely to occur.

          Endogenous uncertainty, on the other hand, may resolve itself over the option period only

with active involvement by the corporate investor (Folta, 1998). If uncertainty is endogenously

resolved or as A&L(a) suggests, “…we move away from a world of ‘wait and see’ to a world of

‘act and see’…”, the application of ROs becomes strained. It is important to note that A&L(a) are

not arguing for strict exogenous resolution of uncertainty but rather leave open the possibility for

some measure of endogeneity before applicability collapses. That is they suggest “The greater

the extent to which these properties are violated, the more problematic the application of an

options framework is” (A&L, 2004a, pg.76).

          Information gathered from our interviews and review of 100 CVC contracts indicates that

two things appear to be predominately occurring within the biopharmaceutical industry.6 First,

most of these CVC investments are indeed standoff financial investments in which case the

resolution of uncertainty is exogenous. That is, the corporate investor has no involvement with

the development of the underlying technology of the portfolio firm. Second, of the contracts we

reviewed less than 10% of them provided a board seat to the corporate investor. In some cases
6
    Contracts were obtained from BiosciDB: https://www.bioscidb.com/.

                                                                                                       9
these board seats were non-voting and observation only. Our interviews revealed that these seats

serve as a mechanism to transfer information back to the corporate investor (as opposed from the

corporate investor to the portfolio firm). This view is consistent with what other scholars have

documented about board seats (e.g., Dushnitsky, 2006).

       Interestingly, Dushnitsky (2006, pg. 415) posed a question that we included in our

interviews: “Do firms leverage their skilled R&D personnel, manufacturing capabilities, or

industry outlook to assist portfolio companies?” Consistently we were told “no” unless there was

an additional research agreement that clearly delineated ownership of IPR. This added caution is

warranted, as this is an industry that is wholly dependent upon secure IPR. That said, our

interviewees did suggest that they would assist in such things as product strategy development or

the facilitation of business development relationships with their own firms. Neither of these areas,

however, directly involved the corporate investor working on the portfolio firm’s underlying

technology.

       In our setting the resolution of uncertainty is therefore exogenous as these investments

are mainly standoff financial transactions. In the limited instances where there is interaction

between the firms it does not appear to rise to the “act-and-see” concerns of A&L(a). Certainly,

the involvement with the portfolio firms through CVC investing is far less than with a joint

venture (Reuer and Tong, 2005; Tong et al., 2008) or engaging in an R&D-focused strategic

alliance (Kogut, 1991; Smit and Trigeorgis, 2004; Vassolo et al., 2004) where the resolution of

uncertainty would be more endogenous.

HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
       In this section we integrate the ideas developed in the previous discussion within a

stylized model, which will allow us to better structure the development of our hypotheses. In

particular, we articulate our hypotheses using the decision tree illustrated in Figure 1.

                                                                                                   10
       While firms face an initial decision on whether to internally develop a technology or

enter the external markets to purchase it, we focus our analysis on the choice between alternative

external technology acquisition strategies. In other words, we analyze whether firms, conditional

on “outsourcing R&D”, should purchase ex post technology in the markets through a license or

an acquisition or, alternatively, make ex ante CVC investments. We also consider the option of

forming an R&D-focused alliance as a second form of ex ante technology acquisition. R&D

alliances can be viewed as a mechanism of investment in the generation of future technology

(Arora and Gambardella, 2010). However, as we will discuss, they also differ markedly from

CVC in terms of the overall resource commitment and involvement by the corporate investor.

       In line with the logic developed in the previous section, the objective of our analysis on

the first stage is to examine the RO value of CVC once we recognize that alternative technology

strategies requiring greater resource commitment are available. The second stage allows us to

analyze the conditions favoring the exercise of the RO. At this stage, conditional on the choice of

CVC, corporate investors can choose to engage in ex post technology acquisition, such as

licensing or acquisition, form an R&D-focused alliance, continue to hold the partner firm in their

CVC portfolio, or liquidate. Our focus is on the decision to acquire ex post technology.

       Figure 2 summarizes differences between the analyzed external R&D strategies along the

key dimensions discussed so far that are relevant to our framework. While the distinction

between CVC and acquisition based on irreversibility and commitment are stronger, differences

between CVC and licensing merit further discussion. As pointed out above, CVC investments

tend to be mostly standoff financial transactions. In many larger firms, CVC programs have their

own staff that select and execute investments. R&D personnel may be consulted on target

selection and corporate assets, such as legal, may also be utilized. In the case of licensing deals,



                                                                                                    11
similar corporate resources may be utilized for target selection and execution. However, R&D

personnel actively use the licensed technology. Thus, from an asset perspective, we would expect

licensing to require a larger human capital commitment than CVC investments.

       In terms of financial commitment between these two types of strategies, we indeed see

that licensing deals require greater financial commitments. For example, the mean CVC

investment (across all rounds) in our data is $10.75 million whereas the mean license is $36.54

million. The average Round A CVC investment has a mean value of $4.46 million and Round B

has a mean value of $8.18 million. In sum, both the human capital commitment (and one can

reasonably assume, that cost) and actual financial commitment of licensing exceeds that of a

CVC investment. Within our typology of ex ante and ex post technology acquisition, this should

not be surprising; CVC investments are an ex ante technology acquisition mechanism whereas

licensing is an ex post mechanism. As such, developed technologies should carry a larger value.

       Licensing and acquisitions are placed on separate branches in our decision tree model.

However, we group them together, conceptually, in the second stage because they are commonly

employed to purchase technology ex post and imply a greater degree of irreversibility and

commitment relative to the ex ante CVC investment. In other words, the application of a RO

framework to CVC decisions whose main objective is to acquire technology justifies the

grouping ex post in term of option exercise. Licensing has advantages over acquisitions when the

investor is interested in a specific technology and avoids potential integration costs. However,

this option is not always available because many start-ups are ultimately aiming to be acquired or

because technologies cannot always be separated from a partner firms’ human and organizational

resources and capabilities. As such, acquisitions may be a more viable (or only) option for

investors in some circumstances.



                                                                                                   12
         To summarize, the logic of our approach is that conditional on entering the external

technology markets, the first decision a firm (corporate investor) will face is whether to purchase

an ex ante or ex post technology. If the decision is to purchase an ex ante technology through a

purchase of an option via a CVC in the first stage, then the firm needs to decide whether to

exercise the option by purchasing the technology ex post, either through a license or an

acquisition. Understanding the factors underlying the choice between licensing and acquisition in

the second stage, while important, goes beyond the scope of this study.7

Uncertainty and absorptive capacity
         The extant literature widely recognizes that a firm’s capacity to be innovative through

external R&D activities is greatly determined by its internal competency in identifying and

integrating appropriate external technologies or know-how. This competency or “absorptive

capacity” (AC) (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989 and 1990) stresses the importance of a firm’s stock

of prior knowledge to effectively identify, evaluate, integrate, and commercialize external

technologies (e.g., Arora and Gambardella, 1990 and 1994; Cockburn and Henderson, 1998;

Dushnitsky and Lenox, 2005b; Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006).

         In the MFT literature, there is substantial evidence highlighting the key role of AC,

typically measured using a firm’s R&D expenditure and its stock of patents, on driving

technology purchase decisions. The key mechanism is through complementarity between

external and internal R&D; with internal R&D activities found to increase the marginal returns

from a variety of external R&D activities. For example, Gambardella (1992) and Veugelers

(1997) report that external sourcing of R&D is more effective when done in conjunction with

7
  For completeness we also allow for the formation of an R&D-based alliance in the second stage. This would
suggest that the corporate investor is still pursuing an ex ante technology. That is, the underlying portfolio
technology has not been completely developed and now the corporate investor is formally committing R&D
resources to the project. Theoretically, we would expect a third-stage where the corporate investor would finally
acquire the ex post technology either via licensing or acquisition. It is important to note that while we leave the
R&D-based alliance as an option in the second-stage, the primary choice we see is that of licensing.

                                                                                                                      13
internal R&D. Ceccagnoli et al. (2014) find that strong scientific capabilities increase

complementarity between internal R&D and in-licensing investments.

        Consistent with the MFT literature, the CVC/strategy literature suggests that strong AC

increases CVC activity (Basu et al., 2011). Two studies qualify this idea by showing that the

complementarity between a firm’s CVC and internal R&D activity depends on its internal

knowledge base (Dushnitsky and Lenox, 2005b; Wadhwa and Kotha, 2006). A third study,

Benson and Ziedonis (2009), shows that internal R&D and CVC investments tend to be

complementary by jointly increasing the performance of acquisitions of entrepreneurial startups

in the IT sector.

        None of these previous studies, however, examines the role of AC on the option value of

CVC as a way to defer an investment in ex post technology acquisition through market

mechanisms that include technology licensing. A key mechanism through which AC affects the

option value of CVC is represented by the effect of upstream scientific capabilities on the

selection of external technologies (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Arora and Gambardella, 1994;

Ziedonis, 2007). In particular, Arora and Gambardella (1994) distinguish two components of

absorptive capacity that are relevant to the acquisition of external technology. One component is

the ability to evaluate external technology, which depends on a firm’s upstream research

capability. Another component is a firm’s ability to utilize external technologies, which depends

on its technological and development skills. Most work in the absorptive capacity literature has

focused on the ability to integrate external knowledge, which has been defined in the

management literature as “realized absorptive capacity” (Zahra and George, 2002). Less work

has instead focused on “potential absorptive capacity”, the capability to assess broad external

technological information (Zahra and George, 2002).



                                                                                                   14
        Such distinction has important implications for our analysis. For example, Arora and

Gambardella (1994) suggest that firms with stronger scientific capabilities have greater ability to

evaluate external technology, are more selective, and focus on fewer but more valuable external

technologies (e.g., “…receive signals about the future value of the technology that are less

‘noisy’…”, Arora and Gambardella, 1994). Ziedonis (2007) applies a similar logic to explain an

early-stage technology acquisition strategy in the context of university licensing, by showing that

that firms better able to evaluate these technologies are less likely to purchase option contracts

prior to in-licensing the technology from a university.

       In our setting, the distinction between ability to evaluate and effectively utilize external

technology suggests that firms possessing lower levels of scientific capabilities will face higher

levels of technological uncertainty, thus perceiving a greater option value of CVC relative to

alternative ex post technology acquisition options, such as licensing or acquisition.

   Hypothesis 1a. Firms possessing weaker scientific capabilities are more likely to make CVC
   investments relative to engaging in ex post technology transactions such as licensing or
   acquisitions.
       A similar logic can be applied to purchase decisions in novel technological domains. A

firm lacking related technological expertise in a particular area will find it more difficult to more

effectively evaluate the importance of a focal technology for future technological advances and

potential commercial applications. As pointed out by Cohen and Levinthal (1990: pp. 135-136):

  “…The possession of related expertise will permit the firm to better understand and therefore evaluate the import
  of intermediate technological advances that provide signals as to the eventual merit of a new technological
  development. Thus, in an uncertain environment, absorptive capacity affects expectation formation, permitting
  the firm to predict more accurately the nature and commercial potential of technological advances.”

Building on these ideas, Lane and Lubatkin (1998) argue that a firm’s ability to recognize and

value new external knowledge is largely determined by a firm’s relative absorptive capacity, a

learning dyad-level construct based on the distance between the knowledge base of recipient and


                                                                                                                 15
contributing organizations.

         Based on the above arguments, we suggest that a lack of related knowledge will decrease

the ability to predict more accurately and will therefore increase uncertainty associated with

investments in external technologies. As such, firms with an internal knowledge base that is

unrelated to the focal technology will assess a higher option value for CVC investments relative

to ex post technology acquisition.8 We therefore hypothesize that:

    Hypothesis 1b. Firms accessing distant technologies are more likely to make CVC
    investments relative to engaging in ex post technology transactions such as licensing or
    acquisitions.
Time to option exercise and the corporate investors’ technology portfolio

         In industries where innovation is critical to gain a competitive advantage, the

composition of a firm’s late-stage innovation portfolio is a key variable that affects its decision to

acquire external technologies (Higgins and Rodriguez, 2006). We now consider how a firm’s

early-stage innovation portfolio influences the option value of CVC investments. We argue that

firms possessing portfolios composed largely of early-stage technologies will be more likely to

engage in ex post technology transactions relative to CVC investments, because they have a

more immediate technological need.

          Ex post technologies that can be obtained via license or acquisition will be more

effective than nascent technologies in improving current productivity and filling any potential

8
  The logic underlying HP1b differs from that recently used by Van de Vrande and Vanhaverbeke (2013), who suggest that
technological relatedness between a CVC investor and its portfolio firm increases the likelihood of subsequent knowledge
sourcing through an R&D alliance. While we share with the above study a RO framework and features of the empirical setting,
we differ significantly in our hypothesis and empirical results. In particular, they study the role of CVC as a way to defer an
investment whose objective is to acquire knowledge through an R&D alliance, while we focus on ex post technology acquisition
investments. Second, they focus on the second stage of our RO framework, that is on factors driving the decision to exercise the
option via an R&D alliance, while we adopt a more holistic approach by studying both purchase and exercise stages of the option
framework (see Figure 1). Third, they hypothesize and find that increases in technological overlap between investor and portfolio
firm, are associated with a higher probability that the CVC investor will exercise the option by making an R&D alliance with the
portfolio firm. Since post-CVC the potential technology partner has been selected, the effect of technological overlap between
CVC investor and portfolio firm captures the role of absorptive capacity in reducing technological uncertainty through a more
effective utilization of the external knowledge contributed by the portfolio firm (‘the realized absorptive capacity”) post-CVC.
We instead analyze the negative effect of technological relatedness (through the role of “potential absorptive capacity”) on the
value of the option (Stage 1, Figure 1), rather than the positive effect on its exercise (Stage 2, Figure 1).

                                                                                                                              16
late-stage pipeline (Chan et al., 2007; Danzon et al., 2007). In other words, a firm’s need for

later-stage technologies will decrease the ex ante value of a RO, or in this case, a CVC

investment. This decrease in value is caused by a reduction in the time (Higgins, 2007) available

between CVC investment and the potential need to exercise the RO. Essentially, firms do not

have time to wait.

          In contrast, firms possessing portfolios with a greater proportion of later-stage

technologies can afford to be less concerned with current productivity and can turn their

attention towards future productivity. In this situation, firms have the freedom to focus on and

shift resources to nurturing nascent technologies that could potentially be used in the future. A

longer time period between investment and potential exercise will increase the value of a RO

(Higgins, 2007). We therefore formulate the following hypothesis:

      Hypothesis 2. Firms possessing a smaller proportion of early-stage technologies are more
      likely to make CVC investments relative to engaging in ex post technology transactions, such
      as licensing or acquisitions.
Resolution of exogenous uncertainty and option exercise post-CVC
          Once a CVC investment is made corporate investors face two future decisions. First, they

can integrate the technology by ‘exercising the option’ via an ex post technology transaction. The

investment can also remain in the investor’s portfolio.9 Consistent with our discussions above,

however, investments will not remain in a portfolio indefinitely. If an investment is not pursued,

a firm can either sell the investment or hold it until a liquidation event occurs. There is also the

risk that the partner firm could go bankrupt or be acquired.

          Ultimately, the decision to exercise an option via an ex post technology transaction will

be dependent upon the resolution of uncertainty (Folta and Miller, 2002). With the passage of

time the corporate investor continues to learn about the underlying technology while at the same

9
    For robustness, we also include R&D alliances as a post-CVC option.

                                                                                                       17
time the partner firm continues their research. As exogenous uncertainty begins to dissipate

around a technology its underlying value begins to increase. Conditional on a corporate investor

entering the external technology market, the portfolio firm’s focal technology will be considered

if the value of that technology is high and the uncertainty associated with realizing that value is

low (Folta and Miller, 2002). Put differently, the interaction effect between technological

uncertainty and the value associated with the technology of the portfolio firm on the probability

that the corporate investor exercises the option is negative. As such, we hypothesize:

   Hypothesis 3. A reduction in exogenous uncertainty associated with the technology of a
   portfolio firm and an increase in its value will increase the probability that CVC investors
   will engage in ex post technology transactions such as licensing or acquisitions with their
   portfolio companies

EMPIRICAL METHOD AND DATA
Method
      We utilize a variety of empirical approaches using a longitudinal dataset of

pharmaceutical firms where the unit of analysis is the corporate investor-partner (portfolio firm)

dyad. The sample and analysis is divided into the two corresponding distinct stages in the

sequence of events outlined in Figure 1.

Stage 1: The option value of CVC
       In the first stage, we examine the time until the occurrence of the first CVC investment

by the corporate investor in the partner firm. The time series of each dyad starts from the time of

incorporation of the corporate investor and it is broken into one-year spells. This allows for the

incorporation of time-varying covariates. Each yearly spell is treated as right censored, unless we

observe a CVC investment or a competing event. This analysis allows us to test hypotheses on

the determinants of the option value of CVC investments within a menu of strategic alternatives

(e.g., Hypotheses 1a, 1b, and 2).

       The hazard of a CVC is modeled using the semi-parametric Cox competing risk

                                                                                                      18
specification (Fine and Gray, 1999), where the dependent variable is time until the occurrence of

the first CVC investment by the corporate investor in the focal partner. The key feature of this

model, also known as a proportional subhazards model, is that the hazard of a CVC investment

depends on the corporate investor not having previously adopted alternative technology

acquisition strategies. We consider a broad set of competing risks that include licensing, majority

ownership acquisitions, and R&D-focused alliances.10

        In this setup, there are multiple latent durations (corresponding to the multiple strategic

alternatives) that are governed by the subhazards. The observed duration for any specific dyad-

year is the minimum value between these alternative durations. The occurrence of a competing

event other than a CVC investment does not necessarily exclude the dyad from the risk set, but it

does fundamentally alter the probability of a CVC tie from occurring. More formally, the

subhazards for event j, dyad i, at time t is:

                                       ,
where           is the baseline hazard of the sub-distribution,          is a matrix of covariates, and        is a

set of coefficients to be estimated. The subhazard                 can be interpreted as the probability of

observing an event of interest j (i.e., CVC investment) in the next time interval while knowing

that either the event of interest did not happen until then or that a competing event was not

observed (Pintilie, 2006).

Stage 2: Exercising the option post-CVC investments
        In order to provide convincing empirical support for the applicability of a ROs theory to

the analysis of CVC investments, we evaluate whether the resolution of exogenous uncertainty


10
  We used stcrreg command in Stata 13 to estimate the model (cf. www.stata.com/manuals13/ststcrreg.pdf). Note
that there are observations (within a dyad) where CVC and competing events occur in the same year. This is an issue
of tied first failures of competing events. We followed the convention (as described in the Stata manuals) and treat
each tied event as the first event but weighted by the reciprocal of the number of tied events, with standard errors
clustered by dyads taking into account of the correlation across observations.

                                                                                                                 19
leads corporate investors to “exercise” the option by acquiring the focal partner’s technology.

Therefore, we examine the time to the occurrence of an ex post technology transaction between

the corporate investor and partner firm starting from the year of the first CVC investment. As for

the first stage, each yearly spell is treated as right censored, unless we observe a license or an

acquisition after the first CVC investment.11 Finally, for reasons we will discuss, we will refer to

licensing as the predominant technology acquisition strategy.

Data
           The sample consists of 604 investor-external technology partner dyads involving 58

publicly-traded pharmaceutical companies that established external technology deals between

1985 and 2007. The pharmaceutical firms in our sample constitute approximately 90% of

branded pharmaceutical sales in the U.S. in 2007. This time period saw significant expansion in

external R&D activities in this industry (e.g., MacMillan et al., 2008). Corporate investors were

selected if they had at least one CVC investment during the study period in the Deloitte ReCap

database (ReCap), our primary data source. ReCap tracks the entire lifecycle of biotechnology

partner firm financing from founding through final disposition. To finalize the sample of

investors, we selected those CVC investors with active internal R&D during the sample period.

R&D and other financial information was obtained from Compustat.

           Once the set of CVC investors was selected, we identified all CVC investments, in-

licensing deals, acquisitions, and R&D-focused strategic alliances involving the corporate

investors in the ReCap database. We then identified the partners of the selected technology deals

and formed investor-partner dyads, starting from the year of incorporation of the investor. Each

dyadic relationship presents at least one type of external R&D during the study period (but not

necessarily a CVC investment) and our analysis is conditioned on investors conducting both

11
     R&D-focused alliances are also considered for robustness purposes.

                                                                                                     20
internal and external R&D during the study period.

        As mentioned earlier, the partner/portfolio firms from the ReCap database can be either

public or private biotechnology companies and the public status can change during the time

period examined. All models include a control for public status. We also estimated our

benchmark results using only private partners (see Appendix A5). The conclusions presented in

this paper remain robust to the exclusion of public partners from the set of firms at-risk of

obtaining CVC financing in any given year.

        For each of our corporate investors and partner firms we reconstruct their drug pipelines

using data from PharmaProjects.12 Next, in order to build measures of technology relatedness we

utilize patent data from NBER to construct patent stocks and classes for each investor and

partner.13 Finally, scientific publication data was gathered from Web of Science. Descriptive

statistics, variable definitions and their sources are presented in Table 1. All financial variables

are in constant 2007 dollars.

Dependent variables: Sub-hazards of CVC and License or Acquisition post-CVC.
         For stage 1 of our analysis, the duration variable is the Sub-hazard of CVC, which is

based on the time until the occurrence of the first CVC investment conditional on the corporate

investor not having previously adopted alternative technology acquisition strategies, such as

licensing, R&D alliance, or acquisition. For stage 2 of our analysis the duration variable is the

Sub-hazard of License or Acquisition post-CVC, defined based on the time until the occurrence

of the first License or Acquisition post-CVC, conditional on the corporate investor not having

12
   PharmaProjects is a proprietary database (https://citeline.com/products/pharmaprojects) containing information
updated monthly on drugs in development since 1980. Each drug profile in the database includes the drug’s current
status, the original materials, the primary therapy, the primary indication and other indications, route of
administration, the name of the developing firm, the country where it is being developed, the novelty rating, and
other information. Pharmaprojects is compiled from both published and unpublished sources, including information
obtained directly from the companies involved in product development.
13
   The NBER data was integrated for the 2007 year using the U.S. Patent Inventor Database, available at
https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=hdl:1902.1/15705

                                                                                                               21
previously established an R&D alliance with the focal partner. For more details on the

construction of this variable, see the related description in Table 1.

Key independent variables
          Investor’s scientific capability. Several different measures of absorptive capacity have

been proposed in the literature. The most widely used, partly due to its availability, is R&D

intensity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989 and 1990). Additionally, Arora and Gambardella (1994)

argue that a firm’s basic research capability is particularly effective in capturing its ability to

evaluate and select external knowledge.14 Measures of upstream research capabilities have also

been shown to be key drivers of potential complementarity between a firm’s internal and external

R&D activities (Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006). For example, in constructing their measure of

absorptive capacity, Cassiman and Veugelers rely on survey responses indicating the importance,

for the innovation process, of information from research institutes and universities.

          Similarly, scholars have measured a firm’s ability to select and evaluate external

knowledge using measures of human capital, including the number of R&D employees with a

doctorate degree (Veugelers, 1997) or the number of scientific publications authored by firm

employees (Arora and Gambardella, 1994; Cockburn and Henderson, 1998; Ceccagnoli et al.,

2014). Following this literature, we use the ratio of the number of scientific papers published by

corporate investor employees (scaled to one thousand) to the number of employees to estimate

the investor’s scientific capability.

          Investor-partner technological distance. Prior work has demonstrated the importance of

corporate investor-partner technological distance (or overlap) on external R&D decisions, such


14
  Arora and Gambardella (1994) argue: “Scientific capability enables the firm to reduce the uncertainty about the
outcome of individual projects…. It has been argued that science provides information that helps restrict the search
for successful innovations at the downstream applied research and development stages. … Since a great deal of
useful information in biotechnology is science based, an in-house scientific capability is crucial for evaluating and
assessing information originating outside of the firm’s boundaries.”

                                                                                                                    22
as, acquisition (Ahuja and Katila, 2001) and strategic alliances (Mowery et al., 1996). As such,

we measure whether or not the technological areas covered by the partner firm are new for the

corporate investor. Using the 3-digit patent classifications listed on each firm’s patents (e.g.,

Ahuja, 2000), we create an indicator variable that equals one if a partner firm has a patent in

areas that are new to the corporate investor, and zero otherwise. Measures computed on samples

with few patents or those limited to a single patent class can generate both biased and imprecise

measures of technological distance (Benner and Waldfogel, 2008). In order to avoid this potential

pitfall we use all patents obtained by the corporate investors and partner firms; we also use all 3-

digit technological classes listed in each patent.

        Investor’s early-stage technology. Since we analyze an industry whose revenue stream is

dependent upon the flow of new products, we use drug pipeline data to measure the proportion of

early-stage technologies of a corporate investor. Within a corporate investor’s research pipeline

we count the number of drugs in the early-stages of development (i.e., preclinical and Phase 1).

We then divide this by the sum of their total number of drugs in all stages of development (i.e.,

preclinical and Phase 1-3). A larger value indicates that a corporate investor has a greater

proportion of early-stage technologies, while a smaller value indicates they have a portfolio more

heavily weighted towards later-stage technologies. These weightings are important because prior

research has demonstrated that gaps within a firm’s research pipeline may cause them to consider

entering the external technological markets (e.g., Chan et al. 2007; Danzon et al., 2007).

        Value of partner’s technologies. We proxy for the value of a partner firm’s technology

using the number of drugs within a partner firm’s research pipeline (i.e., preclinical, Phase 1-3)

that are considered novel in terms of whether drugs with the same therapeutic area/mechanism(s)

have already been approved (or have a more advanced development stage). The novelty score for



                                                                                                     23
each drug is assigned by PharmaProjects. We consider a drug novel if it is classified as being the

1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th compounds in a certain therapeutic class (Abrantes-Metz et al., 2003).

        Volatility of technical subfields. There are substantial differences in the likelihood of

commercialization and development time horizons across technological subfields (i.e.,

therapeutic categories) in the pharmaceutical industry. Technological uncertainty will thus serve

as a proxy for exogenous uncertainty specific to technological subfields. In the same spirit as

Folta (1998), we use the volatility of these technological subfields to estimate technological

uncertainty. Using data from Pharmaprojects, we first create technological subfields and

calculate the 52-week volatility (i.e., standard deviation) of stock trading volume of public

companies that operate in each subfield using data from Compustat. Second, we calculate the

average volatilities in each subfield-year group. Finally, in order to estimate technological

uncertainty, each focal partner firm is matched into one of these subfield-year groups.

Control variables: Corporate investor
       Investor’s pipeline. The scale of a corporate investor R&D pipeline may affect R&D

productivity and its external orientation. We measure the scale of a corporate investor’s

development activity by the total number of drugs within its research pipeline.

       Investor’s employees. A firm’s commercialization capability can impact the probability of

finding external technology partners. We measure firm size by the number of employees.

       Investor’s slack. Financial slack, defined as the availability of funds in order to take

advantage of profitable investment opportunities, may also impact a firm’s external R&D activity.

The pecking order theory of finance suggests that firms tend to use internally generated funds in

the form of retained earnings before turning to external sources. Following Geiger and Cashen

(2002), financial slack is estimated using retained earnings.

       Investor’s patents. Prior research has demonstrated a significant relationship between a

                                                                                                    24
firm’s technological capabilities and its external R&D activities (Arora and Gambardella, 1994).

We control for a corporate investor’s technological capabilities by its stock of successful patent

applications, depreciated by 15% annually (Hall et al., 2005).

         Investor’s prior CVC experience & Investor’s prior external R&D experience. Firms with

experience in certain types of external R&D activity are likely to continue to re-engage in the

same type of activity because of learning effects. To control for this possible path dependency we

create two indicator variables to capture these prior activities. First, we define Investor’s prior

CVC experience as an indicator equal to one if a corporate investor has previously made a CVC

investment in another technology firm, zero otherwise. Second, we define Investor’s prior

external R&D experience as an indicator equal to one if a corporate investor has previously

engaged in an acquisition or license, zero otherwise.15

Control variables: Partner firm
         Partner’s pipeline. We control for both the size and stage of a partner’s pipeline since

both could impact a corporate investor’s external R&D decision. To control for size we define

Partner’s pipeline as a count of the number of drugs in clinical development. In order to control

for the stage of the pipeline we define Partner’s pipeline stage as a count of the number of drugs

in the early-stages of development (i.e., preclinical and Phase 1) and divide by the number of

drugs in all stages of development (i.e., preclinical, Phase 1-3).

         Partner VC funding. A corporate investor may be more interested in the success of an

underlying technology/project versus the longer-term success of a start-up compared to an

independent venture capitalist (Katila et al., 2008). Given this potential conflict, independent

venture capitalists can play a gatekeeper role to potentially protect a start-up’s interests with


15
  Results, unreported, remain qualitatively robust to the inclusion of an additional control for the investor’s prior
experience with R&D-focused alliances.

                                                                                                                        25
corporate investors. To control for this possible effect we define an indicator variable, Partner

VC funding, that equals one if a partner firm received independent venture capital funding, zero

otherwise. Additionally, it may be the amount of previous funding raised by a partner firm that

matters. For example, prior research has demonstrated a positive relationship between the

amount of venture capital funding and the market value of entrepreneurial firms (Gompers and

Lerner, 2006.). To control for these potential effects we define Partner’s amount of funding

received as the cumulative funding raised by a partner firm from venture capitalists.

         Partner’s age. Uncertainty regarding the commercial potential of technologies pursued by

a partner may affect the corporate investor’s ROs choice (Ziedonis, 2007). Since this uncertainty

is likely to be heterogeneously distributed by a partner’s age we control for this potential impact.

Partner’s age is defined based on its year of founding.

         Partner’s public. As indicated previously, our interviews with practitioners suggested

they made minority equity or CVC investments in both early-stage firms that were private or

public. In either case what tends to be the motivating factor is that the underlying technology is

still nascent and highly uncertain. To delineate between these two types of partner firms we

define an indicator variable that equals one if a partner firm is already publicly traded (in the

year of investment), and zero otherwise.16

         Partner’s patents. A partner firm’s internal technological capability is an important factor

that could potentially impact a corporate investor’s external R&D decision. As such, we estimate

the partner firm’s technological capability by calculating its stock of successful patent

applications, depreciated by 15% annually (Hall et al., 2005).


16
   Results are robust to the exclusion of public partners however, as indicated previously, their inclusion was based
on discussions with practitioners. Their observation that these firms are still small with highly uncertain
technologies and differ little from their private counterparts is demonstrated in the data. In Appendix A4 we include
a table comparing descriptives between these two types of partner firms.

                                                                                                                   26
       Dyadic and year fixed effects. We estimate the LPM models within-dyads, thus

controlling for unobserved time-invariant dyad-specific heterogeneity and use standard errors

clustered by dyads in all specifications. Yearly time dummies are also included over the sample

period in the LPM fixed effects models.

EMPIRICAL FINDINGS
Benchmark model: Cox Proportional hazard model with competing risks
       Our benchmark results are obtained using a Cox proportional hazard model with

competing risks (Table 2). Models 1 through 5 analyze a corporate investor’s choice at the first

stage between making a CVC investment versus engaging in a license, acquisition, or R&D-

focused alliance, and show the impact of covariates on the sub-hazard of making CVC

investments. Specifically, our preferred model (Model 5) includes all variables and shows that a

one percentage point increase in the ratio of scientific publications per employee decreases the

sub-hazard of making a CVC investment by 37%, with the effect statistically significant at the 1%

level. This suggests that a stronger scientific capability of a corporate investor helps reduce

uncertainty, thereby decreasing the RO value of a CVC investment. Using a similar logic, the RO

value of CVC investments tends to increase when technologies pursued by partner firms are

more distant relative to the corporate investors. The sub-hazard of a CVC is 88% higher when

partner firms have technologies in areas that are new to corporate investors.

       Notice that, while not a test of a formal hypothesis, the results in Table 2 (Model 5) also

show that a one-percentage point increase in a Partner’s early-stage technology increases the

sub-hazard of a CVC by over 100%, significant at the 1% level. This result supports the idea that

CVC investments are more likely to be made when partners have nascent technologies. Overall,

our results provide strong evidence in favor of the idea that conditions associated with higher

uncertainty tend to increase the value of CVC investments as a way to defer ex-post technology


                                                                                                     27
acquisition requiring greater levels of commitment, thereby supporting Hypotheses 1a and 1b.

       Consistent with Hypothesis 2, Model 5 also shows that a one-percentage point increase in

an Investor’s early-stage technology ratio tends to decrease the risk of making CVC investments

by 69.5%. This marginal effect is significant at the 10% level and suggests that as a corporate

investor’s pipeline becomes more heavily weighted toward early-stage innovations they may

have a more immediate need for later-stage innovations. As the proportion of later-stage

innovations fall it becomes more likely, for example, that a gap in the pipeline may occur (Chan

et al., 2007). This resulting shift will decrease a RO’s value because of the reduction in the time

(Higgins, 2007) available between initial CVC investment and the potential need to exercise an

option. In other words, firms in this position simply do not have the time needed to nurture a

CVC investment to maturity.

       Finally, Models 6 and 7 analyze a corporate investor’s choice at the second stage of the

decision model. In particular, as reflected in Figure 1, we are interested in whether a corporate

investor engages in an ex post external R&D activity. Consistent with Hypothesis 3, Model 7

shows that the risk of ex post technology acquisition increases with a reduction in associated

uncertainty and when the value of the partner’s focal technology is high. That is, when the

coefficient of the interaction Value of partner’s technologies x Volatility of technical subfields is

negative. The interaction is significant at the 5% level.

Robustness analysis
       We test the sensitivity of our results by estimating a panel data linear probability model

(LPM) with dyad fixed-effects and robust standard errors, presented in Table 3. These models are

obtained by re-defining the dependent variables in order to match the competing risks setting. In

particular, Models 1 through 5 relate to the test of Hypotheses 1a, 1b, and 2. A discrete dependent

variable is defined as equal to one if, in any given year, a CVC tie between the focal investor-

                                                                                                    28
partner dyad is observed, zero otherwise. This variable is treated as an absorbing state and

conditional on both parties having no prior CVC tie or other competing transactions in the dyad.

        The LPM has advantages in that it allows us to utilize a panel data fixed-effects model

that controls for dyad-specific time invariant unobserved heterogeneity. The LPM results are also

easier to interpret since these estimates are identified exclusively by within dyad time variation

in the covariates. Finally, the LPM allows us to easily test the robustness to 2-way clustering of

standard errors using canned statistical software.17

        The LPM has also limitations. In particular, it can predict probabilities outside the unit

interval, and its error term is heteroskedastic. However, with the use of standard

heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, the LPM often provides good estimates of the partial

effects on the response probability near the center of the distribution of the covariates

(Wooldridge, 2010: pg. 563). Due to the LPM limitations, we also estimated a logit model;

results suggest that our conclusions remain robust (see Appendix A5).

        We take a similar approach to analyze the effect of uncertainty on the probability of

observing a technology purchase post-CVC investment (e.g., Hypothesis 3). We define a dummy

variable that turns to one if a license agreement in the dyad is the first event post-CVC

investment. This is treated as an absorbing state. We can thus use a fixed-effects LPM that only

exploits the post-CVC investment within dyad variance over time in the covariates. This allows

us to identify the interaction effect between technological uncertainty and the value of the focal

technologies on the decision to purchase a technology in the post-CVC investment period.

        Our robustness results suggest that all our conclusions continue to hold after we control

for unobserved dyad-level heterogeneity. In particular, Model 5 shows that the probability of a


17
  We used xtivreg2 in STATA 13 and clustered standard errors by both corporate investor and partner groups.
Results, reported in Appendix A5, suggest that conclusions remain robust.

                                                                                                              29
first CVC investment, given no prior competing events: 1) decreases by 1.2 percentage points for

a corporate investor’s one percentage point increase in the number of scientific publications per

employee (significant at the 10%, Hypothesis 1a); 2) increases by 2.4 percentage points when a

partner firm operates in a technological area that is new to the corporate investor (significant at

the 1% level, Hypothesis 1b); and, 3) decreases by 2.5 percentage points when a corporate

investor’s ratio of early-stage innovations increase by one percentage point (significant at the 5%

level, Hypothesis 2). Model 7 shows that the interaction effect between the volatility of stock

market volume in a focal technological sub-field and the value of the focal innovation tends to

significantly decrease the probability of licensing in the post-CVC investment period (significant

at the 10% level, Hypothesis 3). The logit results (see Appendix A5) are consistent with the LPM

and support all of our hypotheses.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
       This paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, it contributes to an emerging

research on the organization and financing patterns of external R&D activities (e.g., Robinson,

2008; Fulghieri and Sevilir, 2009). Combined with prior studies that investigate the linkages

between CVC investments and other types of external R&D strategy (e.g., Folta, 1998; Reuer et

al., 2002; Benson and Ziedonis, 2009 and 2010; Dushnitsky and Lavie, 2010), this study

suggests that CVC investments should be considered in conjunction with other types of external

R&D activity. This approach, we believe, is more appropriate because firms often pursue an

R&D strategy that is comprised of several types of external R&D activity simultaneously.

Consistent with this idea, our study highlights the role of CVC investments as ROs to enhance

the efficiency of technology licensing.

       Second, this study also contributes to the literature on optimal organization and financing

arrangements between corporate investors and start-ups (e.g., Katila et al., 2008; Dushnitsky and

                                                                                                      30
Shaver, 2009). Unlike that literature, however, which has investigated how resource constraints

and appropriation problems affect CVC investments, our study suggests that CVC investments

can be greatly determined by timing, which ultimately affects the level of uncertainty found in

the MFT.

        Finally, this study is particularly important for the pharmaceutical industry, which has

faced severe productivity challenges in the last decade and where significant levels of

uncertainty are common (Arora and Gambardella, 1990 and 1994). As a result, effective

decisions on external R&D activity are critical in generating profits for growth (e.g., Nicholson

et al., 2005). Our findings imply that several types of external R&D activity co-exist, each

fulfilling their own strategic role in this industry.

        This study has also important implications for managers. In particular, it implies that

managers should consider timing issues associated with each type of external R&D activity to

maximize firm productivity. This is particularly important in the pharmaceutical industry, which

has long product development cycles. This study also implies that we need to better understand

how various types of external R&D affect one another. Our findings suggest that one type of

external R&D activity cannot be used independently from other types of activity; a consolidated

perspective on the various types of external R&D activity is needed. Finally, our focus on the

pharmaceutical industry suggests that our findings need to be interpreted carefully in the context

of other industries. This notion is important because each industry has its own technological and

managerial environment and uses CVC investments according to its own context.

        All studies have limitations and ours is no different. While we consider the conditions

under which CVC investments are made and executed, we do not consider post-execution

performance. Empirical evidence on whether corporate investors realize benefits from CVC



                                                                                                    31
investments is limited and mixed. Benson and Ziedonis (2010) find that while corporate

investors in the IT sector appear to be overall relatively “good acquirers”, they tended to overpay

for targets from their CVC portfolio. They explore numerous explanations for this puzzling result

but ultimately argue that it stems from managerial overconfidence. In contrast, Allen and Hevert

(2007) find that thirty-nine percent of CVC programs, also from the IT sector, generated internal

rates of return that exceeded their parents’ cost of capital. Returns to larger programs, those with

more than $95 million of investment, were substantial with thirty-six percent of those programs

generating cumulative net cash flows greater than $100 million.

       While consistent with Dushnitsky (2011), it is striking that in our pharmaceutical sample

so few of the partner firms were purchased in the post-CVC investment time period. Instead, the

most likely corporate form of option execution was a technology license. Whether it is an issue

of governance structure, transaction cost, research setting or even sample construction, the

differences between our study and Benson and Ziedonis (2010) are worthy of exploration.

       Our interviews with CVC program managers as well as our contract review pointed to

several key differences with the literature worthy of future discussion. First, the presence of

board seats appeared to be far more limited in this industry. An interesting tension exists between

venture capitalists and corporate investors. In general, VCs are interested in a liquidity event so

they have an interest in pushing a company towards IPO as quickly as possible. On the other

hand, corporate investors in this industry are primarily interested in the underlying technology.

They may be more interested in taking things a bit more slow. Given that CVCs are rarely the

first to invest in this industry they are almost walking into a situation where an existing VC has

some control over the deal. This difference with board seats may be solely of research setting or

it may be pointing to a broader underlying tension between VCs and CVCs.



                                                                                                      32
         Second, based on our interviews we broadened our sample to include both partners that

were private at the time of investment and those that were public. The common characteristic

between both types of firms is that their underlying technologies were still nascent and highly

uncertain. From the corporate investors’ prospective the motivation for a CVC remains the same;

they are clearly interested in a future technology. While the academic literature will often limit

CVC samples to solely investments in private partners, our work suggests that these minority

equity investments in these early-stage public firms should also be included. Interesting future

work should focus on whether those differences in risk profiles (i.e., between a private and

public partner) have any impact not on option execution but rather ultimate productivity.

         Finally, prior work by Higgins and Rodriguez (2006), Chan et al. (2007) and Danzon et

al. (2007) focus on the impact of late-stage productivity changes, gaps and declines on a firm’s

decision to enter the ex post technology market. In contrast, this paper focuses on a firm’s

proportion of early-stage projects and their choice to enter the ex ante technology market. All

firms are resource constrained and face various demands emanating from different areas of their

research portfolio. In short, firms need to make trade-offs between the various stages/phases of

research, the mix of internal versus external R&D, and the type of corporate strategies to employ

to best achieve those goals. All of these papers are pointing towards the need to more fully

understand research portfolio optimization in a dynamic context.

REFERENCES
Abrantes-Metz RM, Adams CP, Metz AD. 2003 Pharmaceutical development phases: a duration analysis. Bureau of
    Economics working paper.
Adner R, Levinthal D. 2004a. What is not a real option: considering boundaries for the application of real options to
    business strategy. Academy of Management Review 29(1): 74-85.
Adner R, Levinthal D. 2004b. Reply: real options and real tradeoffs. Academy of Management Review 29(1): 120-
    126.
Ahuja G. 2000. Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: a longitudinal study. Administrative
    Science Quarterly 45(3): 425-455.
Ahuja G, Katila R. 2001. Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring firms: a
    longitudinal study. Strategic Management Journal 22(3): 197-220.
Allen SA, Hevert KT. 2007. Venture capital investing by information technology companies: did it pay? Journal of
    Business Venturing 22(2): 262–282.

                                                                                                                   33
Arora A, Ceccagnoli M. 2006. Patent protection, complementary assets, and firms’ incentives for technology
    licensing. Management Science 52(2): 293–308.
Arora A, Gambardella A. 1990. Complementarity and external linkages: the strategies of the large firms in
    biotechnology. Journal of Industrial Economics 38(4): 361-379.
Arora A, Gambardella A. 1994. Evaluating technological information and utilizing it: scientific knowledge,
    technological capability, and external linkages in biotechnology. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization
    24(1): 91-114.
Arora, A, Gambardella, A. 2010. Ideas for rent: an overview of markets for technology. Industrial and Corporate
      Change 19(3): 775-803.
Basu S, Phelps C, Kotha S. 2011. Towards understanding who makes corporate venture capital investments and why.
    Journal of Business Venturing 26(2): 153-171.
Benner M, Waldfogel J. 2008. Close to you? Bias and precision in patent-based measures of technological proximity.
    Research Policy 37(9): 1556-1567.
Benson D, Ziedonis RH. 2009. Corporate venture capital as a window on new technologies: implications for the
    performance of corporate investors when acquiring startups. Organization Science 20(2): 329-351.
Benson D, Ziedonis RH. 2010. Corporate venture capital and the returns to acquiring portfolio companies. Journal
    of Financial Economics 98(3): 478-499.
Bottazzi L, Da Rin M, Hellmann T. 2004. The changing face of the European venture capital industry: facts and
    analysis. Journal of Private Equity 7(2): 26-53.
Cassiman B, Veugelers R. 2006. In search of complementarity in innovation strategy: internal R&D and external
    knowledge acquisition. Management Science 52(1): 68-82.
Ceccagnoli M, Higgins MJ, Palermo V. 2014. Behind the scenes: sources of complementarity in R&D. Journal of
    Economics & Management Strategy 23(1): 125-148.
Chan T, Nickerson JA, Owan H. 2007. Strategic management of R&D pipelines with cospecialized investments and
    technology markets. Management Science 53(4): 667-682.
Chemmanur TJ, Loutskina E, Tian X. Corporate venture capital, value creation, and innovation. Review of Financial
    Studies 27(8): 2434-2473
Cockburn IM, Henderson RM. 1998. Absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the organization of research in
    drug discovery. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2): 157-182.
Cohen WM, Levinthal DA. 1989. Innovation and learning: the two faces of R&D. Economic Journal 99(397): 569-
    596.
Cohen WM, Levinthal DA. 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and innovation.
    Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128-152.
Cohen WM, Nelson RR, Walsh JP. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets: appropriability conditions and why US
    manufacturing firms patent (or not). NBER working paper # 7552.
Corporate Strategy Board. 2000. Corporate venture capital: managing equity investments for strategic returns.
    Corporate Strategy Board working paper.
Danzon PM, Epstein A, Nicholson S. 2007. Mergers and acquisitions in the pharmaceutical and biotech industries.
    Managerial and Decision Economics 28(4-5): 307-328.
Dushnitsky G. 2006. Corporate venture capital: past evidence and future directions. In The Oxford Handbook of
    Entrepreneurship, Casson M, Yeung B, Basu A, Wadeson N. (eds). Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.
Dushnitsky G. 2011. Corporate venture capital in the 21st century In Handbook of Entrepreneurial Finance,
Cumming D. (ed). Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.
Dushnitsky G, Lenox MJ. 2005a. When do incumbents learn from entrepreneurial ventures? Corporate venture
    capital and investing firm innovation rates. Research Policy 34(5): 615-639.
Dushnitsky G, Lenox MJ. 2005b. When do firms undertake R&D by investing in new ventures? Strategic
      Management Journal 26(10): 947-965.
Dushnitsky G, Lenox MJ. 2006. When does corporate venture capital investment create firm value? Journal of
    Business Venturing 21(6): 753-772.
Dushnitsky G, Shaver JM. 2009. Limitations to interorganizational knowledge acquisition: the paradox of corporate
    venture capital. Strategic Management Journal 30(10): 1045-1064.
Dushnitsky G, Lavie D. 2010. How alliance formation shapes corporate venture capital investment in the software
    industry: a resource-based perspective. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 4(1): 22-48.
Ernst and Young. 2008. Global corporate venture capital survey 2008-09. Ernst and Young.
Fine JP, Gray RJ. 1999. A proportional hazards model for the subdistribution of a competing risk. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association 94(446): 496-509.

                                                                                                               34
Folta T. 1998. Governance and uncertainty: the trade-off between administrative control and commitment. Strategic
     Management Journal 19(11): 1007-1028.
Folta, T, Johnson D, O’Brien J. 2006. Uncertainty, irreversibility, and the likelihood of entry: an empirical
     assessment of the option to defer. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 61(3): 432-452.
Folta T, Miller KD. 2002. Real options in equity partnerships. Strategic Management Journal 23(1): 77-88.
Fulghieri P, Sevilir M. 2009. Organization and financing of innovation, and the choice between corporate and
     independent venture capital. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44(6): 1291–1321.
Gambardella, A. 1992. Competitive advantages from in-house scientific research: the US pharmaceutical industry in
     the 1980s. Research Policy 21(5): 391-407.
Geiger SW, Cashen LH. 2002. A multinational examination of slack and its impact on innovation. Journal of
     Managerial Issues 14(1): 68-84.
Gil N. 2007. On the value of project safeguards: embedding real options in complex products and systems. Research
     Policy 36(7): 980-999.
Gompers PA, Lerner J. 1998. The determinant of corporate venture capital success: organizational structure,
     incentives and complementarities. NBER working paper # 6725.
Gompers PA, Lerner J. 2006. The Venture Capital Cycle. 2nd edition. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Graebner ME, Eisenhardt KM, Roundy PT. 2010. Success and failure in technology acquisitions: lessons for buyers
     and sellers. The Academy of Management Perspectives 24(3): 73-92.
Hall B, Jaffe A, and Trajtenberg M. 2005. Market value and patent citations. RAND Journal of Economics 36(1): 16-
     38.
Higgins MJ. 2007. Introduction to finance and the valuation of early-stage technologies. In Advances in the study of
     entrepreneurship, innovation, and economic growth, Libecap G. (ed). Elsevier.
Higgins MJ, Rodriguez D. 2006. The outsourcing of R&D through acquisitions in the pharmaceutical industry.
     Journal of Financial Economics 80(2): 351-383.
Kale P, Puranam P. 2004. Choosing equity stakes in technology sourcing relationships: an integrative framework.
     California Management Review 46(3):77-99.
Katila R, Rosenberger JD, Eisenhardt KM. 2008. Swimming with sharks: technology ventures, defense mechanisms
      and corporate relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly 53(2): 295-332.
Keil T, Maula M, Schildt H, Zahra SA. 2008. The effect of governance modes and relatedness of external business
     development activities on innovative performance. Strategic Management Journal 29(8): 895-907.
Kogut B. 1991. Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire. Management Science 37(1): 19-33.
Lane PJ, Lubatkin M. 1998. Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning. Strategic management
     journal 19(5): 461-477.
Li Y, Mahoney J. 2011. When are venture capital projects initiated? Journal of Business Venturing 26(2): 239-254.
Maula MV, Keil T, Zahra S. 2013. Top management’s attention to discontinuous technological change: Corporate
     venture capital as an alert mechanism. Organization Science 24(3): 926-947.
MacMillan I, Roberts E, Livada V, Wang A. 2008. Corporate Venture Capital (CVC): Seeking Innovation and
     Strategic Growth. National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce.
McGrath RG. 1997. A real options logic for initiating technology positioning investments. Academy of Management
     Review 22(4): 974-996.
McGrath RG, Ferrier WJ, Mendelow AL. 2004. Response: real options as engines of choice and heterogeneity.
     Academy of Management Review 29(1): 86-101.
Mowery DC, Oxley JE, Silverman BS. 1996. Strategic alliances and interfirm knowledge transfer.
    Strategic Management Journal 17(Winter 1996): 77-91.
Nicholson S, Danzon PM, McCullough J. 2005. Biotech-pharmaceutical alliances as a signal of assets and firm
     quality. Journal of Business 78(4): 1433-1464.
Pintilie M. 2007. Analyzing and interpreting competing risk data. Statistics in Medicine 26(6): 1360-1367.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2006. Corporate Venture Capital Activity on the Rise in 2006. PricewaterhouseCoopers:
     Washington, DC.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2014. PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association Money Tree Report.
     PricewaterhouseCoopers: Washington, DC.
Reuer JJ, Tong TW. 2005. Real options in international joint ventures. Journal of Management 31(3): 403-423.
Reuer JJ, Zollo M, Singh H. 2002. Post-formation dynamics in strategic alliances. Strategic Management Journal
     23(2): 135-151.
Robinson DT. 2008. Strategic alliances and the boundaries of the firm. Review of Financial Studies 21(2): 649-681.
Santoro MD, McGill JP. 2005. The effect of uncertainty and asset co-specialization on governance in biotechnology

                                                                                                                 35
     alliances. Strategic Management Journal 26(13): 1261-1269.
Seth A, Chi T. 2005. What does a real options perspective add to the understanding of strategic alliances? In
     Shenkar O, Reuer JJ. (eds) Handbook of Strategic Alliances. Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA.
Smit HTJ, Trigeorgis L. 2004. Strategic investment: Real options and games. Princeton University Press: Princeton,
     NJ.
Tong TW, Li Y. 2010. Real options and investment mode: evidence from corporate venture capital and acquisition.
     Organization Science 22(3): 659-674.
Tong TW, Reuer JJ, Peng MW. 2008. International joint ventures and the value of growth options. Academy of
     Management Journal 51(5): 1014-1029.
Van de Vrande V, Lemmens C, Vanhaverbeke W. 2006. Choosing governance modes for external technology
     sourcing. R&D Management 36(3): 347-363.
Van de Vrande V, Vanhaverbeke W. 2008. Corporate venture capital as a real option: A dyad-level analysis of the
     evolvement of the inter-firm ties (summary). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 28(19)
Van de Vrande V, Vanhaverbeke W. 2013. How prior corporate venture capital investments shape technological
     alliances: A real options approach. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 37(5): 1019-1043.
Vassolo RS, Anand J, Folta TB. 2004. Non-additivity in portfolios of exploration activities: a real options-based
     analysis of equity alliances in biotechnology. Strategic Management Journal 25(11): 1045-1061.
Veugelers R. 1997. Internal R&D expenditures and external technology sourcing. Research Policy 26(3): 303-315.
Villalonga B, McGahan AM. 2005. The choice among acquisitions, alliances, and divestitures. Strategic
     Management Journal 26(13): 1183-1208.
Wadhwa A, Kotha S. 2006. Knowledge creation through external venturing: evidence from the telecommunications
     equipment manufacturing industry. Academy of Management Journal 49(4): 1-17.
Wooldridge JM. 2010. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press: Boston, MA.
Zahra SA, George G. 2002. Absorptive capacity: a review, reconceptualization, and extension. Academy of
     Management Review 27(2): 185–203.
Ziedonis A. 2007. Real options in technology licensing. Management Science 53(10): 1618-1633.




                                                                                                                36
Figure 1. Two-stage sequential decision model and map to prior literature

Conditional on entering the external technology markets, firms can make a series of investment choices. We model
the initial two-stages of that process and map the current literature. The branches A, B, C and D relate to Stage 1
while branches E, F, G, H, I, J, and K relate to Stage 2 activities. For example, the Van de Vrande and Vanhaverbeke
(2013) paper is mapped to 2.G. That is, the paper focuses on how prior CVC relationships affect the likelihood of a
subsequent strategic alliance. In Benson and Ziedonis (2009), coded 1.B vs. 2.F, they focus on acquisitions of firms
with prior CVC investments (2.F) versus those that do not (1.B). Our paper is the first to holistically consider CVC
investments (1.A) relative to 1.B, 1.C, and 1.D and then conditional on a CVC investment the eventual outcome,
2.E, 2.F, 2.G, or 2.H, during our sample. It is also the first paper to demonstrate the importance of licensing in Stage
2 (2.E) in a context where CVC are made primarily to gain a window on future technology that could be later
acquired. (Note, all references are provided in Appendix A3. They are included in the reference section if cited in the
paper.)


                                      Stage"
                                        1"                                             A"        B"       C"   D"




                                                                          CVC"
                                                                                            Acquisi,on"         Licensing"    R&D"alliance/JV"
                                     Stage"
                                       2"
                                                         E"     F"      G"       H"                             I"           J"         K"

                                                                                                               Acquisi,on" Licensing"   Acquisi,on"




                                       Licensing"        Acquisi,on"         R&D"alliance/JV" Hold"in"por=olio"
                                                                                              (IPO,"failure,"etc.)"



   1C#v.#2K      Kogut#(1991)                             1D           Reuer#&#Ragozzino#(2006)                                 1B#v.#2F         Dyer#et#al.#(2004)
  1B#v.#1D       Folta#&#Leiblein#(1994)                  1A           Wadhwa#&#Kotha#(2006)                                        2F           Goldman#&#Qian#(2004)
      2H         Stuart#et#al.#(1999)               1A#v.#1B#v.#1D     Van#de#Vrande#et#al.#(2006)                                  1A           Ernst#et#al.#(2005)
  1B#v.#1D       Lambe#v.#Speckman#(1997)              1B#v.#2K        Higgins#&#Rodriguez#(2006)                                   1D           Hoang#&#Rothaermel#(2005)
   1A#v.#1B      Folta#(1998)                          1B#v.#2F        Benson#(2008)                                                1D           Reuer#&#Tong#(2005)
1B#v.#1C#v.#1D   Steensma#&#Fairbank#(1999)               1A           Vanhaverbeke#et#al.#(2008)                               1B#v.#2F         Loizos#(2005)
   2F#v.#2H      Gompers#&#Lerner#(2000)                  1D           Tong#et#al.#(2008)                                           1A           Dushnitsky#&#Lenox#(2005a)
1B#v.#1C#v.#1D   Steensma#&#Corley#(2000)              1B#v.#2F        Benson#&#Ziedonis#(2009)                                     1A           Dushnitsky#&#Lenox#(2005b)
  1A#v.#2F#      Folta#&#MIller#(2002)              2F#v.#2G#v.#2H     Van#de#Vrande#&#Vanhaverbeke#(2008)                          2G           Wadhwa#&#Phelps#(2011)
  1B#v.#1D       Hagedoorn#&#Duysters#(2002)              1A           Dushnitsky#&#Shaver#(2009)                                   1A           Basu#et#al.#(2011)
  1B#v.#1D       Vanhaverbeke#et#al.#(2002)         1A#v.#1B#v.#1D     Van#de#Vrande#et#al.#(2009)                                  1A           Park#&#Steensma#(2012)
      1A         Keil#(2002)                           1B#v.#2F        Benson#&#Ziedonis#(2010)                               1A#v.#1B#v.#1D     Van#de#Vrande#et#al.#(2013)
  1A#v.#1D       Nicholls\Nixon#&#Woo#(2003)              2K           Zollo#&#Reuer#(2010)                                         2G           Van#de#Vrande#&#Vanhaverbeke#(2013)
1B#v.#1C#v.#1D   Yoshikawa#(2003)                         2K           Zaheer#et#al.#(2010)                                         1A           Maula#et#al.#(2013)
   1B#v.#2K      Porrini#(2004)                        1A#v.#1D        Dushnitsky#&#Lavie#(2010)                                    1A           Wadhwa#&#Basu#(2013)
                                                                                                                                    1A           Basu#&#Wadhwa#(2013)




Figure 2. External technology acquisition strategies: Features relevant to our framework

                                                                                      CVC                        Joint R&D alliance                      License              Acquisition
       Timing of technology acquisitions                                              Future	                               Future                    Immediate              Immediate
Technology and organizational commitments                                              Low                               Moderate                       Moderate                  High
                      Irreversibility                                                  Low	                             Moderate                       Moderate                  High




                                                                                                                                                                                  37
                          Table 1. Descriptive statistics, variable definitions, and data sources
Variable                          Mean      St. Dev.                                   Description                                  Data sources
                                                        The dependent variables for our analysis are based on the time until
                                                        the occurrence of the first CVC investment or time to the first License
                                                        or Acquisition post-CVC. In order to compute these variables, we
                                 (The distribution of   defined an outcome variable                           as describing the
                                 this outcome           following types of events characterizing the relationship between
                                 variable over time     corporate investor-partner i (the dyad) at year t, with the time
                                 is presented in        subscript omitted:          corresponds to no observed external R&D
                                 Appendix A1,
                                                        activity between the corporate investor and the partner;
Time until the occurrence of     while the
                                                        corresponds to a corporate investor making a CVC investment in the
the first CVC or the first       distribution of                                                                                  Deloitte ReCap
                                                        partner;          corresponds to a corporate investor licensing a
Lic.|Acq. post CVC               number of external
                                                        technology from the partner;              corresponds to a corporate
                                 R&D deal by
                                                        investor acquiring the partner; and,        corresponds to a corporate
                                 corporate investor
                                                        investor forming a R&D-focused alliance with the partner;
                                 over time is
                                                        corresponds to an investor licensing a technology from the partner
                                 presented in
                                                        after a CVC;          corresponds to an investor acquiring the partner
                                 Appendix A2)
                                                        after a CVC;          corresponds to an investor undertaking an R&D
                                                        alliance after a CVC; and           corresponds to an investor holding
                                                        the CVC investment in its portfolio.
Investor's scientific                                   The ratio of the number of scientific papers published by corporate       Web of Science/
                                  0.385       0.560
 capability                                             investor employees per thousands of employee                              Compustat
                                                        An indicator variable that equals one if a partner firm has a patent in
Investor-partner
                                  0.165       0.372     areas that are new to the corporate investor, zero otherwise (dyad-       NBER
 technological distance
                                                        level)
Investor’s early stage
                                  0.294       0.319     The proportion of early-stage technologies of a corporate investor        PharmaProjects
 technology
                                                        The number of novel drugs within a partner firm’s research pipeline,
                                                        with novelty defined as either the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th compound
Value of partner’s                                      approved or furthest along the development process with a similar
                                  0.417       1.233                                                                               PharmaProjects
 technologies                                           pharmacological and therapeutic combination (e.g., number of
                                                        portfolio firm’s drugs classified by PharmaProjects with highest
                                                        novelty codes of “5” or “6”).
                                                        Average 52-week volatility (i.e., standard deviation) of stock trading
Volatility of technical                                                                                                           PharmaProjects/
                                  0.361       0.241     volume of public companies that operate in each subfield (in
 subfields                                                                                                                        Compustat
                                                        thousands)
                                                        The number of drugs within the corporate investor’s research pipeline
Investor’s pipeline               0.019       0.034                                                                               PharmaProjects
                                                        (i.e., preclinical, Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3)
Investor's employees              0.039       0.044     Corporate investor’s number of employees (thousands)                      Compustat
Investor's slack                  0.010       0.078     Corporate investor’s retained earnings ($ billions)                       Compustat
                                                        Corporate investor’s stock of successful patent applications
Investor's patents                0.412       0.826                                                                               NBER
                                                        depreciated by 15% annually (in thousands)
Investor's prior CVC                                    An indicator variable equal to one if a corporate investor previously
                                  0.704       0.457                                                                               Deloitte ReCap
 experience                                             made a CVC investment in other firms, zero otherwise
Investor's prior external                               An indicator variable equal to one if a corporate investor previously
                                  0.902       0.297                                                                               Deloitte ReCap
 R&D experience                                         engaged in an acquisition or license with another firm, zero otherwise
Partner’s pipeline                1.996       5.064     The number of drugs within a partner firm’s research pipeline             PharmaProjects
Partner pipeline stage            0.146       0.280     The proportion of early-stage technologies of a partner                   PharmaProjects
                                                        An indicator variable that equals one if a partner firm received
Partner VC funding                0.366       0.482                                                                               Deloitte ReCap
                                                        independent venture capital funding, zero otherwise
Partner’s amount of funding                             The cumulative amount of funding raised by a partner firm from
                                  0.137       0.577                                                                               Deloitte ReCap
 received                                               venture capitalists ($ billions)
Partner's age                     10.674      6.620     The time between the year of founding and the year of focal event         Deloitte ReCap
                                                        An indicator variable that equals one if a partner firm is publicly
Partner's public                  0.625       0.484                                                                               Deloitte ReCap
                                                        traded at time of investment, zero otherwise
                                                        The stock of successful patent applications depreciated by 15%
Partner's patents                 0.004       0.031                                                                               NBER
                                                        annually (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                    38
    Table 2. Competing risks models
                   Model                   1           2             3           4          5             6           7
                                                                                                     Sub-hazard of Post C
          Dependent variable                                 Sub-hazard of CVC
                                                                                                          VC Lic.|Acq.
                                               st       st
          Stage (cf. Figure 1)             1           1            1st          1st         1st         2nd         2nd
                                                     -0.175                              -0.374***     0.117       0.134
   Investor's scientific capability
                                                    (0.140)                               (0.140)     (0.159)     (0.161)
   Investor-partner technological                                 0.625***                0.880***     -0.059      -0.053
    distance (dyad-level)                                         (0.167)                 (0.178)     (0.266)     (0.267)
   Investor’s early stage                                                     -0.442      -0.695*     0.927**     0.901**
    technology                                                               (0.338)      (0.372)     (0.458)     (0.442)
   Value of partner’s technologies                                                                                -0.832**
   × Volatility of technical                                                                                      (0.356)
    subfields
                                         0.038         0.035        0.049      0.041        0.052     -0.038      0.296*
   Value of partner’s technologies
                                        (0.102)      (0.100)      (0.101)     (0.102)     (0.097)    (0.092)     (0.173)
                                         -0.509       -0.509       -0.443      -0.422      -0.283     0.205       0.714
   Volatility of technical subfields
                                        (0.602)      (0.599)      (0.602)     (0.595)     (0.577)    (0.584)     (0.633)
                                         1.302         1.216        0.045      3.219        2.359     -0.348      -0.698
   Investor’s pipeline^
                                        (1.918)      (1.902)      (2.272)     (2.119)     (2.599)    (2.942)     (2.941)
                                         -3.820      -5.173**      -2.748     -4.634*     -7.026**    -0.911      -0.515
   Investor's employees^
                                        (2.346)      (2.530)      (2.372)     (2.510)     (2.833)    (3.132)     (3.060)
                                        1.652***     1.634***     1.947***    1.730***    2.001***    0.840       0.780
   Investor's slack
                                        (0.537)      (0.535)      (0.554)     (0.550)     (0.541)    (1.535)     (1.493)
                                         -0.098       -0.060       -0.193      -0.103      -0.101     -0.419      -0.421
   Investor's patents
                                        (0.142)      (0.144)      (0.155)     (0.145)     (0.159)    (0.301)     (0.292)
   Investor's prior CVC                 0.614**      0.650***     0.531**     0.613**      0.568**
    experience                          (0.242)      (0.241)      (0.248)     (0.242)     (0.245)
   Investor's prior external R&D         0.194         0.244        0.140      0.236        0.285
    experience                          (0.326)      (0.327)      (0.330)     (0.329)     (0.331)
                                         -0.044       -0.044       -0.046      -0.047      -0.049      0.005       -0.011
   Partner’s pipeline
                                        (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.034)     (0.042)
                                        1.000***     1.013***     0.928**     1.103***    1.088***     0.644       0.745
   Partner pipeline stage
                                        (0.373)      (0.371)      (0.382)     (0.383)     (0.387)     (0.474)     (0.485)
                                        0.989***     0.984***     0.997***    0.990***    0.990***     0.347*      0.322
   Partner VC funding
                                        (0.179)      (0.178)      (0.179)     (0.178)     (0.177)     (0.208)     (0.210)
   Partner’s amount of funding          -1.754*       -1.715*     -1.856*     -1.765*      -1.834*    -1.783*      -1.326
    received                            (0.984)      (0.974)      (1.027)     (0.979)     (1.018)     (1.009)     (1.020)
                                       -0.131***    -0.132***    -0.127***   -0.127***   -0.124***   -0.106***   -0.113***
   Partner's age
                                        (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.029)     (0.030)
                                         0.243*        0.228        0.232      0.233        0.167      0.498*      0.473*
   Partner's public
                                        (0.146)      (0.147)      (0.148)     (0.146)     (0.149)     (0.259)     (0.261)
                                        3.436***     3.419***     3.458***    3.488***    3.494***     2.903       2.663
   Partner's patents
                                        (0.638)      (0.636)      (0.625)     (0.638)     (0.611)     (2.116)     (2.133)

    Log pseudo likelihood                 -1.4e+03 -1.4e+03 -1.4e+03 -1.4e+03 -1.4e+03 -469.589 -467.925
    Total number of dyad-years             10021      10021      10021       10021      10021         2156       2156
    Number of dyads                          604       604         604        604         604          190        190
    Number of dyads failed                   163       163         163        163         163           64         64
*** **
   , , and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Robust standard errors clustered by dyads are in Italics. ^
In the regressions, investor’s pipeline and employees have been scaled by thousands and millions, respectively.




                                                                                                                       39
Table 3. Panel data linear probability model with dyad fixed effects
                         Model                  1             2            3             4           5            6           7
                                                                                                              Probability of Post C
               Dependent variable                                  Probability of CVC
                                                                                                                  VC Lic.|Acq.
                                                    st        st
               Stage (cf. Figure 1)             1            1            1st           1st          1st         2nd         2nd
                                                           -0.008                                 -0.012*       0.008       0.007
         Investor's scientific capability
                                                          (0.006)                                 (0.006)      (0.019)     (0.019)
         Investor-partner technological                                 0.022***                  0.024***     -0.035*     -0.035*
          distance (dyad-level)                                         (0.007)                   (0.007)      (0.019)     (0.019)
         Investor’s early stage                                                      -0.021*      -0.025**      0.021       0.024
          technology                                                                 (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.041)     (0.041)
         Value of partner’s technologies                                                                                   -0.024*
         × Volatility of technical                                                                                         (0.013)
          subfields
                                                0.002      0.002         0.002         0.002       0.002        0.001         0.017
         Value of partner’s technologies
                                              (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.008)       (0.013)
                                               -0.001      -0.002        -0.000       -0.002       -0.000       -0.041        0.004
         Volatility of technical subfields
                                              (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.051)       (0.065)
                                                0.097      0.092         0.067         0.160       0.131        -0.267        -0.292
         Investor’s pipeline^
                                              (0.102)     (0.103)       (0.104)      (0.110)      (0.111)      (0.266)       (0.271)
                                             -0.303***   -0.306***      -0.275**    -0.322***    -0.299***    -1.472***     -1.530***
         Investor's employees^
                                              (0.110)     (0.110)       (0.109)      (0.110)      (0.109)      (0.562)       (0.565)
                                                0.056      0.056         0.058         0.055       0.058        -0.005        0.001
         Investor's slack
                                              (0.055)     (0.055)       (0.055)      (0.055)      (0.055)      (0.012)       (0.014)
                                                0.001      0.000         -0.001        0.000       -0.003       -0.014        -0.014
         Investor's patents
                                              (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.025)       (0.025)
         Investor's prior CVC                   0.006      0.007         0.005         0.006       0.006
          experience                          (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.006)
         Investor's prior external R&D         0.013*      0.014*       0.014**       0.013*      0.016**
          experience                          (0.007)     (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)
                                               -0.001      -0.001        -0.001       -0.001       -0.001       -0.001       -0.002
         Partner’s pipeline
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
                                               0.027*      0.026*        0.024        0.026*       0.023       0.102**      0.103**
         Partner pipeline stage
                                              (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.045)      (0.045)
                                              0.080***    0.080***      0.080***     0.080***     0.080***      0.259        0.255
         Partner VC funding
                                              (0.011)     (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.215)      (0.211)
         Partner’s amount of funding            0.001      0.001         0.001         0.001       0.001       0.152***     0.191***
          received                            (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.056)      (0.067)
                                                0.000      0.000         -0.000        0.000       0.000        0.006        0.005
         Partner's age
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.004)      (0.004)
                                               0.024*      0.024*        0.024*       0.024*       0.024*       0.044        0.041
         Partner's public
                                              (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.049)      (0.048)
                                               0.230*      0.229*        0.225*       0.231*       0.226*       0.181        0.174
         Partner's patents
                                              (0.118)     (0.118)       (0.116)      (0.118)      (0.116)      (0.582)      (0.580)

         Year dummies                          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
         Dyad fixed effects                    Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

         R2 (within)                          0.052        0.052         0.054        0.052        0.054        0.058        0.061
         Total number of dyad-years           8253         8253          8253         8253         8253         1593         1593
         Number of dyads                       604          604           604          604          604          190          190
*** **
   , , and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Robust standard errors clustered by dyads in Italics. The total number of
observations is reduced relative to Table 2 since observations (within dyads) post-CVC or post lic/acq are dropped (e.g., events are treated
as absorbing states). ^ In the regressions, investor’s pipeline and employees have been scaled by thousands and millions, respectively.




                                                                                                                                     40
Appendix A1. Distribution of choice of external R&D activity variable through time
 Stage                                1st                                  2nd (Conditional on prior CVC investments)
                                                                                                   Post CVC
                                                           R&D          Post CVC Post CVC                       Keep in
 Year         CVC         Licensing     Acquisition                                                  R&D
                                                          alliance      licensing acquisition                  portfolio
                                                                                                    alliance
 1985          3              4              0                1             0            0              0          0
 1986          1              9              0                0             0            0              0          3
 1987          2              10             0                0             0            0              0          4
 1988          4              10             0                0             0            0              0          4
 1989          3              4              0                1             0            0              1          7
 1990          5              16             0                1             2            0              0          11
 1991          6              17             1                1             2            0              0         17
 1992          19             9              0                5             10           0              2         19
 1993          11             17             1                6             6            0              2         38
 1994          19             18             0                6             11           0              2         46
 1995          15             22             0                5             10           1              2         56
 1996          22             23             2                8             11           0              5         70
 1997          14             25             0                5             4            0              5         93
 1998          13             29             2                3             6            0              7        103
 1999          17             24             4                6             16           0             13         110
 2000          11             27             3                6             12           1              6        133
 2001          12             36             2                2             4            0              2        149
 2002          12             31             2                9             17           0              4        156
 2003          7              33             2                5             11           0              8        168
 2004          6              32             1                3             5            0              7        173
 2005          1              32             1                2             2            0              2        184
 2006          0              28             3                0             0            0              0        179
 2007          0              28             1                0             0            0              0        165
 Total        203            484             25              75            129           2             68        1888
Note: This table reports the number of external R&D deals in the dataset by type, year, and stage. Since the table
summarizes the data at the transaction, rather than at the dyad level, the number of CVC, licensing, and acquisitions does
not equal the corresponding number of deals considered in the event history models (which analyze the occurrence of the
first CVC deal, or ex post technology acquisition transaction, within dyads) presented in the following tables.




                                                                                                                             41
Appendix A2. Number of external R&D deals by corporate investors and year
Investor
           1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   Total
   ID
    1       4      6      8     10     14     15     15     15     17     18     18     18     18     18     18     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     368
    2       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      5      5      6      5      5      5      5      5      5      0      0     51
    3       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      1      1     12
    4       0      0      0     0      0      4       4     6       5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      0     98
    5       0      0      0     2      2      2       5     7       7      7      7      9      9      9      9      9      9     10      9      9      9      9      9     163
    6       0      0      0     0      1      1       2     2       2      2      2      3      3      3      3      3      3      3      3      3      3      3      3     65
    7       9     10     11     12     12     13     14     15     17     18     19     20     19     20     20     20     20     20     21     20     20     20     20     409
    8       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     5       5      5      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8      8     143
    9       0      1      1     3      3      0       0     3       5      7      7      7      7      7      7      8      7      7      8      0      0      0      0     116
   10       6      8     10     11     12     13     15     17     19     18     20     21     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     410
   11       0      0      0     0      7      7       8     10     12     13     14     13     14     15     14     14     14     14     14     14     14     14     14     271
   12       1      1      1     1      1      1       2     3       4      4      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5     117
   13       0      0      0     0      0      6       7     8       9      9      9     10     11     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     206
   14       0      0      0     0      0      4       4     4       4      4      4      4      4      5      5      5      5      5      5      6      5      5      5     121
   15       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      4      4      3      4      0      4      4      5      4      4      4      4      4     90
   16       3      3      3     3      3      3       4     5       5      5      5      5      5      5      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6     158
   17       0      0      6     6      6      7       8     9       9      9      9      9      9      9      9     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     235
   18       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     6       6      6      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7     160
   19       6      6      9     10     10     12     13     18     18     18     18     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19     19      0      0     383
   20       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      4      4      4      4      4      4      4      4      4     105
   21       0      0      0     2      2      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      3      3      3      3     91
   22       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      4      0      0      4      4      4      4      4      0     106
   23       0      0      6     7      7      8      10     13     15     16     19     19     20     21     20     20     20     20     20     20     20     20     20     424
   24       8     10     17     17     22     24     26     29     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     30     688
   25       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      0      4      4      5      4      4      4      4      4     120
   26       11    11     12     15     15     16     21     24     29     29     29     30     31     31     33     32     34     35     34     33     33     33     33     704
   27       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0     11     11     11     11     11     156
   28       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      0      0      0      0      1      1      2      2      2      2      2      2      2      2     120
   29       5      5      8     9      11     12     14     16     16     16      0     19     22     25     25     25     25     26     25     25     25     25     25     508
   30       2      3      3     0      2      0       3     3       4      4      4      0      4      3      4      5      4      4      4      4      4      4      0     179
   31       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       0      1      1      1      1      1      1      1      1      0      1      1      1      1      1     127
   32       0      0      0     0      0      0       0     0       6      6      0      0      0      0      0      9      9      9      9      9      9      9      9     200
   33       4      7      8     10     10     12     12     16     17     17     17     17     18     18     18     18     18     18     18     18     18     18     18     470
   34       0      0      0     0      0      0      12     13     13     13     13     13     13     13     14     14     14     14     14     14     14     14      0     355
   35       0      0      0     0      0      8       9     9       9      9     10     11     12     12     12     13     12     13     12     12     12     12     12     340
   36       3      5      5     7      7      6       7     10     10     10     10     10     10     11     11     11     12     12     12     12     12     12      0     350
   37       3      4      7     9      12     12     12     14     14     15     15     16     17     18     18     18     18     19     19     19     19     19     19     482
   38       0      0      0     0      8      9      10     12     13     14     15     16     16     17     18     17     18     19     21     19     19     19     19     456
   39       4      4      4     5      5      5       8     8       9      8     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     348
   40       0      0      0     1      1      2       2     2       2      2      2      2      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0      0     176
   41       4      7     10     10     11     13     15     20     20     22     24     21     22     23     24     24     24     24     24     24     24     24     24     609
   42       8      9     10     11     13     14     15     16     16     16     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     17     532
   43       0      0      0     0      8      8       8     8      10     10     10     11     11     12     12     12     12     12     12     12     12     12     12     394
   44       0      0      0     0      4      4       4     4       5      5      6      6      7      6      8      9      8      8      8      8      8      8      8     326
   45       0      1      2     2      2      3       4     4       5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5      5     297
   46       0      0      0     0      0      0       4     5       5      5      0      6      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      8      7      7     313
   47       0      0      0     0      5      5       5     5       5      5      5      5      5      6      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      7      0     318


                                                                                                                                                                     42
    48         0         0        0       0        0       0       0   0         0        0       0        8       8        8       8        9      8        8      8        8         8         8      8     310
    49         0         0        0       0        0       0       0   0         0        0       0        3       3        3       3        3      3        3      3        3         3         3      3     253
    50         0         0        3       3        3       3       3   5         5        5       5        5       5        5       5        5      5        5      5        5         5         5      5     313
    51         7         8       12       13       13     15      15  16        16       17       0       20      19       19      19       19     19       19     19       19        19        19     19     580
    52         0         0        0       0        5       0       0   6         7        0       8        8       8        8       8        8      8        8      8        8         8         8      8     362
    53         0         0        0       0        0       0       0   0         0        0       0        0       0        0       0        3      3        3      3        3         3         3      3     270
    54         0         0        0       0        0       0       0   0         0        0       0        0       0        7       7        7      7        8      7        7         7         7      7     322
    55         0         0        0       0        0       0       3   5         5        5       5        7       7        8       8        8      8        8      8        8         8         8      8     371
    56         0         0        0       0        0       0       0   5         5        5       5        5       5        5       5        6      5        5      5        5         5         5      5     337
    57        10        12       13       13       13     13      13  13        13       14      15       15      16       16      16       16     16       16     16       17        16        16     16     591
    58         3         4        5       6        7       8       8   9         9        9       9        9      10       10      10       10     10       10     10       10        10        10     10     454
   Total      101      125      174      198      257     288     344 423      457       461    450      512      529      549    562      584     582     594    603       596      595       571     525   10080
  No. of
              19        21       24       26       34     34      38  43        44       44      42       46      47       49      50       53     53       53     55       55        55        54     48     58
 Investors
Notes. This table reports R&D decision regarding external technology acquisition activities by corporate investors (sorted by the number of deals). The top 10 corporate investors include Genentech,
GlaxoSmithKline (Glaxo Wellcome and SmithKline Beecham), Amgen, Proctor & Gamble, Wyeth, Abbott Laboratories, Baxter, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, and Merck & Co.. The number of investors indicates the number of
unique corporate investors involved with external R&D activities.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     43
Appendix A3: Figure 1 References

Basu S, Phelps C, Kotha S. 2011. Towards understanding who makes corporate venture capital investments and
    why. Journal of Business Venturing 26(2): 153-171.
Basu S, Wadhwa A. 2013. External venturing and discontinuous strategic renewal: an options perspective.
    Journal of Product Innovation Management 30(5): 956-975.
Benson D. 2008. When do corporate venture capital activities improve firm performance when acquiring
    startups? Evidence from the information technology sector. Working paper, University of Michigan, Ann
    Arbor.
Benson D, Ziedonis RH. 2009. Corporate venture capital as a window on new technologies: implications for the
    performance of corporate investors when acquiring startups. Organization Science 20(2): 329-351.
Benson D, Ziedonis RH. 2010. Corporate venture capital and the returns to acquiring portfolio companies.
    Journal of Financial Economics 98(3): 478-499.
Dushnitsky G, Lenox MJ. 2005a. When do incumbents learn from entrepreneurial ventures? Corporate venture
    capital and investing firm innovation rates. Research Policy 34(5): 615-639.
Dushnitsky G, Lenox MJ. 2005b. When do firms undertake R&D by investing in new ventures? Strategic
      Management Journal 26(10): 947-965.
Dushnitsky G, Shaver JM. 2009. Limitations to interorganizational knowledge acquisition: the paradox of
    corporate venture capital. Strategic Management Journal 30(10): 1045-1064.
Dushnitsky G, Lavie D. 2010. How alliance formation shapes corporate venture capital investment in the
    software industry: a resource-based perspective. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 4(1): 22-48.
Dyer J, Kale P, Singh H. 2004. When to ally and when to acquire. Harvard Business Review 82: 108-115.
Ernst H, Witt P, Brachtendorf G. 2005. Corporate venture capital as a strategy for external innovation: an
    exploratory empirical study. R&D Management 25(3): 233-242.
Folta T. 1998. Governance and uncertainty: the trade-off between administrative control and commitment.
    Strategic Management Journal 19(11): 1007-1028.
Folta T, Leiblein MJ. 1994. Technology acquisition and the choice of governance by established firms: insights
    from option theory in a multinomial logit model. Academy of Management Proceedings, 27-31.
Folta T, Miller KD. 2002. Real options in equity partnerships. Strategic Management Journal 23(1): 77-88.
Goldman E, Qian J. 2005. Optimal toeholds in takeover contests. Journal of Financial Economics 77: 321-346.
Gompers PA, Lerner J. 2000. The determinants of corporate venture capital success: organizational
incentives and complementarities. In Concentrated corporate ownership, Morck R. (ed). University
of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Gompers PA, Lerner J. 2006. The Venture Capital Cycle. 2nd edition. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Hagedoorn J., Duysters, GM. 2002. External sources of innovative capabilities: the preference for strategic
    alliances or mergers and acquisitions. Journal of Management Studies 39(2): 167-188.
Higgins MJ, Rodriguez D. 2006. The outsourcing of R&D through acquisitions in the pharmaceutical industry.
    Journal of Financial Economics 80(2): 351-383.
Hoang H, Rothaermel F. 2005. The effect of general and partner specific alliance experience on joint R&D
    project performance. Academy of Management Journal 48(2): 332-345.
Keil T. 2002. External Corporate Venturing, Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Kogut B. 1991. Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire. Management Science 37(1): 19-33.
Lambe CJ, Speckman RE. 1997. Alliances, external technology acquisition and discontinuous technology
    change. Journal of Product Innovation Management 14(2): 102-116.
Loizos C. 2005. Dell, other corporations shut venture units. Venture Capital Journal, Feb. 1.
Maula MV, Keil T, Zahra S. 2013. Top management’s attention to discontinuous technological change:
    Corporate venture capital as an alert mechanism. Organization Science 24(3): 926-947.
Nicholls-Nixon C, Woo C. 2003. Technology sourcing and output of firms in a regime of encompassing
    technological change. Strategic Management Journal 24: 651-666.
Park HD, Steensma K. 2012. When does corporate venture capital add value for new ventures? Strategic
    Management Journal 33: 1-22.
Porrini P. 2004. Can a previous alliance between an acquirer and a target affect acquisition performance?
    Journal of Management 30: 545-562.
Reuer JJ, Ragozzino R. 2006. Agency hazards and alliance portfolios. Strategic Management Journal 27(1): 27-
    43.
Reuer JJ, Tong TW. 2005. Real options in international joint ventures. Journal of Management 31(3): 403-423.
Steensma HK, Fairbank JF. 1999. Internalizing external technology: a model of governance mode choice and an
    empirical assessment. The Journal of High Technology Management Review 10(1): 1-35.
Steensma, HK, Corley KG. 2000. On the performance of technology-sourcing partnerships: the interaction
    between partner interdependence and technology attributes. Academy of Management Journal 43(6): 1045-
                                                                                                           44
    1067.
Stuart TE, Hoang H, Hybels HC. 1999. Interorganizational endorsements and the performance of
    entrepreneurial ventures. Administrative Science Quarterly 44(2): 315-349.
Tong TW, Reuer JJ, Peng MW. 2008. International joint ventures and the value of growth options. Academy of
    Management Journal 51(5): 1014-1029.
Van de Vrande V, Lemmens C, Vanhaverbeke W. 2006. Choosing governance modes for external technology
    sourcing. R&D Management 36(3): 347-363.
Van de Vrande V and Vanhaverbeke W. 2008. Corporate venture capital as a real option: A dyad-level analysis
    of the evolvement of the inter-firm ties (summary). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 28(19): Article
    16.
Van de Vrande V, Vanhaverbeke W. 2013. How prior corporate venture capital investments shape technological
    alliances: a real options approach. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 37(5): 1019-1043.
Van de Vrande V, Vanhaverbeke W, Duysters, G. 2009. External technology sourcing: the effect of uncertainty
    on governance mode choice. Journal of Business Venturing 24: 62-80.
Vanhaverbeke W, Duysters, G, Van de Vrande V. 2002. External technology sourcing through alliances or
    acquisitions: an analysis of the application-specific integrated circuits industry. Organization Science 13(6):
    714-733.
Vanhaverbeke V, Li-Ying J, Van de Vrande V. 2013. The dual role of external technology sourcing in
    technological exploration. Working paper, Erasmus University.
Vanhaverbeke W, Van de Vrande V, Chesbrough H. 2008. Understanding the advantages of open innovation
    practices in corporate venturing in terms of real options. Creativity and Innovation Management 17(4): 251-
    258.
Wadhwa A., Basu S. 2013. Exploration and resource commitments in unequal partnerships: An examination of
    corporate venture capital investments. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30(5): 916-936.
Wadhwa A, Kotha S. 2006. Knowledge creation through external venturing: evidence from the
    telecommunications equipment manufacturing industry. Academy of Management Journal 49(4): 1-17.
Wadhwa A, Phelps C. 2011. Take a chance on me: An examination of the interdependence of start-up tie
    formation across venture capital and alliance networks. Paper presented at the DRUID 2011 conference,
    Copenhagen Business School, Denmark, June 15-17, 2011.
Yoshikawa T. 2003. Technology development and acquisition strategy. International Journal of Technology
    Management 25(6/7): 666-674.
Zaheer A, Hernandez E, Banerjee S. 2010. Prior alliances with targets and acquisition performance in
    knowledge intensive industries. Organization Science 21(5): 1072-1091.
Zollo M, Reuer J. 2010. Experience spillovers across corporate development activities. Organization Science
    21(6): 1195-1212.




                                                                                                                45
Appendix A4. Comparison between private and public partner firms


                                                  Public partners       Private partners
                                                                                               Difference
                   Variable                      Mean      St.Dev.      Mean      St.Dev.
                                                                                                -0.360***
  Value of partner’s technologies                0.191       0.697      0.552       1.446
                                                                                                 (0.025)
                                                                                                -0.041***
  Volatility of technical subfields             0.336      0.208        0.377      0.258
                                                                                                 (0.004)
                                                                                                -1.728***
  Partner’s pipeline                            0.915      2.879        2.644      5.910
                                                                                                 (0.102)
                                                                                                -0.081***
  Partner pipeline stage                        0.095      0.235        0.177      0.299
                                                                                                 (0.005)
                                                                                                -0.097***
  Partner VC funding                            0.305      0.461        0.403      0.490
                                                                                                 (0.009)
                                                                                                -0.151***
  Partner’s amount of funding received          0.042      0.098        0.193      0.720
                                                                                                 (0.011)
                                                                                                -2.421***
  Partner's age                                 9.160      6.515       11.581      6.516
                                                                                                 (0.134)
                                                                                                -0.006***
  Partner's patents                             0.000      0.003        0.007      0.039
                                                                                                 (0.000)
    *** **       *
       , , and denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                            46
  Appendix A5. Additional sensitivity analyses

                     Model                       1                2                 3                4                 5
                                                                              Within dyad                        Within dyad
                                            Competing                         LPM with 2-                        LPM with 2-
                                            Risks model         Logit        level (investor       Logit        level (investor
                                           without public                     and partner)                       and partner)
                                              partners                        clustering of                      clustering of
                                                                              stand. errors                      stand. errors
                                                                                               Probability of   Probability of
                                           Sub-hazard of    Probability of   Probability of
           Dependent variable                                                                    Post CVC         Post CVC
                                               CVC              CVC              CVC
                                                                                                  Lic.|Acq.        Lic.|Acq.
           Stage (cf. Figure 1)                  1st              1st              1st               2nd              2nd
                                              -0.623**          -0.203          -0.012**           0.284             0.007
Investor's scientific capability
                                              (0.254)          (0.148)          (0.004)           (0.218)           (0.023)
Investor-partner technological distance       1.042***         0.612***         0.024***           -0.060           -0.035*
(dyad-level)                                  (0.274)          (0.221)          (0.009)           (0.317)           (0.019)
                                               -0.893          -1.206**         -0.025*            0.116             0.024
Investor’s early stage technology
                                              (0.590)          (0.483)          (0.015)           (0.684)           (0.035)
Value of partner’s technologies ×                                                                 -1.099**          -0.024*
Volatility of technical subfields                                                                 (0.466)           (0.014)
                                               0.014            0.084            0.002             0.390             0.017
Value of partner’s technologies
                                              (0.199)          (0.127)          (0.003)           (0.250)           (0.013)
                                               0.605            0.266            -0.000            -0.065            0.004
Volatility of technical subfields
                                              (0.575)          (0.388)          (0.020)           (1.476)           (0.057)
                                               3.837            3.608            0.131             -0.316           -0.292
Investor’s pipeline^
                                              (3.344)          (3.180)          (0.108)           (3.870)           (0.228)
                                              -8.708**         -8.664**        -0.299***           2.068           -1.530**
Investor's employees^
                                              (4.330)          (3.707)          (0.111)           (4.150)           (0.677)
                                               1.472           2.933***         0.058***           2.875*            0.001
Investor's slack
                                              (1.274)          (0.731)          (0.010)           (1.546)           (0.015)
                                               -0.065           -0.208           -0.003           -1.103**          -0.014
Investor's patents
                                              (0.287)          (0.209)          (0.006)           (0.435)           (0.023)
                                               0.361           0.545**           0.006
Investor's prior CVC experience
                                              (0.326)          (0.236)          (0.007)
                                               0.082            0.203            0.016*
Investor's prior external R&D experience
                                              (0.392)          (0.345)          (0.008)
                                               -0.012           -0.067           -0.001            -0.042          -0.002*
Partner’s pipeline
                                              (0.053)          (0.041)          (0.001)           (0.052)          (0.001)
                                               0.182           1.213***          0.023             0.993*          0.103**
Partner pipeline stage
                                              (0.709)          (0.435)          (0.016)           (0.593)          (0.041)
                                              1.690***         1.099***         0.080***           0.420            0.255
Partner VC funding
                                              (0.279)          (0.203)          (0.013)           (0.286)          (0.209)
                                              -5.613**          -0.848           0.001             1.111           0.191**
Partner’s amount of funding received
                                              (2.456)          (0.833)          (0.001)           (1.306)          (0.091)
                                             -0.131***        -0.080***          0.000            -0.074*           0.005
Partner's age
                                              (0.026)          (0.022)          (0.001)           (0.038)          (0.004)
                                                                0.292            0.024*            0.310            0.041
Partner's public
                                                               (0.183)          (0.014)           (0.340)          (0.052)
                                              2.871***         4.680***          0.226*            5.005            0.174
Partner's patents
                                              (0.730)          (1.138)          (0.118)           (4.513)          (0.289)

Year dummies                                    No               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Dyad fixed effects                              No               No               Yes               No               Yes

Log pseudo likelihood                        -664.358         -705.111                           -246.939
Total number of dyad-years                     4443             8253             8253              1593             1593
Number of dyads                                531              604               604              190               190
R2 (within)                                                                      0.054                              0.06
Pseudo-R2                                                        0.12                              0.099
  ***
    , **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Robust standard errors in Italics are clustered by dyads
  for models 1-2, 4 and by investor and partners (2-level clustering) for Model 3 and 5.



                                                                                                                           47
