                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

     THE DYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF FINANCIAL-MARKET EQUILIBRIUM WITH
                             TRADING FEES

                                        Adrian Buss
                                       Bernard Dumas

                                     Working Paper 21421
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21421

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 01238
                            July 2015, Revised July 2017

Previous versions were circulated and presented under the titles “The Equilibrium Dynamics of
Liquidity and Illiquid Asset Prices” and “Financial-market Equilibrium with Friction.” Buss is
with INSEAD (adrian.buss@insead.edu) and Dumas is with INSEAD, University of Torino,
NBER, and CEPR (bernard.dumas@insead.edu). Work on this topic was initiated while Dumas
was at the University of Lausanne and Buss was at the Goethe University of Frankfurt. Dumas’s
research has been supported by the Swiss National Center for Competence in Research
“FinRisk,” by grant #1112 of the INSEAD research fund and by the AXA chair of the University
of Torino. He is thankful to Collegio Carlo Alberto and to BI Norwegian Business School for
their hospitality. The authors are grateful for useful discussions and comments to Beth Allen,
Andrew Ang, Yakov Amihud, Laurent Barras, Sébastien Bétermier, Bruno Biais, John Campbell,
Georgy Chabakauri, Massimiliano Croce, Magnus Dahlquist, Sanjiv Das, Xi Dong, Itamar
Drechsler, Phil Dybvig, Thierry Foucault, Kenneth French, Xavier Gabaix, Nicolae Gârleanu,
Stefano Giglio, Francisco Gomes, Amit Goyal, Harald Hau, John Heaton, Terrence Hendershott,
Julien Hugonnier, Ravi Jagannathan, Elyès Jouini, Andrew Karolyi, Felix Kubler, David Lando,
John Leahy, Francis Longstaff, Abraham Lioui, Edith Liu, Hong Liu, Frédéric Malherbe, Ian
Martin, Alexander Michaelides, Pascal Maenhout, Stefan Nagel, Stavros Panageas, Luboš Pástor,
Paolo Pasquariello, Patrice Poncet, Tarun Ramadorai, Scott Richard, Barbara Rindi, Jean-Charles
Rochet, Leonid Ro¸su, Olivier Scaillet, Norman Schürhoff, Chester Spatt, Raman Uppal, Dimitri
Vayanos, Pietro Veronesi, Grigory Vilkov, Vish Viswanathan, Jeffrey Wurgler, Ingrid Werner,
Fernando Zapatero, and participants at workshops given at the Amsterdam Duisenberg School of
Finance, INSEAD, the CEPR’s European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets at
Gerzensee, the University of Cyprus, the University of Lausanne, Bocconi University, the
European Finance Association meeting, the Duke-UNC Asset Pricing Workshop, the National
Bank of Switzerland, the Adam Smith Asset Pricing workshop at Oxford University, the Yale
University General Equilibrium workshop, the Center for Asset Pricing Research/Norwegian
Finance Initiative Workshop at BI, the Indian School of Business Summer Camp, Boston
University, Washington University in St Louis, ESSEC Business School, HEC Business School,
McGill University, the NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute, the University of Zurich, the
University of Nantes, the Western Finance Association and the Frankfurt School of Finance and
Management. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Adrian Buss and Bernard Dumas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamic Properties of Financial-Market Equilibrium with Trading Fees
Adrian Buss and Bernard Dumas
NBER Working Paper No. 21421
July 2015, Revised July 2017
JEL No. G10,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

We incorporate trading fees in a long-horizon dynamic general-equilibrium model in which
traders optimally and endogenously decide when and how much to trade. A full characterization
of equilibrium is provided, which allows us to study the dynamics of equilibrium trades,
equilibrium asset prices and rates of return in the presence of trading fees. We exhibit the effect
of trading fees on deviations from the consumption- CAPM and analyze the pricing of
endogenous liquidity risk. We compare, for the same shocks, the impulse responses of this model
to those of a model in which trading is infrequent because of trader inattention.

The current version reflects material that was previously in two papers, w21421 and w19155.


Adrian Buss
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
adrian.buss@insead.edu

Bernard Dumas
INSEAD
boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and NBER
bernard.dumas@insead.edu
    The …nancial sector of the economy issues and trades securities. But, more importantly, it
provides a service to clients, such as the service of accessing the …nancial market and trading.
This service is provided at a cost to cover physical as well as wage costs and the adverse
selection e¤ect of facing potentially informed customers, plus a pro…t. Understanding the
impact of this cost on …nancial-market equilibrium is as important to the …nancial industry
as the cost of producing chickpeas to the chickpea industry.
    In practice, traders trade through intermediaries. However, the end users being the
traders, access to a …nancial market is ultimately a service that traders make available to
each other. As a way of constructing a simple model, we bypass intermediaries and their
pricing policy, and let traders serve as dealers for, and pay trading fees to each other. We
view trading fees as a metaphor for the cost (plus markup) of keeping the …nancial sector in
operation.
    We incorporate trading fees in a dynamic-equilibrium model in which traders optimally
and endogenously decide when and how much to trade, with the purpose of increasing our
understanding of the modi…cation of trading strategies, prices, and returns associated with
trading fees. We de…ne for this market a form of Walrasian equilibrium that is the limit of
a sequence of equilibria in which each trader’s complementary slackness condition has been
relaxed, and we invent an algorithm that takes that limit. It delivers an exact numerical
equilibrium that synchronizes like clockwork the traders in the implementation of their trades
and allows us to analyze the way in which trades take place and in which prices are formed
and evolve. In doing this, we follow the lead of He and Modest (1995), Jouini and Kallal
(1995) and Luttmer (1996), but, unlike these authors, who established bounds on asset
prices, we reach a full description.
    We take the cost function as given, but choose the functional form in such a way that it
re‡ects one special and important feature of the cost of …nancial services: while producers
of chickpeas only sell chickpeas and consumers only buy chickpeas, …nancial-market traders
sometimes buy and, at other times, sell the very same security.1 In both cases, they pay
a positive cost to the institution that organizes the market, irrespective of the direction of
the trade. For any cost function of the power type other than the square (or even-powered)
   1
     Philippon (2015) de…nes the user cost of …nance as the sum of the rate of return to a saver plus the unit
cost of …nancial intermediation. That formulation presupposes that a saver is always a saver and a borrower
always a borrower. The cost of …nancial intermediation is then the spread between the borrowing and the
lending rates. The question of choosing between being a saver and a borrower is not on the table.


                                                      1
function, this implies that there is a kink at zero in the trading cost function that induces
traders not to trade when they otherwise (without trading fees) would have. We want to draw
the consequences of the traders’inaction for portfolio decisions, asset prices, and …nancial-
market equilibrium. In particular, we assume that the cost of trading, to an approximation,
is proportional to the value of the shares traded.
    In our model, traders are endowed with an every-period motive for trading, over and
above the long-term need to trade for lifetime planning purposes. That is, we assume that
traders receive endowments that are not fully hedgeable as, even without trading fees, the
…nancial market is incomplete. Accordingly, whenever a trader’s realized endowment is above
or below the amount he has previously been able to hedge, he has the desire to adjust his
portfolio positions.
    In the presence of proportional trading fees, traders, as is well-known from the literature
on non-equilibrium portfolio choice, tolerate a deviation from their preferred holdings, the
zone of tolerated deviation being called the “no-trade region.” Speci…cally, a trader may
decide not to trade, thereby preventing other traders from trading with him, which is an
additional endogenous, stochastic, and, perhaps, quantitatively more important consequence
of the trading fee. Liquidity begets liquidity. Conceptually and qualitatively speaking, this
endogenous stochastic process of the liquidity of a security is as important to investment
and valuation as is the exogenous stochastic process of its future cash ‡ows. That is, when
purchasing a security it is not su¢ cient for a trader to have in mind the cash ‡ows that the
security will pay into the inde…nite future, he must also anticipate his, and other people’s,
desire and ability to resell the security in the marketplace at a later time.
    We show, analytically, how this endogenous stochastic process of the liquidity a¤ects
equilibrium securities prices. That is, we compare equilibrium securities prices to traders’
private valuations, which can be likened to private bid and ask prices, and explain how the
gap between them triggers trades. In addition, we compare equilibrium securities prices in the
presence of trading fees to those in the absence of trading fees. The di¤erences between the
two prices result from changes in the state prices, or, equivalently, consumption. Speci…cally,
in the presence of trading fees, traders face a trade-o¤ between smoothing consumption and
smoothing holdings (to reduce trading costs).
    Next, we provide quantitative results for an illustrative setting with two traded assets,
one of which, the stock, is subject to trading fees. We illustrate the degree to which capital


                                              2
is slow-moving and how the presence of the fee intrinsically a¤ects the traders’ trading
strategies. We document quantitatively the increase in consumption volatility resulting
from the trading fees and its welfare implications. Finally, we study the equilibrium asset
prices of both securities. The price of a risk-free bond is increasing in the trading fee of the
stock because the additional consumption volatility creates a precautionary savings motive,
which leads to a lower interest rate. Interestingly, the price of the stock is also increasing
(slightly) in its trading fee. Particularly, the precautionary savings e¤ect, which implies a
lower discount rate for the stock, and, thus, a higher price, weakly dominates the illiquidity
discount arising from stochastic (il)liquidity. We also document the implications for the
return-generating processes of the two assets.
    Finally, we develop three applications of our model. First, we draw the implications of
our equilibrium for liquidity (risk) premia and formulate recommendations to researchers
who wish to test a CAPM that takes trading fees and endogenous trading decisions into
account. Second, we study an extension of our model to three traders and compare the
dynamics of equilibrium to the one with two traders. Third, we construct in a proper way
the responses of prices to shocks in the presence of frictions and show that the hysteresis
e¤ect of trading fees can explain slow price reversal.
    There exists an extensive empirical literature on the impact of (il)liquidity on returns
and trading activities. Particularly, it has been documented that less liquid stocks earn
higher returns and are more volatile. Moreover, various liquidity (risk) premia have been
studied. Our model can rationalize many of these …ndings. It also provides guidance for
future empirical research, e.g., on endogenous liquidity (risk) premia in unconditional and
conditional asset pricing model, and makes new empirical predictions, for example about
the relation between trading fees and the speed of price reversal. These predictions are
empirically refutable, as we verify quantitatively that the bid-ask midpoint can be used as a
proxy to study the empirical implication of our model.
    While we do not investigate the origin of the cost of …nance, we now argue that its size
is not negligible. For that, we need to be aware of what it includes. Trading costs have to
be interpreted not only as bid-ask spreads or brokerage fees, but also as the opportunity
cost of time devoted to portfolio selection and, above all, to information acquisition. When
these activities are delegated to an intermediary, the opportunity cost becomes an e¤ective,
monetary one. Three recent papers throw light on this issue.


                                               3
    First, French (2008) shows that the magnitude of spreads, fees, and other trading costs,
in spite of increasing competition and technological advances, is not negligible. He estimates
the “the cost of active investing,”de…ned as the di¤erence between the aforementioned costs
and the costs one would pay for holding the market portfolio, to be 0:67% per year of the
aggregate market value (distinct from the size of the trade). This estimate can be interpreted
as a lower bound of the actual costs for spreads and fees. He also estimates the “cost of price
discovery,” that is, the fees, as a percentage of managed assets, investors are willing to pay
to have the portfolio selection and, above all, information acquisition done by a third party.
He arrives at estimates of 1 to 2% for US mutual funds, 23 to 34 basis points for institutional
investors and more than 6:5% for funds of hedge funds.
    Second, Philippon (2015) provides the most comprehensive account to date of the cost of
…nance. He writes, “We can think of the …nance industry as providing three types of services:
(i) liquidity (means of payments, cash management); (ii) transfer of funds (pooling funds
from savers, screening, and monitoring borrowers); (iii) information (price signals, advising
on M&As).”With this de…nition, he shows that the total value added of the …nancial industry
is a remarkably constant fraction of about 2% of the “total amount intermediated,”in which
the latter is de…ned as a mix of stocks of debt and equity outstanding and ‡ows occurring
in the …nancial industry. Hence the cost is much more than 2% of the value of trades.2
    The third paper is by Novy-Marx and Velikov (2015), who carefully estimate the cost of
implementing investment strategies based on “pricing anomalies.”The costs they …nd range
from 0:03%/month for the “Gross Pro…tability”strategy to 1:78%/month for the “Industry
Relative Reversals”strategy. They conclude that most asset pricing anomalies could not be
exploited pro…tably if trading costs were to be paid, so that they are no longer as puzzling.
While the anomalies arise from some trader behavior that needs to be identi…ed, trading
costs do make room for, or allow, the anomalies to continue to exist.3
    Our paper is related to the existing studies of portfolio choice under transactions costs
such as Magill and Constantinides (1976), Constantinides (1976a, 1976b, 1986), Davis and
Norman (1990), Dumas and Luciano (1991), Edirsinghe, Naik and Uppal (1993), Gennotte
and Jung (1994), Shreve and Soner (1994), Cvitanic and Karatzas (1996), Leland (2000),
  2
    The total amount intermediated, a composite of the level and ‡ow series, is an average of the two, with
‡ows being scaled by a factor of 8:48 to make the two series comparable.
  3
    Novy-Marx and Velikov do not optimize trades, as we do here. Optimized trades may generate a reduced
amount of trading costs. But, optimal policies would be of the the (s; S) type, which they do consider.


                                                    4
Longsta¤ (2001), Bouchard (2002), Obizhaeva and Wang (2013), Liu and Lowenstein (2002),
Jang et al. (2007), Gerhold et al. (2011), and Gârleanu and Pedersen (2013), among others.
As was noted by Dumas and Luciano, many of these papers su¤er from a logical quasi-
inconsistency. Not only do they assume an exogenous process for securities’returns, as do
all portfolio optimization papers, but they do so in a way that is incompatible with the
portfolio policy that is produced by the optimization. That is, when transactions costs are
linear, the portfolio strategy is of a type that recognizes the existence of a “no-trade region.”
Yet, portfolio-choice papers assume that prices continue to be quoted and trades remain
available in the marketplace.4 Obviously, the assumption must be made that some traders,
other than the one whose portfolio is being optimized, do not incur costs. In the present
paper, all traders (except in Section 5.3) face a trading fee.
    The papers of Heaton and Lucas (1996), Vayanos (1998), Vayanos and Vila (1999), and
Lo et al. (2004) exhibit the equilibrium behavior resulting from a cost of transacting and are
direct ancestors of the present one.5 Heaton and Lucas (1996) derive a stationary equilibrium
under transactions costs, but, in the neighborhood of zero trade, the cost is assumed to be
quadratic, so that traders trade all the time in small quantities and equilibrium behavior is
qualitatively di¤erent from the one we produce here. In Vayanos (1998) and Vayanos and
Vila (1999), a trader’s only motive to trade is his …nite lifetime. Transactions costs induce
him to trade very little during his life. When young, he buys securities that he can resell
during his old age. Here, we introduce a motive to trade that is operative at every point in
time. In the paper of Lo et al. (2004), costs of trading are …xed costs, all traders have the
same negative exponential utility function, and individual traders’endowments provide the
motive to trade, but the amount of aggregate physical resources available is non-stochastic.
In our paper, fees are proportional, preferences can be speci…ed at will (although we present
illustrative results for time-additive utility), and aggregate and individual resources are free
to follow an arbitrary stochastic process. To our knowledge, ours is the …rst paper that
   4
     Constantinides (1986), in his pioneering paper on portfolio choice under transactions costs, attempted to
draw conclusions concerning equilibrium. Assuming that returns were independently, identically distributed
(IID) over time, he claimed that the expected return required by an investor to hold a security was very little
a¤ected by transactions costs. Liu and Lowenstein (2002), Jang et al. (2007) and Delgado et al. (2015) have
shown that this is generally not true under non-IID returns. The possibility of falling in a no-trade region is
obviously a violation of the IID assumption.
   5
     In these papers, the cost is a physical, deadweight cost of transacting. Another predecessor is that of
Milne and Neave (2003), which, however, contains few quantitative results.



                                                      5
obtains such an equilibrium.6
    As far as the solution method is concerned, our analysis is closely related, in ways we
explain below, to the “dual method” proposed by Bismut (1973), Cvitanic and Karatzas
(1992) and used by Jouini and Kallal (1995), Cvitanic and Karatzas (1996), Cuoco (1997),
Kallsen and Muhle-Karbe (2008) and Deelstra, Pham and Touzi (2002), among others.
    The paper is organized in …ve sections. Section 1 introduces a model of …nancial friction.
Section 2 discusses the equilibrium in an economy without trading fees, focusing particularly
on the motive to trade. In Section 3, we add trading fees, de…ne equilibrium, and compare
analytically equilibrium prices to the present value of dividends and to what they would be
in the absence of fees. Then, in Section 4, a numerical illustration allows to display dynamics
and to discuss the impact of trading fees on trading decisions, consumption, asset prices,
and the rates of return. In Section 5, we develop three applications. First, we determine
theoretically what deviations from the consumption-CAPM follow from trading frictions
and analyze quantitatively the endogenous behavior of liquidity premia. Second, we extend
the model to three traders. Finally, we compare after an impulse the price reversals produced
by our model to those that would result from infrequent trading by inattentive traders.


1       A Model of Financial Friction
We work with a generic model of a dynamic exchange economy. Time is discrete and the
horizon is …nite, with time being indexed by t = 0; :::; T . There exists a single consumption
good, which is also used as a numéraire. Uncertainty is described by a tree or lattice.7
A given node of the tree at time t is followed by Kt nodes at time t + 1 with transition
probabilities f t;t+1;j gKt 8
                         j=1 . The economy is populated with two traders l = 1; 2, who receive

    6
     Longsta¤ (2009) studies an exogenous “blackout”period in which an asset cannot be traded, whereas in
our model, the trading dates are chosen endogenously by the traders. In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008),
liquidity is priced, and investors, in addition to trading with frictions, face liquidity constraints. However,
some investors arrive to the market exogenously. As we do, Buss et al. (2017) derive an equilibrium in the
presence of a cost of trading. But, in their paper, investors trade because of disagreement, and the focus is
on the interplay between illiquidity and disagreement.
   7
     Notice that the tree accommodates the exogenous state variables only. As has been noted by Dumas and
Lyaso¤ (2012), because the tree only involves the exogenous variables, it can be chosen to be recombining
when the endowments and payo¤s are Markovian.
   8
     Transition probabilities and other time-t variables depend on the current state, but, for ease of notation
only, we suppress the corresponding subscript everywhere.


                                                      6
individual endowments and can trade multiple …nancial assets. However, …nancial markets
are incomplete. The economy is further de…ned below.


1.1     Investment Opportunities
We model a competitive …nancial market with I traded securities: i = 1; ::; I. Securities
are described by their payo¤s f t;i ; t = 0; :::; T g ; which are exogenous and placed on the
tree or lattice. Some securities can be short-lived, making a single payo¤ and being reissued
immediately; for example, a risk-free, one-period bond. Other securities can be long-lived,
making payo¤s at all dates t. The total supply of security i is denoted by i , allowing
for securities in zero but also positive, net supply. Financial markets are assumed to be
incomplete. That is, at each node of the tree, there exist fewer non-redundant securities
than future nodes.
    Financial-market transactions can entail trading fees, with the fees being calculated on
the basis of the transaction price. That is, when a trader sells one unit of security i at
time t, he receives in units of consumption good the transaction price multiplied by 1 "i;t
(0 < "i;t < 1) and, when he buys one unit, he must pay the transaction price times 1 + i;t
(0 < i;t < 1). We assume that all fees are paid to a central pot, with the fees collected from
one trader distributed to the other trader in the form of transfers. The transfers are taken
by him to be lump-sum (but recurring) amounts, they enter his budget constraint, but do
not generate an additional term in his …rst-order conditions. In this way, the trader remains
purely competitive in that he only takes into account the cost of his own actions, not the
bene…ts he may receive from the actions of the other trader.9
    We consider a recursive Walrasian market for the securities.10 Assuming all markets
beyond time t are cleared, the auctioneer calls out time-t prices, which we call “posted”
prices and denote as fSt;i ; i = 1; :::; I; t = 0; :::; T g. The posted price of a security is an
e¤ective transaction price only if and when a transaction takes place, but it is posted all the
time by the Walrasian auctioneer. Traders submit to the auctioneer ‡ow quantity schedules,
   9
     At the request of a referee, we have redone all calculations with deadweight trading costs. The results
are available upon request and con…rm that this assumption is innocuous for price and trading behavior.
The assumption, however, is convenient, as it allows to equate aggregate consumption to aggregate output.
Without that, some output would be lost to deadweight trading costs, so that the sum of the consumption
shares would have to be bounded away from 100%.
  10
     We make no claim that the equilibrium in this market is unique.


                                                     7
knowing that fees will be calculated on the basis of that posted price in case of a buy or a
sell transaction. If the ‡ow demanded is positive at the price that is called out, the trader
intends to buy; otherwise he intends to sell. The auctioneer clears the market by determining
the intersection between the two schedules, if any, with one possible outcome of the clearing
being a zero trade.


1.2     Endowments, Policies, and Preferences
Each trader is endowed with l;i shares of security i and a stream of exogenous, individual
endowments fel;t 2 R++ ; l = 1; 2; t = 0; :::; T g.11 He chooses consumption and investment
policies to maximize the expected utility over his lifetime consumption. For trader l, denote
his consumption at time t by cl;t , and the number of units of security i in his hands after
all transactions of time t by l;t;i , so that fcl;t ; t = 0; :::; T g and f l;t;i ; t = 0; :::; T ; i = 1; :::; Ig
describe his consumption and investment policies.
    We assume that all traders have expected utility of the form:12

                                                  X
                                                  T
                                             E0         ul (cl;t ; ; t) :                                     (1)
                                                  t=0


    While we write the utility function (1) in the additive form, given the recursive technique
to be used, it would be easy to handle recursive utility, especially in the isoelastic case. Also,
the utility function may contain other arguments than a trader’s time-t consumption (hence
the as an argument), for example, past consumption in the case of habit formation.
    While the equilibrium construction is based on a …nite horizon T , we are able to increase
T inde…nitely, until such point at which the horizon no longer changes anything in the
behavior of the equilibrium we found.13
  11
                                                      P2
     The initial holdings satisfy the restriction that l=1 l;i = i .
  12
     We assume that utility functions are strictly increasing, strictly concave, and di¤erentiable to the …rst
order with respect to consumption.
  13
     See Appendix A.3 for more details.




                                                          8
1.3     The Trading Motive
In the model, traders trade because they receive stochastic endowments while the …nancial
market is incomplete. They are “liquidity traders.”That is, at each time t they trade or hedge
a marketable component of their endowments. Thereafter, they trade again whenever the
realized endowment is above or below the amount they have previously been able to hedge.14
Particularly, in the absence of frictions, the trading motive is completely straightforward:
the trader who receives an endowment that exceeds the amount previously being hedged uses
some of his funds to consume an extra amount and uses the other part to save by means of
the available securities. Frictions will impede that trading motive somewhat. How much of
the “extra”endowment he consumes and how he allocates the remainder across the securities
is determined endogenously.


1.4     Illustrative Setting
Throughout the paper, we will use a speci…c setting to illustrate the predictions of our model.
Here, we quickly introduce this setting, which is described in detail in Appendix A.
    In particular, we consider an economy with two traded securities: a short-lived riskless
security (the “bond”), i = 1, in zero net supply that is not subject to trading fees; and, i = 2,
a long-lived claim (the “stock”) in unit net supply that pays out dividend t;2 . Trading the
stock entails trading fees. Both traders have the same preferences of the external-habit type,
implemented as surplus consumption, similar to Campbell and Cochrane (1999).15
    Aggregate output is assumed to follow a binomial tree, with the expected value of growth
and its volatility matching their empirical counterparts. The dividends of the stock are
simply modeled as constant fraction of aggregate output. The remainder is distributed
as endowments, with the endowment shares of the traders following an independent, two-
state Markov chain.16 Particularly, we assume that the endowment shares are symmetric
  14
     We leave for future or ongoing research two other motives for trading that are obviously present in the
real world, such as the sharing of risk between two investors of di¤ering risk aversions and the speculative
motive arising from informed trading, private signals, or di¤erences of opinion.
  15
     External habit is introduced solely for the purpose of being able to illustrate the e¤ects of trading fees
in the presence of a realistic behavior of stock prices (equity premium, return volatility, etc.).
  16
     One can demonstrate a property of scale invariance that is valid without and with trading fees: All the
nodes of a given point in time, which di¤er only by their value of the aggregate output, are isomorphic to
each other. In this way, we do not need to perform a new set of calculations for each and every node of a



                                                      9
and persistent and set the parameters of the Markov chain in such a way that the traders’
endowments match empirical labor income dynamics. Accordingly, each trader faces Kt+1 =
2 2 = 4 states of nature for the immediate future: positive vs. negative growth in aggregate
output and a high vs. a low share of aggregate endowment. With only two securities, the
…nancial market is incomplete and traders must trade in response to the endowment shocks
they receive.
    We solve the economy recursively, increasing the horizon until such point at which it no
longer changes the behavior of the equilibrium. We then simulate the equilibrium quantities
on 500; 000 paths for 300 periods, after which the frequency distribution of the endogenous
state variable(s) is invariant. More details are provided in Appendix A.3.


2     Equilibrium in the Absence of Trading Fees
In a …rst step, we analyze the equilibrium in the absence of trading fees. This case can
be obtained from the general model, described in Section 1, by setting "i;t and i;t to zero
for all securities i and all dates t. This will allow us to illustrate the trading behavior in a
frictionless setting and can be used to contrast the results for the case with trading fees.


2.1     Optimization Problem and Equilibrium
In order to derive an equilibrium for the economy without trading fees, we begin by stating
each trader’s budget constraint and optimization problem under a given stock price process.
Given initial holdings l; 1;i = l;i , each trader chooses consumption fcl;t g and holdings of the
securities f l;t;i g, so as to maximize his expected utility, given in (1), subject to a sequence
of ‡ow-of-funds budget constraints for t = 0; ::; T :

                                X
                                I                                              X
                                                                               I
                       cl;t +         (   l;t;i   l;t 1;i )    St;i = el;t +         l;t 1;i t;i :   (2)
                                i=1                                            i=1


   Each trader will try to use the available assets to smooth his consumption across time
and states. Particularly, in reaction to a realized endowment that exceeds the amount that a
trader has hedged previously, he will consume more but also save by means of the available
given point in time. We prove this property in the Internet Appendix.


                                                              10
securities. The amount allocated to consumption and each of the securities is determined
endogenously.
    An equilibrium is de…ned as a process for the allocation of consumption fcl;t g of both
traders, a process for portfolio choices f l;t;i g of both traders, and a process for securities
prices fSt;i g such that the supremum of (1) subject to the budget set is reached for all l, i
and t; and the market-clearing conditions are satis…ed with probability 1 at all times:
                         X
                                 l;t;i   =   i;    i = 1; :::; I; t = 0; :::; T       1:    (3)
                         l=1;2


2.2    Asset Pricing
Equilibrium asset prices St;i in the economy without trading fees can be easily derived from
the individual trader’s …rst-order conditions with respect to consumption and holdings

                                                  l;t+1
                             St;i = Et                         t+1;i   + St+1;i   ;         (4)
                                                   l;t


where l;t denotes the Lagrange multiplier associated with time-t budget constraint (2) and
is, in equilibrium, equal to marginal utility of consumption. That is, the price of security i
is simply given by the time-t value of the security’s future dividends t+1;i and future price
St+1;i , discounted using a trader’s stochastic discount factor l;t+1 = l;t .
     Because …nancial markets are incomplete, the individual traders’ stochastic discount
factors will not be equated. Also, the traders’individual consumption growth rates are not
perfectly correlated.


2.3    Numerical Illustration
To be more speci…c, we now focus on the numerical illustration, introduced in Section 1.4.
Table 1 reports, conditional on a high or low realized endowment share for Trader 1, the
endowment and dividend income received by the trader as well as his endogenous consump-
tion and security trading decisions. When the trader receives a high endowment share, he
has, in total, 0:6153 units of the consumption good available, from which he allocates 0:5282
units to consumption and 0:0870 units to savings. The case of a low endowment share is



                                                          11
                                           High endow. share Low endow. share
       Endowment (exogenous)                     0:5313            0:3188
       Dividend                                  0:0840            0:0660
       Consumption                               0:5282            0:4718
       Change in stock holdings                 +0:1046             0:1046
       Change in bond holdings                    0:0176          +0:0176
       Prob. of increase in stock holdings       100%                0%
       Prob. of increase in bond holdings       33:84%:           66:16%

Table 1: Trades in the absence of trading fees. The table reports the consumption and
investment decisions of Trader 1, conditional on his realized endowment share. In particular, it
shows the size of the trader’s endowment and dividend income, his consumption choice as well as
the (dollar) values of his securities trades (number of shares price) –all normalized by aggregate
output. The last two rows show the probability of an increase in the stock’s and bond’s holdings.
The table is based on the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4 and averages are computed
across 500,000 simulation paths.


symmetric, with an available income of 0:3848 units, a consumption of 0:4718 units, and a
disinvestment of 0:0870 units to enhance consumption.
    The di¤erence in the amount consumed between the two states is a re‡ection of the
degree of consumption smoothing that the trader has been able to achieve. Most apparent,
however, is the simple trading pattern in the stock market: the trader always (with probability
1) increases his stock holdings if he receives a high share of aggregate endowment, i.e., he
buys additional shares of the stock. Knowing that his endowment shock is persistent – a
positive shock today announces further positive shocks in the future –he borrows (more often
than not) a modest amount through the bond in order to buy even more stock. Symmetric
trading decisions can be observed for the case of a low share of aggregate endowment.
    This simple trading pattern is also illustrated in Figure 2 on page 22 which shows a single
sample path of the economy. It is apparent from the black, dashed line in Panel (a) that for
all periods in which Trader 1 receives a high share of aggregate endowment (highlighted by
shaded grey), he increases his investment in the stock – here shown in terms of number of
shares. The corresponding trading decisions for the bond are depicted in Panel (c).17
  17
    An increase (decrease) in the number of shares of the bond, as shown in Panel (c) of Figure 2, is not
(always) equivalent to an increase (decrease) in the dollar bond holdings. Particularly, due to the short-term
nature of the bond, the change in bond holdings is given by l;t;1 St;1       l;t 1;1 .




                                                     12
3      Equilibrium with Trading Fees
We now turn to the dynamic properties of equilibrium in the presence of trading fees. This
allows us to study how trading fees a¤ect traders’consumption and trading decisions as well
as equilibrium asset prices and returns.


3.1         Optimization Problem and Equilibrium
We begin by stating each trader’s budget constraint and optimization problem under a given
stock price process. As in the case of no trading fees, each trader chooses consumption fcl;t g
and holdings of the securities f l;t;i g, so as to maximize his expected utility (1). The only
di¤erence is that this optimization is subject to a sequence of ‡ow-of-funds budget constraints
for t = 0; ::; T that now take into account the fact that transactions entail trading fees:

                                           X
                                           I
                                cl;t +           max [0;       l;t;i          l;t 1;i ]         St;i   (1 +         i;t ) +
                                           i=1
                  X
                  I                                                                                       X
                                                                                                          I
                        min [0;    l;t;i         l;t 1;i ]     St;i       (1         "i;t ) = el;t +                l;t 1;i t;i   +    l;t ;          (5)
                  i=1                                                                                     i=1


where the three terms on the left-hand side re‡ect consumption, net cost of purchases, and
net cost of sales of securities (i.e., proceeds of sales with a negative sign), and the three
terms on the right-hand side re‡ect endowment and dividend income as well as the transfer
received from the central pot, l;t , which is given by

                XX
                 I                                                                    X
                                                                                      I

      l;t   ,                max [0;   l0 ;t;i       l0 ;t 1;i ]       St;i    i;t              min [0;   l0 ;t;i        l0 ;t 1;i ]    St;i "i;t :   (6)
                l0 6=l i=1                                                                i=1


   A change of notation reformulates the problem in the form of an optimization under
inequality constraints, which is more suitable for mathematical programming. That is, writing
the purchases max [0; l;t;i      l;t 1;i ] and sales min [0; l;t;i     l;t 1;i ] (a negative number) of

securities as
                                          l;t 1;i , max [0; l;t;i
                             ^l;t;i                                l;t 1;i ]




                                                                          13
and
                                                 l;t;i           l;t 1;i      , min [0;           l;t;i         l;t 1;i ] ;


the time-t recursive dynamic-programming formulation of the trader’s problem is18
                                                                                                                n                                  o
 Jl;t (f   l;t 1;i g ;    ; el;t ) =             sup                 ul (cl;t ; ; t) + Et Jl;t+1                 ^l;t;i +     l;t;i      l;t 1;i       ; ; el;t+1 ;
                                       cl;t ;f^l;t;i ;   l;t;i   g
                                                                                                                                                                   (7)
subject to the budget constraint (5), for time t only, and to the inequality conditions:

                 X
                 I                                                                                X
                                                                                                  I
        cl;t +             ^l;t;i       l;t 1;i            St;i          (1 +         i;t )   +              l;t;i      l;t 1;i        St;i    (1        "i;t )
                 i=1                                                                              i=1
                                                                              X
                                                                              I
                                                          = el;t +                     l;t 1;i t;i      +     l;t ;                                                (8)
                                                                              i=1

                                                                      l;t;i         l;t 1;i
                                                                                                  ^l;t;i :                                                         (9)

    Under standard concavity assumptions on utility functions, the maximization of (7) sub-
ject to (8) and (9) is a convex problem. First-order conditions of optimality (including ter-
minal conditions l;T;i = 0) are necessary and su¢ cient for the optimum to be reached. In
Appendix B we derive the system of …rst-order conditions (which is system (10) to (16)
below with = 0). To obtain an equilibrium, one then usually combines the …rst-order con-
ditions of both traders with the market-clearing conditions, and solves the resulting equation
system. Here, for reasons explained below, we de…ne a sequence of -equilibria.

De…nition 1 An -equilibrium is de…ned as a process      n for theoallocation of consumption
fcl;t g of both traders, a process for trading decisions ^l;t;i ; l;t;i of both traders, a process
for posted securities prices fSt;i g, state prices  l;t , and shadow prices fRl;t;i g that solve
the following system of equations for all l, i, and t:

                                                                       u0l (cl;t ; ; t) =           l;t                                                           (10)
                X
                I                                    X
                                                     I
       el;t +            l;t 1;i t;i      cl;t                       ^l;t;i +       l;t;i     2           l;t 1;i        Rl;t;i       St;i +         =0           (11)
                                                                                                                                               l;t
                i=1                                  i=1
  18
   The value function Jl (f l;t 1;i g ; ; el;t ; t) refers explicitly only to Trader l’s individual state variables.
The complete set of state variables actually used in the backward induction is chosen below.

                                                                                      14
            X
            Kt

                   t;t+1;j   l;t+1;j    (   t+1;i;j   + Rl;t+1;i;j                St+1;i;j ) =       l;t   Rl;t;i   St;i     (12)
             j=1

                                              l;t;i           l;t 1;i
                                                                             ^l;t;i                                          (13)
                                        1     "i;t        Rl;t;i          1+          i;t ;                                  (14)
                             ( Rl;t;i + 1 +           i;t )
                                                                    ^l;t;i          l;t 1;i      =                           (15)

                              (Rl;t;i   (1       "i;t ))                l;t 1;i          l;t;i   =                           (16)

while the market-clearing conditions (3) are also satis…ed with probability 1.

De…nition 2 An equilibrium is the limit (if it exists) of an -equilibrium as                                          ! 0.

    In the equation system described by (10) to (16) and (3), the unknown variables Rl;t;i
(de…ned in Appendix B) represent the shadow price of a “paper security” valued at the
posted price, in units of consumption. Whenever Trader l’s inventory of security i is large
(small) at time t, the value of Rl;t;i is smaller (greater) than 1. In particular, when the
shadow price of a trader reaches the value of one plus the cost of buying, the trader buys,
and when the shadow price reaches the value of one minus the cost of selling, he sells. The
exact opposite happens for the other trader.
    For = 0, the last two equations (15) and (16) are the familiar complementary-slackness
conditions of Karush, Kuhn and Tucker (KKT). In contrast, in an -equilibrium with …nite,
the complementary slackness conditions have been relaxed and traders are conducting a
suboptimal policy. In de…ning equilibrium in our economy, we found it necessary to introduce
the limit of a sequence of -equilibria because, literally speaking, at = 0, the posted
prices fSt;i g and the shadow prices fRl;t;i g, at times other than transaction times, become
indeterminate.19 We illustrate that point by means of Figure 1.
    The …gure shows the traders’ demands for the stock, aggregate demand for the stock,
and the traders’ demands for the bond, plotted against the posted price of the stock (on
the horizontal axis), for a small, positive but …nite value of and for trading fees of 0:5%
  19
    We thank a referee for this remark. Their product remains determinate as equations (12) and (17) below
make clear. We should still stress that at equilibrium, the consumption allocation – at time t and t + 1 –
and the securities demands are constant over the no-trade region, irrespective of the posted price, so that
we can regard the equilibrium allocations that we have reached as being fully determinate.



                                                               15
                  (a) Stock Demand - 0.5% Fees                              (b) Stock Demand - 3.0% Fees
     0.8

                                                                0.6
     0.6

                                                                0.5
     0.4
                                                                0.4
        3.45        3.5    3.55    3.6    3.65                        3.4      3.5      3.6      3.7    3.8
                       Posted Stock Price                                        Posted Stock Price
              (c) Agg. Stock Demand - 0.5% Fees                         (d) Agg. Stock Demand - 3.0% Fees

     1.4
                                                               1.01
     1.2
                                                                 1
       1
                                                               0.99
     0.8
                                                               0.98
           3.45     3.5     3.55    3.6    3.65                             3.58         3.6        3.62
                        Posted Stock Price                                         Posted Stock Price
                  (e) Bond Demand - 0.5% Fees                               (f ) Bond Demand - 3.0% Fees
      0.5
                                                                0.2

       0                                                         0

                                                               -0.2
     -0.5
                                                               -0.4

           3.45     3.5       3.55    3.6    3.65                     3.4        3.5      3.6      3.7     3.8
                          Posted Stock Price                                       Posted Stock Price
                                                    Trader 1          Trader 2


Figure 1: Securities demand curves. The …gure shows the traders’ demands for the stock,
aggregate demand for the stock, and the traders’demands for the bond, plotted against the posted
price of the stock (on the horizontal axis). The …gure is drawn conditional on a high realized
endowment shock for Trader 1, a small, positive but …nite, value of and for tradings fees of 0.5%
and 3.0%. Note that in Panel (d), the scale of the x-axis is magni…ed to better show the intersection
point. The no-trade regions of the two traders are indicated by double-headed arrows. The …gure
is based on the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4.




                                                          16
and 3:0%.20 In particular, as illustrated in Panels (a) and (b), both traders’ demands for
the stock exhibit some ‡at regions (highlighted by double-headed arrows) in which it would
be optimal not to trade. For low trading fees (0:5%) the traders’ no-trade regions do not
overlap, so that aggregate stock demand uniquely determines the equilibrium (transaction)
price (cf. Panel (c)). In contrast, for high trading fees (3:0%) there exists a joint no-trade
zone. For = 0, this implies that the aggregate demand curve has a ‡at part over the domain
of the joint no-trade region, thus leaving the posted stock price indeterminate. However, just
before the limit, the aggregate-demand curve intersects the supply at a single point, which
is the equilibrium posted price (highlighted by a red circle in the magni…ed graph in Panel
(d)). Panels (e) and (f) show the demand for the bond, which is ‡at over the same region
as the stock demand. The same holds for consumption (not shown).
    Also, in the equation system described by (10) to (16) and (3), the unknown variables l;t
are the customary state prices for the state prevailing at time t. They are speci…c to Trader
l in part because the market is incomplete and in part because of the presence of trading
fees. They are, of course, di¤erent from the state prices l;t that prevailed in the frictionless
economy. Since state prices are also marginal utilities of consumption, it follows that the
same statements can be made about individual consumption behavior.
Remark 1 Because aggregate output (consumption) volatility is exogenously given, the prob-
ability distribution of aggregate consumption is, of course, una¤ected by trading fees. But the
conditional joint distribution of the individual consumptions of the two traders re‡ects as-
set holdings, which are very much a¤ected because trading fees create impediments to trade.
That is, in the presence of trading fees, traders smooth their consumption across states less
e¤ectively than they do in the frictionless economy. In other words, traders face a trade-o¤
between the goal of smoothing consumption and the goal of smoothing holdings, with the latter
being due to the desire to reduce trading fees. This will lead to an increase in the individual
trader’s consumption growth volatility. Since aggregate consumption volatility is unchanged,
the increased individual consumption volatility must be matched with a reduced correlation
of individual consumptions. The illustration of Section 4 will further discuss these e¤ects
(quantitatively).
  20
    These are demand curves drawn at time t for two traders who assume prices and wealth at time t + 1
which are those of equilibrium. When solving for equilibrium we do not make use of demand curves; instead
we solve the system of equations characterizing equilibrium (see Section 3.3 and Appendix E). Demand
curves are used in Figure 1 for illustrative purposes and to discuss the point at hand.

                                                   17
3.2     Asset Pricing: Two Comparisons
Equilibrium asset prices in the economy with trading fees can be derived from the traders’
…rst-order conditions. In particular, it follows directly from the “kernel condition”(12) that
the securities’posted prices St;i are given by:

                               1       l;t+1
                  St;i = Et                        (     t+1;i   + Rl;t+1;i      St+1;i ) ; ST;i = 0;   (17)
                              Rl;t;i    l;t


where the shadow prices Rl;t;i and Rl;t+1;i , which are bounded between 1 "i;t and 1 + i;t ,
capture the e¤ect of current and anticipated future trading fees, respectively.
    The dual variables Rl;t+1;i , in addition to the intertemporal marginal rates of substitution
 l;t+1 , drive the prices of assets that are subject to trading fees, as do, in the “LAPM” of
Holmström and Tirole (2001), the shadow prices of the liquidity constraints.21 In e¤ect,
there are two distinct pricing kernels: one, l;t+1 , applies to the time-t + 1 payo¤s paid in
consumption units, the other, l;t+1 Rl;t+1;i , applies to the time-t + 1 posted price.
    We now present two comparisons. First, we compare equilibrium posted prices, St;i , to
the private valuation S^l;t;i , de…ned as the present value of dividends on security i calculated
at Trader l’s equilibrium state prices as they are under trading fees:

De…nition 3
                        S^l;t;i , Et
                                        l;t+1
                                                           t+1;i   + S^l;t+1;i    ; S^l;T;i = 0:
                                          l;t

    In Appendix C, we show that, by induction, the present value of all future payouts,
discounted using the “normal”pricing kernel only, gives the private valuation Rl;t;i St;i

Proposition 1
                                                Rl;t;i      St;i = S^l;t;i :                            (18)

    This means that the posted prices can at most di¤er from the private valuation of their
dividends by the amount of the potential one-way trading fee at the current date only.22 The
  21
     Holmström and Tirole (2001) make assumptions such that their liquidity constraint is always binding.
Here, the inequality constraints (9) bind whenever it is optimal for them to do so.
  22
     Our proposition makes the statement of Vayanos (1998) more precise, who writes (page 26): “Second,
the e¤ect of transaction costs is smaller than the present value of transaction costs incurred by a sequence
of marginal investors.” Emphasis added.

                                                             18
posted price is, in fact, some form of average of the two private valuations.23
    Second, we compare equilibrium securities prices that prevail in the presence of trading
fees to those that would prevail in a frictionless economy, that is, to prices based on state
prices that would obtain under zero trading fees, as de…ned in (4). Denoting all quantities
in the zero-trading fees economy with an asterisk , we show in Appendix D the following
proposition:

Proposition 2
                                       "                                                                         #
                                           X
                                           T
                                                  l;         1             l;            l;
           Rl;t;i   St;i = St;i + Et                                                              ;i   +S   ;i       :   (19)
                                           =t+1        l;t            l;        1   l;        1


    That is, the two asset prices, St;i and St;i , di¤er by two components: (i) the current
shadow price Rl;t;i ; acting as a factor, of which we know that it is at most as big as the
one-way trading fees; (ii) the present value of all future price di¤erences arising from the
di¤erences in state prices l; = l; 1      l; = l; 1 .
    The di¤erences in consumption schemes pointed out in Remark 1 in‡uence the future
state prices and explain the di¤erences in prices, so that the following is proposed:

Proposition 3 The reason for any e¤ect of anticipated trading fees on prices is that traders
do not hold the optimal, frictionless portfolios and, therefore, also have consumption schemes
that di¤er from those that would prevail in the absence of trading fees.

    Particularly, the increased volatility of individual consumption plays a role in setting the
price because of the marginal utilities, and the reduced correlation of individual consumption
also plays a role via the term    l;       ;i + S ;i . Indeed, as the payo¤ is a fraction of total

output and whatever part of total output one group of traders is not consuming because of
trading fees, the other group is consuming, trading fees a¤ect the correlation between          l;
and     ;i + S ;i .

    Proposition 3 is in marked contrast with the proposition stated by Amihud and Mendelson
(1986a),24 who attribute the e¤ect of trading fees on a securities price to the future-fee cash
  23
     Below we introduce private bid and ask prices that are based on the two traders’private valuations, and
we claim that the posted price is extremely close to the bid-ask midpoint.
  24
     See also Vayanos and Vila (1999, page 519, equation (5.12)).


                                                                 19
expense itself. The di¤erence between their proposition and ours is ascribed to the fact
that these authors exogenously force investors to trade, whereas in our setting traders trade
optimally. The di¤erence is not to be ascribed to our assumption that the fees are refunded.
If the fees had been a deadweight loss, the e¤ect of that expense would still have been felt
on consumption only. It would not have appeared directly in the present-value formula in
the form of altered future cash ‡ows on the security being priced, and Proposition 2 would
have been equally valid.25


3.3     Solution Algorithm
The method used to obtain an equilibrium blends in an original fashion a shift of equations
that has been proposed by Dumas and Lyaso¤ (2012) to facilitate backward induction with
the Interior-Point algorithm, which is an optimization technique based on Karush-Kuhn-
Tucker …rst-order conditions for optimization under non-negativity constraints.
    The “time-shift” of Dumas and Lyaso¤ (2012) implies shifting all …rst-order conditions,
except the kernel and market clearing conditions, forward in time and letting traders at time
t plan their time-t + 1 consumption but choose their time-t portfolio (which will, in turn,
…nance the time-t + 1 consumption).
    The Interior-Point algorithm amounts to replacing the above equation system (consisting
of equations (10) to (16) and (3)) by a sequence of equation systems in each of which the
complementary-slackness conditions are relaxed.26 This corresponds closely to our de…nition
of the -equilibria. In one very convenient implementation, Armand et al. (2008) show a
way to add to the system a single equation that drives toward zero progressively with each
Newton step of the solver. More details are provided in Appendix E.
  25
    See footnote 9.
  26
    Parenthetically, the Interior-Point method should be of great interest to microeconomists who study
choice problems with inequality constraints. That is, the comparative statics of the solution can be obtained
by total di¤erentiation of the …rst-order conditions, for a given value of , in the same way as is done
in Microeconomics textbooks to derive Slutzky’s equation. In cases in which limits can be interchanged,
these comparative-statics properties are close to those that would obtain in the original system of …rst-
order conditions with = 0. Our approach is more closely connected to microeconomic theory than other
optimization techniques, such as steepest-ascent. This remark was made by Dimitri Vayanos in a private
conversation.




                                                     20
4     Simulation Results
To further describe the equilibrium in the presence of trading fees, we now come back to the
numerical illustration introduced in Section 1.4.


4.1    Dynamics in Equilibrium
First, we describe the mechanics over time of the equilibrium we found and the transactions
that take place. Particularly, in the presence of trading fees, a key concept is that of a “no-
trade zone,” which is the area of the state space where both traders prefer not to adjust
their portfolios.
    Figure 2 displays a simulated sample path that illustrates how our …nancial market
with trading fees operates over time, with periods of a high endowment share for Trader 1
highlighted by shaded grey, and transaction dates highlighted by a red circle. Speci…cally,
Panels (a) and (b) show a sample path of: (i) the stock holdings (expressed as a fraction of
the security’s supply, not as a dollar value) as they would be in a zero-trading fee economy;
(ii) the actual stock-holdings with a 3% trading fee; and (iii) the boundaries of the optimal
no-trade zone. Note that the boundaries of the no-trade zone ‡uctuate in tango with the
optimal frictionless holdings, except that they allow a tunnel of deviations on each side.
Within that tunnel, the traders’ logic is apparent: the actual holdings move up or down
whenever they are pushed up or down by the movement of the boundaries, with a view to
reduce the amount of trading fees paid and making sure that there occur as few wasteful
round trips as possible, leading to a trade-o¤ between the desire to smooth consumption and
the desire to smooth holdings. Panel (a) viewed in parallel with Panel (b) illustrates how the
two traders are wonderfully synchronized by the algorithm; they are made to trade exactly
opposite amounts exactly at the same time.
    The …gure also illustrates the degree to which capital is slow-moving, an issue we return
to in Section 5.3 That is, the optimal stock holdings in the presence of trading fees are a
delayed version of the frictionless holdings, but with the length of the delay being stochastic.
To the opposite, as shown in Panels (c) and (d), holdings of the riskless bond, which is
assumed not to entail trading fees, ‡uctuate more than they would in a frictionless economy.
Speci…cally, when traders receive their endowments, they use the cost-free, riskless bond as
a holding tank and trade it much more than they would if the stock were also cost-free.

                                              21
              (a) Stock Holdings Trader 1                       (b) Stock Holdings Trader 2

     1                                                 0.4



   0.8                                                 0.2


   0.6                                                  0

     280       285        290         295    300         280     285      290          295       300
                          Time                                           Time
                                   No Fees         3% Fees        Boundaries
              (c) Bond Holdings Trader 1                        (d) Bond Holdings Trader 2

      0                                                20


    -10                                                10


    -20                                                 0

      280       285         290       295    300         280     285         290       295       300
                           Time                                              Time
                      (e) Stock Price                            (f) Relative Bid/Ask Prices
   450         Transaction Price                       6%
               Posted Price                            3%
   400
                                                       0%
   350
                                                      -3%
   300
                                                      -6%
   250                                                           Bid T rader 1        Ask T rader 1
                                                                 Bid T rader 2        Ask T rader 2
      280       285       290         295    300         280     285        290        295       300
                          Time                                              Time

Figure 2: A sample path. Panels (a) and (b) show a sample path of: (i) the stock holdings as
they would be in a zero-trading fee economy; (ii) the actual stock-holdings with a 3% trading fee;
and (iii) the boundaries of the no-trade zone. Panels (c) and (d) show the holdings of the riskless
security. Panel (e) shows the behavior of the stock price, and Panel (f) displays the bid and ask
prices of both traders, computed as a percentage di¤erence from the posted price. In all panels,
periods during which Trader 1 receives a high endowment share are highlighted in shaded grey, and
transaction dates are highlighted by a red circle. The …gure is based on the numerical illustration
described in Section 1.4.                        22
    Panel (e) shows the stock’s posted price. While the posted price forms a stochastic
process with realizations at each point in time, transactions prices materialize as a “marked
point process” with realizations at random times only.27 The simultaneous observation of
Panels (a), (b), and (e) shows the way in which the algorithm has synchronized the trades
of the two traders. After an extension to more traders, the properties of this process could
be confronted empirically with those of illiquid-market prices.
    Even though ours is a Walrasian market and neither a limit-order nor a dealer market,
one can de…ne a virtual concept of bid and ask prices. In De…nition 3, we de…ned the traders’
private valuations of dividends. The bid price of a trader can then be de…ned as being equal
to the trader’s private valuation of dividends divided by one plus the trading fee to be paid
in case the person buys. Similarly, the ask price is de…ned as the trader’s private valuation
divided by one minus the sell fee. When the two private valuations di¤er by the sum of the
one-way trading fees for the two traders, a transaction takes place. Equivalently, a trade
occurs when the bid price of one trader is equal to the ask price of the other trader. That
mechanism is displayed in Panel (f). De…ning the e¤ective spread as the di¤erence between
the higher of two bid prices and the lower of the two ask prices, one could also say that a
transaction takes place when the e¤ective spread becomes equal to zero.
    The posted price can thus be interpreted as some form of average of the two private
valuations, or some form of average of the higher bid and the lower ask price (cf. Proposition
1). We have veri…ed quantitatively that the posted price di¤ers very little from the bid-
ask midpoint. As far as levels are concerned, the mean absolute di¤erence between the
posted price and the bid-ask midpoint divided by the e¤ective spread is equal to 0:62bp,
1:03bp, and 1:52bp for the three cases of 1%, 2%, and 3% trading fees, respectively. Also
the mean absolute di¤erence between the rates of return on the posted price and the bid-ask
midpoint are 0:00bp, 0:01bp, and 0:04bp, respectively.28 Hence the empirical counterpart of
  27
    For an application to the bond market of this type of process, see Björk et al. (1997).
  28
    We have also varied the degree of symmetry between the two traders in terms of risk aversion, endowment
shares, and endowment persistence. None of these invalidated the quasi-equality between the posted price
and the bid-ask midpoint. One might surmise that an asymmetry in trading fees would invalidate it. We
have, therefore, also computed a setting with asymmetric trading fees. In it, Trader 1 pays fees of 3% and
Trader 2 pays fees of 1%. A comparison of that setting with a setting in which both traders pay 2% trading
fees reveals that the level di¤erence between posted price and bid-ask midpoint is a bit bigger, but the
di¤erences in expected returns, return volatility, Sharpe ratio, and other return statistics computed on the
posted price and on the midpoint are completely negligible.



                                                    23
any statement we make below regarding the behavior of the posted price or rates of returns
on it is a testable statement involving the bid-ask midpoint, viewed as a very close proxy.
    The …gure also illustrates that after transitioning to a high endowment state, Trader
1 may at …rst not buy the stock, buying the bond instead and only buys the stock if the
high endowment persists. This happens when his prior holding is already high. Instead, he
may buy the stock right away if his prior holding is less high. To generalize the intuition
provided by a single path and to give a systematic, probabilistic representation of the pattern
of trading, we depict, in Figure 3, the transition probabilities for the “shadow price ratio”
R1 = (R1 + R2 ) of the stock for the case in which Trader 1 is currently in his high endowment
state.29 A shadow price ratio of 1:03 means that Trader 1 buys shares of the stock, and a
ratio of 0:97 means that he sells. The …gure shows the probability of a value of that ratio at
time t + 1 conditional on a value of it at time t.30
    For any value of the shadow price ratio at time t; the …gure makes clear that the prob-
ability of a mid-level value of the ratio occurring at t + 1 is equal to zero or nearly so.
This is the result of the trading fee being proportional: when a trader needs to trade in
one direction, he trades as little as possible, knowing that he can trade repeatedly the next
few times at no greater cost than he would have incurred if he had traded in a lump. The
ratio, therefore, transitions to either a high value of the shadow price ratio near the buy
boundary (left-hand ridge in the diagram) if Trader 1 remains in the high-endowment state,
or it transitions directly to a very low value of the ratio at the sell boundary (right-hand
ridge) if his endowment shifts to the low level.31 The smaller ridge close to the large one on
the left-hand side results from the combination of a high consumption share of Trader 1 at
time t coupled with a negative output shock at t+1. Because of the high consumption share,
the trader holds a large fraction of wealth in the stock, so that the negative output (and,
therefore, dividend) shock implies a negative wealth shock and, accordingly, he is less willing
to buy more of the stock. In summary, it follows that the equilibrium system is most of the
time near a trading boundary, or, equivalently, that the steady-state probability distribution
of the shadow price ratio is U-shaped.
  29
     The …gure for the low endowment state is symmetric, i.e., one just needs to switch the “roles” of the
two traders in this …gure to arrive at the …gure for the low endowment share.
  30
     At both times, the probability is integrated over the remaining state variables: aggregate output shock
and consumption share. In those two dimensions, the probabilities shown are marginal probabilities.
  31
     Intuitively, for low time-t shadow price ratios, he does not always sell after a negative shock.



                                                    24
                0.15


                 0.1


                0.05


                   0
                0.97
             Sh




                      0.985
               ad
                 ow




                              1.00
                  Pr
                    ice




                                                                                                0.97
                                                                                    0.985
                       Ra




                                  1.015
                                                                        1.00
                         tio




                                                             1.015
                              -T




                                          1.03                                       Time t+1
                                                                           e Ratio -
                                im




                                                 1.03                 Pric
                                                                   ow
                                  e




                                                               Shad
                                  t




Figure 3: Transition probabilities of the shadow price ratio R1 = (R1 + R2 ) : The …gure
shows the probability of a value of the shadow price ratio at time t + 1 conditional on a value of it
at time t, with, at both times, the probability being integrated over the remaining state variables.
The …gure is based on the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4 and drawn for the case
in which Trader 1 is currently in his high endowment state. The trading fee is set at 3%. Thus, a
ratio of 1:03 means that Trader 1 buys, and a ratio of 0:97 means that he sells.


4.2     Average E¤ects of Trading Fees
We now display some summary statistics showing the average e¤ect of trading fees on the
equilibrium. Our …rst order of business is to illustrate the statements we have already made
in Remark 1 and in Propositions 1 and 2.

4.2.1   Consumption

As discussed in Remark 1, in the presence of trading fees, the traders face a trade-o¤ between
smoothing consumption and smoothing holdings, with the latter being due to the desire to
reduce trading fees. We now display the endogenous consumption choices of the two traders
for the numerical illustration.


                                                        25
                (a) Cons. Growth Volatility                      (b) Cons. Growth Correlation
                                                        0.18
   4.29%

                                                        0.16
   4.26%
                                                        0.14

   4.23%
                                                        0.12


   4.20%                                                0.10
       0%           1%         2%             3%           0%             1%         2%         3%
                     Trading Fees                                          Trading Fees
                                      (c) Equiv. No-Fees Initial Output
                            0.0%



                            -0.1%



                            -0.2%



                            -0.3%
                                 0%           1%         2%               3%
                                               Trading Fees


Figure 4: Optimal consumption behavior and welfare loss. Panels (a) to (c) show the
conditional consumption growth volatility, conditional consumption growth correlation and welfare
changes of the two traders for di¤erent levels of trading fees. Welfare is expressed in terms of an
equivalent permanent drop in output for the no-fee case. The …gure is based on the numerical
illustration described in Section 1.4 and averages are computed across 500,000 simulation paths.
All curves are bracketed by dotted lines showing the two-sigma con…dence intervals for the estimate
of the mean.




                                                   26
   Panel (a) of Figure 4, plots, against the rate of trading fees, the average conditional
volatility of individual consumption growth. Panel (b) plots their correlation.32 In summary,
we have the following proposition:

Proposition 4 Trading fees have the e¤ect of increasing the volatility of the consumption
of both traders and of reducing their correlation.33

   In Panel (c) of Figure 4, we also document the impact of trading fees on traders’welfare,
measured by the permanent drop in output in the frictionless economy that would lead to
the same welfare as in the economy with trading fees. In general, higher trading fees lead
to a reduction in the traders’ welfare. For example, the equilibrium with a trading fee of
3% is equivalent in terms of welfare to a 0:2% permanent drop in output for the frictionless
economy even though there is no loss of aggregate consumption (such as would occur in
the presence of deadweight costs). For comparison, Barro (2009) reports welfare gains, in
a model without habit formation, of 0:73% to 1:65% for eliminating all business cycle risk,
that is, an output volatility of zero.

4.2.2    Asset Prices

In Section, 3.2, we had derived analytical expressions that allow for a comparison between
securities prices with and without trading fees. In the following, we quantify the impact of
trading fees for our numerical illustration.
    In general, trading fees on the stock have two e¤ects. First, they increase the risk associ-
ated with holding the stock, because a trader might not be able to resell the security in the
next period, causing the traders to reduce their demand. This will lead to a price discount
for the stock that is subject to trading fees. It is a liquidity e¤ect. Second, fees increase
the traders’ consumption growth volatility, which will a¤ect the discount rate, and, thus,
all traded securities. In particular, the e¤ect of the increased volatility of consumption,
resulting from the trading fees, can be likened to the e¤ect of increased volatility result-
ing from more volatile endowment shocks in the absence of trading fees, which would be a
  32
     Recall that, even at level zero of trading fees, the market is incomplete. That is why the correlation of
consumption is never equal to 1.
  33
     While this proposition is fully in line with microeconomic theory, it is based on numerical experiments.




                                                     27
                          (a) Bond Price                                                  (b) Stock Price
       +0.6%                                                      +15%



       +0.4%                                                      +10%



       +0.2%                                                          +5%




            0%           1%          2%                     3%           0%              1%           2%    3%
                          Trading Fees                                                    Trading Fees
                                           Total Ef f ect              Prec. Sav ings Ef f ect


Figure 5: Asset prices. The solid lines in Panels (a) and (b) show the bond and stock price for
di¤erent levels of the trading fee, respectively. The dashed curve shows the prices for frictionless
economies with the same consumption growth volatility as for the case with trading fees. The
…gure is based on the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4 and averages are computed
across 500,000 simulation paths. All curves are bracketed by dotted lines showing the two-sigma
con…dence intervals for the estimate of the mean.

precautionary-savings e¤ect. It is well known that, with positive prudence, this e¤ect encour-
ages saving, brings down the rate of interest, and, all else equal, reduces the discount rate
and increases asset prices. The actual variation in the price will be determined endogenously
by the interaction of the two e¤ects.
    To illustrate the impact of the two e¤ects, Figure 5, Panels (a) and (b) show the bond
and stock prices for di¤erent levels of trading fees. Moreover, the dashed curves in the
…gure depict the prices that arise in a frictionless economy in which traders have the same
consumption growth volatility as in the corresponding economy with trading fees, thereby
capturing exclusively the precautionary savings e¤ect.34
    Panel (a) shows that for the bond, which is not subject to trading fees, the precautionary
savings e¤ect fully explains the change in price. Particularly, the bond price is increasing in
the trading fee on the stock, due to the lower discount rate. This makes sense intuitively,
as the liquidity e¤ect is not present for the bond. Interestingly, the price of the stock is also
  34
       This is achieved by slightly modifying the volatility of the endowment shocks.



                                                                 28
(slightly) increasing in the trading fee.35 As Panel (b) shows, the precautionary savings e¤ect
alone would lead to a strong increase in the price of the stock. In contrast, the liquidity e¤ect
leads to a price discount that counteracts and almost o¤sets the precautionary savings e¤ect.
Particularly, the downward di¤erence between the solid and the dashed curves is accounted
for by the drop in the correlation between individual consumptions, which implies a drop in
the correlation between the aggregate dividend and individual consumption.

Proposition 5 The greater consumption volatility that arises with trading fees drives pre-
cautionary savings higher. This lowers the interest rate, which tends to raise asset prices.
For securities subject to trading fees, this e¤ect is counteracted by the drop in the correlation
between dividends and individual consumption, which tends to reduce asset prices.

4.2.3    Trading Strategies

Next, we examine the changes in trading strategies induced by trading fees. Similar to the
discussion in Section 1.4, we focus on the …rst trader’s trading strategies in reaction to an
endowment shock. In particular, Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 6 depict the (dollar) change
in the stock holdings as well as in the bond holdings (the value of the bond purchased or
sold minus the redemption value of the bond having matured; see footnote 17), conditional
on the realized endowment share for Trader 1 and normalized by aggregate output.
    The intercepts of the curves, for zero trading fees, are identical to the numbers reported
in Table 1. For instance, in case of a high endowment share and no trading fees, Trader 1
invests 0:1046 units into the stock and borrows 0:0176 units through the bond. As trading
fees increase, the change in the stock holdings is gradually reduced (Panel (a)). The change in
the bond holdings, shown in Panel (b), is more striking. Whereas, at zero trading fees, when
receiving a high endowment, the trader borrows against future endowments for the purpose
of leveraging his investment into the stock; he gradually gives up this strategy when fees
are larger (approximately greater than 0:625%) and starts using the bond, on which there is
zero fee, as the primary investment vehicle, that is, the bond is used as a “substitute.”

Proposition 6 There exists a level of trading fees below which the bond, which can be traded
  35
    Vayanos (1998) has noted that prices can be increased by the presence of transactions costs. Gârleanu
(2009) draws a similar conclusion in a limited-trading context. However, in both of these papers, the rate of
interest is exogenous.


                                                     29
                  (a) Change in stock holdings                         (b) Change in bond holdings
                                                           0.04
         0.1

                                                           0.02
       0.05


          0                                                   0


       -0.05
                                                           -0.02

        -0.1
                                                           -0.04
           0%           1%         2%            3%            0%           1%         2%            3%
                         Trading Fees                                        Trading Fees
                                 High Endowment Share              Low Endowment Share


Figure 6: Trading strategies. Panels (a) and (b) depict the (dollar) change in the stock holdings
as well as in the bond holdings (the value of the bond purchased or sold minus the redemption
value of the bond having matured), conditional on the realized endowment share for Trader 1 and
normalized by aggregate output. The …gure is based on the numerical illustration described in
Section 1.4, and averages are computed across 500,000 simulation paths. Curves are bracketed by
dotted lines showing the two-sigma con…dence intervals for the estimate of the mean.


without fee, serves to enhance the investment into the stock, and above which it partially
replaces the investment into the stock as the means to optimize consumption over time.36

4.2.4      Rates of Return

The same pricing mechanism reported in Section 4.2.2, as it a¤ects rates of return, is illus-
trated in Figure 7. Particularly, the …gure depicts the e¤ect of trading fees on the return-
generating processes and, for comparison, the rates of return for economies with an increase
in endowment volatility that arti…cially mimics the consumption risk added by trading fees
(dashed line).
    As expected, the rate of interest is reduced due to the precautionary savings e¤ect,
matching the bond price result. In contrast, the expected stock return is basically left
unchanged by trading fees, while it would be reduced by the precautionary savings e¤ect by
 36
      This proposition is based on numerical experiments and is really a conjecture.



                                                      30
                     (a) Risk-free Rate                                  (b) Exp. Stock Return
                                                             10%
       2.3%



       2.0%                                                  9.5%



       1.7%
                                                             9.0%
          0%          1%          2%               3%           0%          1%          2%           3%
                       T rading Fees                                         T rading Fees
                                   T otal Effect              Prec. Savings Effect
                   (c) Equity Risk Prem ium                            (d) Stock Return Volatility
                                                        19.75%
       8.0%

                                                        19.70%
       7.7%

                                                        19.65%

       7.4%
          0%          1%          2%               3%           0%         1%          2%            3%
                       T rading Fees                                        T rading Fees
                                               (e) Sharpe Ratio
                              0.41




                              0.39




                              0.37
                                 0%            1%          2%              3%
                                                T rading Fees

Figure 7: Rates of Return. Panels (a) to (e) show the risk-free rate, the conditional expected
stock return, the conditional equity premium, the conditional volatility and the conditional Sharpe
ratio of equity, respectively, for di¤erent trading fees. The solid curves represent averages result-
ing from trading fees, and the dashed curves show the precautionary savings e¤ect created by
endowment shocks that would induce the same consumption volatility as do trading fees. The
…gure is based on the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4, and averages are computed
across 500,000 simulation paths. All curves are bracketed by dotted lines showing the two-sigma
con…dence intervals for the estimate of the mean.
                                                        31
exactly the same amount as the reduction of the rate of interest. The e¤ect on the equity
premium follows; it is increased quite markedly by trading fees. The volatility of stock returns
is increased somewhat by fees, in line with the empirical …ndings of Hau (2006) and, …nally,
the net e¤ect on the Sharpe ratio is an increase. As shown, these latter quantities would be
unchanged by an increase in endowment risk capturing the precautionary savings e¤ect.
    In the next section, we decompose the rates of return into premia and, returning to
dynamics, show how the premia behave over time.


5       Applications
We now develop three applications of our model. First, we study the pricing of liquidity
risk, particularly, the consumption-CAPM (CCAPM) that arises in the presence of trading
fees and endogenous trading. Second, we consider an extension to three traders. Third, we
study the reaction of asset prices to shocks in models with frictions.


5.1     The Pricing of Liquidity Risk
In the equilibrium with trading fees, the capital-asset pricing model is described by equation
(17). It is speci…c to each trader; we make no attempt at aggregation across traders.37 This
expression can be used to show how, in the presence of trading fees, various premia arise,
relative to the classic CCAPM.

5.1.1    Deviations from the classic Consumption-CAPM

De…ne the gross rate of return on asset i as

                                                             + St+1;i;j
                                      rt+1;i;j ,
                                                   t+1;i;j
                                                                        ;
                                                             St;i

and, for simplicity, assume that the …rst security, i = 1, is a risk-free bond that is not subject
to trading fees. Thus, rt+1;1 is conditionally riskless at time t. A CCAPM in the presence of
  37
     The CCAPM could be aggregated across traders, using weights of our choice. But, even in the absence of
frictions, aggregate consumption cannot become exactly the basis for pricing in discrete time. Traders being
symmetric, however, the behavior of their risk premia is symmetric around the center of the state space.



                                                    32
trading fees can then easily be derived from equation (17):
                                                                   !                                                              !
                                                       l;t+1                                                          l;t+1
 Et [rt+1;i ] = rt+1;1      covt       rt+1;i ;                        + Et [   l;t+1;i ] + covt     l;t+1;i ;                        ; (20)
                                                  Et       l;t+1                                                 Et       l;t+1


where    l;t+1;i   denotes the change in liquidity, de…ned as:

De…nition 4 (Liquidity change)

                                           (1      Rl;t+1;i )        St+1;i
                             l;t+1;i   ,                                         (1    Rl;t;i )    rt+1;1 :
                                                       St;i

    Note that 1 Rl;t+1;i is a shadow trading fee rate applying to asset i at time t + 1; from
the point of view of Trader l, so that (1 Rl;t+1;i ) St+1;i is a future shadow dollar amount
of the trading fee. Accordingly, ((1 Rl;t+1;i ) St+1;i )=St;i is the drag on the asset’s rate
of return, created by future trading, or the “dollar cost per dollar invested”in the words of
Acharya and Pedersen (2005).
    Although we refer to the key variables as “liquidity change,”notice that the level of the
liquidity variables R also play a role in the CCAPM deviation. Indeed, supposing it were
known that Rl;t+1;i;j = Rl;t;i 8j; then the CCAPM deviation would be equal to
                                       (                                                                         !)
                                                  St+1;i                              St+1;i        l;t+1
                   (1    Rl;t;i )          Et                      rt+1;1 + covt             ;                        ;
                                                   St;i                                St;i Et        l;t+1


which is still not equal to zero. Speci…cally, even if the shadow fee rate were known, a
stochastic dollar amount of the trading fee would still have to be charged when transacting
because the security price itself is uncertain.38
    The …rst part of equation (20) is exactly the CCAPM expression of a frictionless market,
that is, the risk-free rate minus the covariance between an asset’s return and the (normalized)
pricing kernel. The remainder captures a deviation from the CCAPM, which we can split
into two components:

  38
     Only if the liquidity variable tomorrow were …xed at the level 1 at both points in time, Rl;t+1;i;j =
Rl;t;i = 1; would the liquidity change be equal to zero.




                                                                     33
De…nition 5 (Components of CCAPM deviation)

                     Expected liquidity change , Et [         l;t+1;i ]                                (21)
                                                                                            !
                       Liquidity-risk premium , covt
                                                                                   l;t+1
                                                                  l;t+1;i ;                            (22)
                                                                              Et    l;t+1


    The deviation due to the expected liquidity change (21) captures the fact that security i is
potentially purchased or sold tomorrow minus current liquidity, (1 Rl;t;i ) rt+1;1 , capturing
that one dollar of the asset is potentially purchased or sold today against the riskless asset,
interest on the fee being included. The deviation in the form of the liquidity-risk premium
(22), in contrast, re‡ects the fact that the dollar fee to be paid upon potential resale is
uncertain.
    Equation (20) has given us a decomposition similar to that performed by Acharya and
Pedersen (2005). Here, however, the terms have received a formulation that is explicitly
related to the optimal decision of traders to trade or not to trade and all quantities have
explicit and endogenous dynamics.

5.1.2    Endogenous Liquidity-Risk Premia

With these deviations from the classic consumption-CAPM in mind, we can now study
endogenous liquidity-risk premia for the numerical illustration introduced in Section 1.4.
Speci…cally, Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 8 depict the total CCAPM deviation as well as the
two components separately, for di¤erent trading fees.
    As expected, the absolute CCAPM deviation is increasing in trading fees. Amihud and
Mendelson (1986a) explain that the total premium should be concave in the size of trading
fees. For that reason, Amihud and Mendelson (1986b) …t the cross section of equity portfolio
returns to the log of the bid-ask spread of the previous period and …nd a highly signi…cant
relationship. Our …gure does exhibit that concavity property.39 For trading fees of 3%, the
total deviation reaches about 60bp, which is less than the trading fees themselves, measured
as a percentage of the value of each trade. That deviation is too small to be able to account
for the several percentage points of returns that empirical researchers commonly attribute
  39
   See also Figure 3.1 in Amihud et al. (2005). Note, however, that the analogy is not perfect, as they
empirically display a cross-section of …rms a¤ected di¤erently by transactions costs and we display a single
premium for di¤erent levels of trading fees. But the underlying rationale is identical.

                                                    34
                  (a) CCAPM Deviation                                   (b) Components
     0.6%                                               0.6%


     0.4%                                               0.4%


     0.2%                                               0.2%


      0%                                                 0%
        0%          1%          2%            3%           0%           1%          2%   3%
                     Trading Fees                                        Trading Fees
                                 Exp. Liquidity Change          Liquidity Risk
                                        (c) Variance Decomposition
                           50%



                           30%



                           10%


                               0%            1%          2%             3%
                                              Trading Fees

Figure 8: CCAPM deviations. Panels (a) and (b) show the unconditional deviations from
the classic CCAPM and the two components of the deviation –the expected liquidity change and
liquidity risk, for di¤erent trading fees. Panel (c) shows the decomposition of the unconditional
variance (across paths) of the deviations from the conditional CCAPM. The …gure is based on
the numerical illustration described in Section 1.4 and 500,000 simulation paths. All curves are
bracketed by dotted lines showing the two-sigma con…dence intervals for the estimate of the mean.




                                                   35
to liquidity premia.40 But, it does illustrate the role played by trading frictions when we
try to explain empirical deviations from classic asset pricing models. In particular, Panel
(b) reveals that the unconditional average value of the CCAPM deviation is mostly due to
the liquidity-risk premium (as presupposed by Pástor and Stambaugh (2003)), while the
expected liquidity change is comparatively small, unconditionally speaking.41
    Panel (c) of Figure 8 shows, however, that the unconditional variance of the condition-
ally expected liquidity term is the larger one and is, therefore, mostly responsible for the
‡uctuations over time of the CCAPM deviations.42 Thus, it is an important bene…t of our
model, in which the liquidity variable is endogenized, that we can study the variation of each
of the terms over time.
    This theoretical contrast between the conditional and the unconditional pictures should
provide guidance for empirical researchers working on illiquid markets and trying to decide
which of the two terms is more important. Bongaerts, De Jong and Driessen (2016), for
instance, study the e¤ect of liquidity on corporate-bond expected returns and “…nd a strong
e¤ect of expected liquidity and equity market liquidity risk on expected corporate bond
returns, while there is little evidence that corporate bond liquidity risk exposures explain
expected corporate bond returns, even during the recent …nancial crisis.” Our model shows
that, here especially, empirical conclusions could vary a lot depending on conditioning.


5.2     Extension to Three Traders
It might be argued that deviations from the frictionless equilibrium will be reduced when
there are more traders in the market.43 That is, if one trader wants to trade, he is more likely
to …nd a counterparty to his trade when there are many traders. The comparative dynamics
of trades between economies with two and three traders can serve to cope with that issue.
This is the …rst reason for which we now study an extension to the case of three traders.
The second reason is that we would like to have an answer to a tantalizing question: will
  40
     Furthermore, the terms being of opposite signs for the two traders, their values would be even smaller
in any CCAPM that would be somehow aggregated across traders.
  41
     The term “unconditional mean” is used here for the …rst time. It has the same meaning as the term
“average (across paths)” that we have used so far. We alter the language slightly at this point in order to
conform with the distinction, which is traditional in the asset-pricing literature, between tests of the CCAPM
in its “unconditional” vs. its “conditional” form.
  42
     We are grateful to Luboš Pástor for suggesting this distinction to us.
  43
     We are thankful to one referee for doing just that.

                                                     36
most trades be bilateral trades –an order matching another –or will most be trilateral and
“centralized”?
    When extending the economy to three traders, we keep the exogenous process for ag-
gregate output unchanged and continue to assume that the three traders are symmetric.44
Because there are now three, rather than two, traders, individual endowments are no longer
perfectly negatively correlated. Instead, individual endowments have an idiosyncratic com-
ponent.45
    Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows that, for all levels of the trading fee (including zero fees),
trading volume for the stock is higher in the three-trader economy than in the two-trader
economy. Naturally, as the trading fees now impact a higher volume, each trader’s welfare
loss due to trading fees is actually increased when three symmetric traders are present (Panel
(b)). For example, while the two-trader equilibrium with a trading fee of 3% was equivalent
in terms of welfare to a 0:2% permanent drop in output for the frictionless economy, with
three traders it is equivalent to a drop of 0:35%. Intuitively, while with more traders in a
market, there are more people potentially ready to trade, there are also more people who
need to trade (for partially idiosyncratic reasons). In summary, although trading takes place
over a wider part of the state space, it is not true that the e¤ect of trading fees goes away
as one increases the number of traders, as long as it is increased in a way that preserves
symmetry between traders (with attendant rising idiosyncratic risk).46
    While it is true that each trader now faces two candidate trading counterparts, the
counterparts’endowments are now less correlated with his own than before. While the …rst
e¤ect increases the probability of stock trading, the second e¤ect reduces it. Panel (c) shows
that the …rst e¤ect dominates and, in line with the increased trading volume, the probability
of a trade in the stock market occurring increases with the introduction of a third trader.
Interestingly, Panel (d) shows that even though the probability of any trade occurring is
higher in the three-trader economy, the average time each trader waits for a trade in the
stock is increased when passing from two to three traders.
  44
     For more details, cf. Appendix A.2.
  45
     We emphasize at the outset that of all the two-trader, homogeneous-probability beliefs settings one could
have assumed, the one we have picked was such as to generate a low frequency of no trading, because the
endowment shocks of the two traders are perfectly negatively correlated.
  46
     It would be conceivable to take that experiment to the limit of an in…nite number of traders. However,
that would require a completely di¤erent kind of algorithm.



                                                     37
                 (a) Trading Volume                               (b) Equiv. No-Fees Initial Output
   0.09                                                 0.0%


                                                        -0.1%
   0.07

                                                        -0.2%
   0.05
                                                        -0.3%

   0.03                                                 -0.4%
      0%           1%          2%               3%           0%             1%         2%             3%
                    Trading Fees                                             Trading Fees
                                           2 Traders            3 Traders

                (c) Probability of Trade                                    (d) Waiting Time
       1
                                                          1.4


     0.9

                                                          1.2
     0.8



     0.7                                                    1
       0%          1%          2%               3%          0%              1%          2%            3%
                    Trading Fees                                             Trading Fees

Figure 9: Two- vs. three-trader economy. Panels (a) to (d) show the trading volume
for the stock, welfare changes, the probability of a trade in the stock market occurring and
the waiting time between stock trades, for two- vs. three-traders economies and di¤erent
trading fees. Welfare is expressed in terms of an equivalent permanent drop in output for the
corresponding no-fee economy. The …gure is based on the numerical illustrations described
in Appendix A, and averages are computed across 500; 000 simulation paths. All curves are
bracketed by dotted lines showing the two-sigma con…dence intervals for the estimate of the
mean.




                                                   38
          Minority Threshold (as % of            total trade volume       at path)
    Fee   0% 2:5% 5% 7:5% 10%                    12:5% 15% 17:5%           20% 22:5% 25%
    0:0% 0:00 0:00 0:00 0:01 0:04                 0:10 0:18 0:29           0:44 0:68 1:00
    0:5% 0:01 0:01 0:02 0:03 0:04                 0:08 0:14 0:25           0:40 0:64 1:00
    1; 0% 0:25 0:25 0:26 0:28 0:31                0:36 0:42 0:49           0:59 0:75 1:00
    2:0% 0:37 0:37 0:39 0:41 0:44                 0:47 0:51 0:56           0:63 0:74 1:00
    3:0% 0:43 0:43 0:45 0:48 0:51                 0:55 0:59 0:64           0:70 0:79 1:00

Table 2: Trade matching. The table shows the relative frequency of paths for which the minority
trade is below a given threshold, de…ned as a percentage of total volume at the simulated path –for
di¤erent levels of trading fee. The table is based on the numerical illustration with three symmetric
traders, as presented in Appendix A.2, and 500,000 simulated paths.


    These two observations can only be reconciled if, in the three-trader setting, a sizeable
fraction of trades in the stock market take place between two traders only –a bilateral trade.
Speci…cally, when three traders trade, the trade imbalance between the two largest traders
is balanced by the smallest one, which might be called the “minority trade.”Table 2 shows
the relative frequency for which the minority trade in the stock market is below a given
threshold, de…ned as a percentage of total stock volume at the simulated path –for di¤erent
levels of the trading fee. In particular, for a threshold of zero, it reports the frequency of
bilateral trades, in which the orders of two traders only match exactly. While for a fee level
of 1%, a quarter of the trades are purely bilateral, the frequency increases to 43% for trading
fees of 3%. After an extension to more than three traders, these numbers could be confronted
with the actual market-clearing data that are used in the empirical Microstructure literature.


5.3    Slow-Moving Investment Capital
Du¢ e (2010) gives numerous examples –with supporting empirical evidence –of situations
in which investment capital does not adjust immediately and rather seems to move slowly
toward pro…table trades. That is, when a shock occurs, the price of a security reacts …rst
before the quantities adjust. When they do, the price movement is reversed. Du¢ e’s exam-
ples include additions and deletions from the S&P 500 index, arrival of a new order in the
book, natural disasters impacting insurance markets, defaults a¤ecting CDS spreads, and
issuance of U.S. Treasury securities a¤ecting yields, as well as many other “price-pressure”



                                                 39
situations.47
    One may think of several approaches to the modelling of slow-moving capital. Du¢ e
himself o¤ers as an illustration a model in which the attention of traders is limited. In a
similar spirit, Du¢ e and coauthors (2002, 2007, 2012, 2014) assume that trading requires
the physical encounter of one trader with another and that searching for encounters is costly
or requires some time. In the Microstructure literature (which does not provide a general-
equilibrium model), imperfect, non-competitive intermediation or asymmetric information is
the reason for the slow movement of capital. Here, we o¤er a third, more basic microfoun-
dation for sluggish capital. That is, in our model, capital moves slowly simply because the
…nancial industry operates at a cost, which can be interpreted as a trading cost or fee. As
compared to limited attention, our theory has the advantage of simplicity and absence of
irrationality. It only makes use of a very basic, in fact, classic, economic principle, namely
that access to a service is not free.
    In Du¢ e (2010), in response to an aggregate supply shock, capital moves slowly because
some traders are inattentive at the time of the shock, so that a “thin subset of traders
[has] to absorb the shocks.”Only when the inattentive traders re-enter the market, the price
movement is reversed. He displays the e¤ect in the form of impulse-response functions for the
prices of securities.48 In the following, we evaluate similarly the equilibrium price response
to traders’endowment shocks and compare the price responses for the case of trading fees
and the case of stochastic inattention.
    In most published work, an impulse-response function is de…ned as the path followed by
an endogenous variable after an exogenous shock of arbitrary size occurs at a speci…c time,
followed by a complete absence of shocks. That is, after the shock, the exogenous variables
of the economy remain at the same level as they are directly after the shock. In essence,
the economy becomes deterministic. However, the probability of occurrence of that path is
  47
     See the discussion in Du¢ e (2010) and the references therein.
  48
     The theoretical literature on infrequent trading is burgeoning. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010)
calibrate a two-country model in which agents make infrequent portfolio decisions. Chien, Cole and Lustig
(2012) set up an equilibrium model in which a large mass of investors do not rebalance their portfolio shares
in response to aggregate shocks. Hendershott, Li, Menkveld, and Seasholes (2014) expand the Du¢ e (2010)
slow-moving capital model to analyze multiple groups of investors. Rachedi (2014), as Peress (2005) had done,
introduces an observation cost in a production economy with heterogeneous agents, incomplete markets, and
idiosyncratic risk. Bogousslavsky (2016) shows that inattention can explain return autocorrelation patterns
for intraday returns.



                                                     40
equal to zero. Therefore, it is not representative of what one would observe if the economy is
treated as an ongoing entity. A di¤erent de…nition of an impulse-response function is called
for, to re‡ect the concept of a shock occurring along the way. In Appendix F, we explain the
concept of an impulse-response function that is adapted to an economy with ongoing shocks.
Speci…cally, one has to compare two conditionally expected paths depending on the shock
at a given impulse time.
    To get as close to empirical work as possible, we seek to have available a transaction price
at all times. For that reason, we rely on our three-trader model. First, we consider the case
in which one of the three traders only (Trader 1) has to pay trading fees, while the other
two do not face trading fees. Then, we consider the case in which one of the traders (Trader
1) might become (stochastically) inattentive, while the other two are always free to trade.
In both settings, the traders 2 and 3 e¤ectively trade all the time, delivering a transaction
price.

5.3.1     Response to an Endowment Shock: the Case of Trading Fees

The impulse responses are shown in Figure 10 for the two alternative impulse response
functions. By way of benchmark, the price response in a frictionless market is also shown (as
the solid line) and is perfectly ‡at in both cases because the three traders are free to trade
and are able to stabilize the price. This is true irrespective of the fact that the endowment
impulse is followed by other shocks.
    In contrast, in the case of 2% trading fees, relative to the frictionless price, the stock
price is depressed by about 30 basis points when the fee-paying trader receives a positive
impulse. Intuitively, in the absence of a trading fee, he would have invested (at least) some of
his endowment income into the stock. Since he does so in a smaller amount in the presence
of trading fees, the average price is lower. Only over time, the price reverts back.
    Note that it is a common belief in the profession that trading fees could not produce such
a price reversal, because fee-paying traders react instantaneously, albeit in smaller quantities.
For example, Du¢ e (2010) writes:

           At the time of a supply or demand shock, the entire population of investors
        would stand ready to absorb the quantity of the asset supplied or demanded,
        with an excess price concession relative to a neoclassical model that is bounded


                                               41
                               (a) Impulse Response - Ongoing Future Shocks


           0


       -0.1%


       -0.2%


       -0.3%
               -5                       0                          5                           10
                                                      Time
                        Frictionless        2.0% Fees         Inatt. 3 Periods, Prob. = 0.80

                               (b) Impulse Response - Absence Future Shocks


           0


       -0.1%


       -0.2%


       -0.3%
               -5                       0                          5                           10
                                                      Time

Figure 10: Impulse-response functions. The …gure shows the di¤erence in the price of the stock
between two sets of paths, normalized by the stock price in the frictionless economy. The …rst set of
paths is selected conditional on a positive endowment shock for Trader 1 at the impulse time, and
the second set is selected conditional on a positive endowment shock for Trader 2 at the impulse
time. Panel (a) depicts the impulse response for the case of ongoing future shocks, i.e., it compares
conditionally expected paths depending on the shock at a given impulse time. Panel (b) depicts the
impulse response in the absence of future shocks. The …gure is based on the numerical illustrations
described in Section 5.3.
                                                 42
        by marginal trading costs. After the associated price shock, price reversals would
        not be required to clear the market.

    It is true that, when the shock hits, all traders adjust immediately, and less so than they
would in the absence of fees. Then, with the common concept of impulse response criticized
above, there is no need for further adjustment and there is no reversal, since there is no more
shock after the one shock of the impulse. This is illustrated in Panel (b), which shows an
impulse response function for a shock, followed by a complete absence of future shocks.
    However, with our de…nition, which is closer to empirical work because it compares
conditionally expected paths, after the impulse, the e¤ect gradually disappears: there is a
reversal (Panel (a)).49 Particularly, when the shock hits, all traders adjust immediately, but
on an equilibrium path with ongoing shocks, the traders will also react later on. That is true
because of hysteresis. Indeed, the impulse has moved the fee-paying trader closer to a trade
boundary, so that when later shocks arrive in the same direction, he will act, more so than
he would have acted in the absence of the impulse. This causes the price reversal.

5.3.2     Response to an Endowment Shock: the Case of Inattention

Consider now the case in which Trader 1 may randomly become inattentive for n periods.
Note that the trader still optimizes his decisions intertemporally when he is attentive, and
rationally anticipates becoming inattentive again.50 As in Du¢ e (2010), we have to choose
the probability of becoming inattentive and the length n of periods of inattention. For the
illustration in Figure 10, we set the probability of the trader becoming inattentive to 0:8 and
assume that he becomes inattentive for three periods. With that choice, the two economies
–the one with trading fees and the one with stochastic inattention –have about the same
aggregate trading volume.
    Panel (a) displays the impulse response function under limited attention for the case with
  49
     Note, the paths were segregated based on draws from a uniform distribution, which is not persistent.
See Appendix F.
  50
     We solve the model recursively, using as an additional endogenous state variables last period’s stock
holdings of the potentially inattentive trader. For each combination of the state variables, we solve a system
of equations similar to the one without trading fees with the small di¤erence that, in case the potentially
inattentive trader is inattentive, he does not agree with the other traders on the price of the stock, because
he cannot trade the stock. We keep track of his “private valuation,” which we carry backwards until the
trader is attentive again. When that happens, all traders agree on the price of the stock.


                                                     43
ongoing future shocks. Here again, the reaction of the price to the impulse is immediate and
approximately equal to 25 basis points and we observe a slow reversal as in Du¢ e (2010).
   Note that for inattention, slow price reversal can also be observed in the case of a complete
absence of future shocks (Panel (b)). Even if there are no future shocks, the price is changing
because the inattentive trader re-enters the market.51
   In summary, it is clear that in the case of ongoing shocks the time path is extremely
similar whether we consider the trading-fee model or the limited-attention model. As far as
responses to endowment shocks are concerned, they are empirically indistinguishable.


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a general-equilibrium model of a …nancial friction to describe
the properties of …nancial-market equilibrium, that is, trading strategies, asset prices and
returns, in the presence of trading fees. We de…ne a concept of Walrasian equilibrium for this
market and invent an algorithm that delivers an exact numerical equilibrium. The algorithm
synchronizes like clockwork the traders in the implementation of their trades and allows us
to analyze the way in which trades take place and in which prices are formed and evolve.
    We analytically compare the equilibrium securities prices in the presence of trading fees
to those without trading fees as well as to the traders’private valuations, and explain how
the gap between them triggers trades.
    Using a numerical setting with two traded securities –a bond and a stock –we then study
the impact of trading fees quantitatively. We …nd that the trade-o¤ between smoothing
consumption and smoothing holdings, leads to a higher volatility of individual consumption,
a lower correlation between individual consumptions and a drop in welfare. The prices of
securities are actually increased slightly by the presence of fees. The price increase of the
bond is related to the increased volatility of individual consumption, which produces a drop
in the rate of interest because of precautionary saving. The same e¤ect would lead to a
marked increase in the price of stock. However, the e¤ect is largely o¤set by an illiquidity
  51
     The small “over-reaction” of the price after the reversal is due to changes in traders’ consumption
(wealth) shares, created by the impulse. Particularly, if Trader 1 is inattentive and therefore unable to react
to the impulse, the impulse will trigger a permanent reduction in his consumption (wealth) share. This
dislocation leads to a higher price because it pushes him closer to the habit subsistence level. In a model
with many traders this e¤ect would be negligible.


                                                      44
discount because the stock’s liquidity is now endogenously varying over time. As for rates
of return, we show that the equity premium, stock return volatility, and the Sharpe ratio of
equity are increased.
    Finally, we develop three applications of our model. First, we obtain endogenously the
behavior over time of the various components of a CCAPM that incorporates frictions. That
is, we identify the risk factors and display their relative sizes and movements over time.
Second, we study an extension of our model to the case of three traders and show that
the impact of trading fees does not decrease with the introduction of more (symmetric)
traders. Third, we compare the impulse responses of this model to those of a model in which
trading is infrequent because of trader inattention. Contrary to what has been asserted by
some authors, limited-attention models and trading-fees models produce very similar price
responses if one considers the realistic case of an economy with ongoing future shocks. Thus,
they are, so far, equally good contenders as representations of slow-moving capital.
    The model generates a rich set of predictions, which are empirically refutable, as we
verify quantitatively that the bid-ask midpoint can be used as a proxy to study the empirical
implication of our model. For example, similar to our results, many empirical papers have
found a “liquidity premium” for less liquid stocks, though a quantitatively bigger one. The
theoretical nature of our paper allows to comment on the adequacy of extant empirical tests
of CCAPMs that include a premium for liquidity risk, thereby guiding future empirical work.
Another point of contact with empirics is the paper by Hau (2006), who already showed that
volatility does increase with trading fees, as predicted by our model. By empirically studying
the price reversal for stocks with di¤erent levels of liquidity, one should also be able to shed
more light on the underlying explanation for price reversal. Particularly, our model predicts
that for a more liquid stock the price reverts back at a faster rate.
    Future theoretical work should aim to model an equilibrium in which trading would not
be Walrasian. In it, the rate of transactions fees would not be a given and traders would
submit limit and market orders. The behavior of the limit-order book would be obtained.
This work would be similar to that of Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999), Foucault et al. (2005),
Goettler et al. (2005) and Roşu (2009), except that trades would arrive at the time and in
quantities of the traders’choice, and would not be driven by an exogenous process.52
  52
   Recently, Kühn and Stroh (2010) have used the dual approach to optimize portfolio choice in a limit-order
market and may have shown the way to do that.



                                                    45
    Appendixes

A      Numerical Illustrations
Here, we describe the settings that we use to illustrate the dynamics of equilibrium in the
presence of trading fees. Note, they are only meant to illustrate, in a stylized fashion, the
workings of the model. They cannot be seen as being calibrated to a real-world economy
because we have two (three) traders, not millions; two securities, not tens of thousands; and
a trading frequency of one year. Thus, although we incorporate a motive to trade that is
present at all times, the volume of trading does not come anywhere close to market data.


A.1     Two Traders
We assume that aggregate output, Ot , follows a binomial tree with expected growth, O =
1:8% and a volatility, O = 3:2%, matching their empirical counterparts. There exist two
traders with preferences of the additive external-habit type, implemented as surplus con-
sumption, similar to Campbell and Cochrane (1999):
                                  " T                                   #
                                   X         (cl;t        h   Ct 1 )1
                                         t
                              E                                             ;
                                   t=0
                                                          1

where Ct 1 denotes aggregate last period consumption. Traders have homogeneous prefer-
ences, that is, the same time-preference , risk appetite and habit parameter h.
       There exist two securities: i = 1, a short-lived riskless security (the “bond”) in zero net
supply that is not subject to trading fees; i = 2, a long-lived claim (the “stock”) for which
trading entails trading fees. The stock is in unit net supply and pays out dividend t;2 , which
is modeled as a constant fraction, , of aggregate output.
       The remainder, total output minus dividend, (1        ) Ot , is distributed as endowments,
el;t , to the two traders. Particularly, we assume that the fractions of aggregate endowment,
  l;t , follow a simple, symmetric two-state Markov chain, with realizations of 62:5% and 37:5%.
We set the probability of transitioning from a high (low) state today to a high (low) state
in the next period to 0:85. These parameters imply a volatility of 20% for the endowment
shocks, which is comparable to the volatility of labor income shocks of about 24% (see
Gourinchas and Parker (2002)).
       The parameters , h, and are chosen to match the empirical risk-free rate, equity
risk premium, stock market volatility, and wealth-income ratio. The resulting values are

                                                     46
                       Moment                          Data      Model
                       Agg. cons. growth mean          1:79%     1:82%
                       Agg. cons. growth volatility    3:22%     3:26%
                       Risk-free rate                  2:02%     2:32%
                       Equity premium                  6:73%     7:47%
                       Stock return volatility         18:60%    19:65%
                       Sharpe ratio                    0:36      0:38
                       Price-dividend ratio            23:75     21:01
                       Volatility of log P=D ratio     0:32      0:16
Table 3: Return moments without friction. The data is based on Campbell (2003) with a
sample period spanning from 1891-1998. Consumption growth denotes real per capital consumption
growth of non-durables and services for the United States. The stock return data are based on the
S&P500 index, and the risk-free rate is based on the 6-month U.S. Treasury bill rate.


  = 0:98, h = 0:2, = 7:5, = 0:15. Note that 85% of total output being distributed as
endowments, implies that the average wealth-income ratio in our economy is 3:81, comparable
to the ratios documented by the Survey of Consumer Finances (2014) of 0:37 (age < 35) to
5:52 (age    75). The resulting return moments are shown in Table 3, demonstrating that
our quantitative experiments are conducted in a realistic …nancial-market setting.


A.2     Three Traders
The three-trader economy that we study in Section 5.2, is a simple extension of the two-trader
economy presented above. Particularly, we again model a symmetric, Markov chain, now
with three states to accommodate the third trader, and with endowment share realizations of
45%, 27:5%, and 27:5%. The probability of one trader transitioning from the high endowment
share today to the high endowment share in the next period is set to 0:7 and the probability
of transitioning to a state in which one of the other two traders receives a high endowment
share is set to 0:15 each. On average each trader gets 1=3 of aggregate endowment. Finally,
to keep the surplus consumption ratio unchanged, we set the habit parameter to 0:1333.
    In the case of the three-trader economy discussed in Section 5.3, we also use a habit
parameter of 0:1333. However, to preserve perfect conditional symmetry between Traders
1 and 2, we consider a compound of two 2 2 Markov chains for endowments. While in
the …rst chain, Trader 3 gets a share of either 41:68% or 24:98%, in the second chain, the
remainder is distributed to the other two traders, with each one getting either 39% or 61%
of what is left. Both separate Markov chains are persistent, with the probability of staying
in a state being 0:85. Again, on average each trader gets 1=3 of aggregate endowment.

                                               47
                  (a) Standard Deviation                                  (b) Density
        0.1
                                                          5             t = 250         t = 300
       0.08
                                                          4
       0.06
                                                          3

       0.04
                                                          2

       0.02                                               1

         0                                                0
          0         100            200        300         0.2          0.4          0.6           0.8
                          T im e


Figure 11: Dynamics of state variable. The picture illustrates the existence of a time window
starting some time before t = 250 within which the probability distribution of the state variable
(consumption share) is unchanged. Panel (a) shows the standard deviation of the consumption share
of Trader 1 over time. Panel (b) shows the simulated density of the consumption share for two
dates. The …gure is based on the numerical illustration described in 1.4 and on 500,000 simulation
paths.


A.3           The Horizon and the Steady State
For all our numerical illustrations we run the algorithm backward from a …xed horizon date
until there is no change in all the functions being carried backward, thereby obtaining an
equilibrium of an economy where traders are very long-lived.53 Besides displaying features
that hold for a very long horizon, we also want to make sure that those features do not depend
on initial conditions. For that purpose, we simulate the long-horizon economy forward and
we keep track of the frequency distribution of the state variable(s) across simulated paths.
We only stop the simulations when the distribution of the state variable(s) has converged.
For all results reported in the paper, we rely only on dates from this “steady state.”
    Figure 11 illustrates this for the economy with two traders in the absence of trading
fees. The steady-state probability distribution of consumption shares obtains after about
250 periods. After this the distribution does not change anymore. That is, this many years
is a long enough “burn-in”history. In this speci…c case, our results are based on equilibrium
quantities at t = 300.
  53
    The criterion for stopping the backward calculation is the mean absolute relative di¤erence from one
time step to the next of all iterated functions. We stop when the value of that criterion is below 0:01%.
Further re…ning the criterion has virtually no e¤ects.


                                                    48
B     First-order Conditions
The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker …rst-order conditions, associated with maximization problem (7)
subject to (8) and (9) are

                                                                 u0l (cl;t ; ; t) =                   l;t
                                                                 X
                                                                 I
                                                    el;t +                 l;t 1;i t;i               cl;t +         l;t
                                                                  i=1
              X
              I                                                                       X
                                                                                      I
                        ^l;t;i          l;t 1;i     St;i (1 +            i;t )                        l;t;i          l;t 1;i    St;i (1          "i;t ) = 0
               i=1                                                                     i=1
                       X
                       Kt
                                         @Jl;t+1;j               n                                               o
                                 t;t+1;j
                                                                  ^l;t;i +           l;t;i            l;t 1;i        ; ; el;t+1;j ; t + 1
                       j=1
                                          @ l;t;i
                                                  =        l;t      St;i          (1 +             i;t )          1;l;t;i
                       X
                       Kt
                                           @Jl;t+1;j             n                                               o
                                 t;t+1;j
                                                                  ^l;t;i +           l;t;i            l;t 1;i        ; ; el;t+1;j ; t + 1
                       j=1
                                            @ l;t;i
                                                  =        l;t       St;i (1                  "i;t ) +           2;l;t;i

                                          l;t;i        l;t       1;i
                                                                        ^l;t;i ;        1;l;t;i             0;     2;l;t;i      0
                                           ^l;t;i           l;t 1;i        = 0;                                  l;t 1;i        l;t;i     = 0;
                             1;l;t;i                                                    2;l;t;i


where l;t is the Lagrange multiplier attached to the ‡ow budget constraint (8) and 1;l;t;i
and 2;l;t;i are the Lagrange multipliers attached to the inequality constraints (9). The last
two equations are usually referred to as the “complementary-slackness”conditions.
   Two of the …rst-order conditions imply that

                       l;t       St;i      (1 +        i;t )            1;l;t;i   =          l;t       St;i          (1       "i;t ) +       2;l;t;i :


Therefore, we can merge two Lagrange multipliers into one, Rl;t;i ; de…ned as

      l;t     Rl;t;i         St;i ,       l;t       St;i         (1 +        i;t )             1;l;t;i      =      l;t       St;i       (1      "i;t ) +    2;l;t;i ;


and recognize one …rst-order condition that replaces two of them:

    X               @Jl;t+1;j n^                                                  o
    Kt

            t;t+1;j             l;t;i +                l;t;i            l;t 1;i        ; ; el;t+1;j ; t + 1 =                       l;t      Rl;t;i      St;i :         (23)
    j=1
                     @ l;t;i

                                                                                  49
   In order to eliminate the value function from the …rst-order conditions, we di¤erentiate
the Lagrangian with respect to l;t 1;i (invoking the Envelope theorem) and use (23):

                                                   X                     @Jl;t+1;j n^                                                          o
                                                   Kt
         @Jl;t              @Ll;t
                    =                    =                       t;t+1;j             l;t;i +                        l;t;i            l;t 1;i       ; ; el;t+1;j ; t + 1
     @    l;t 1;i       @    l;t 1;i               j=1
                                                                          @ l;t;i
                        +      l;t [ t;i   + St;i                (1 +       i;t )   + St;i       (1          "i;t )]             1;l;t;i     +      2;l;t;i
                               X Kt
                                                       @Jl;t+1;j            n                                       o
                    =                    t;t+1;j
                                                                             ^l;t;i +        l;t;i          l;t 1;i         ; ; el;t+1;j ; t + 1
                               j=1
                                                        @ l;t;i
                             +       l;t t;i   +2          l;t     Rl;t;i           St;i =       l;t        (   t;i   + Rl;t;i               St;i ) ;

so that the …rst-order conditions can be written as equations (10) to (16).


C        Proof of Proposition 1
At t = T 1; the present value of dividends                                                   for a generic asset from the point of view of
Trader l is given by
                                                                                               l;T
                            S^l;T 1 = ET 1                                                                      T      ;
                                                                                             l;T 1

whereas Equation (17) applied to time T                                              1 is

                                                                                              l;T
                                        Rl;T       1         ST    1    = ET         1                          T      = S^l;T          1:                                (24)
                                                                                             l;T 1

    At t = T            2; the present value of dividends is

                                                                                l;T 1
                                           S^l;T       2   = ET         2                            T 1     + S^l;T         1          ;
                                                                                l;T 2


whereas Equation (17) applied to time T                                              2 is

                                                                                    l;T 1
                        Rl;T     2       ST    2           = ET             2                   (      T 1      + Rl;T           1          ST     1)
                                                                                    l;T 2
                                                                                    l;T 1
                                                           = ET             2                          T 1      + S^l;T          1          = S^l;T      2;
                                                                                    l;T 2


where we used equation (24) to replace Rl;T                                              1    ST       1.



                                                                                      50
    By an induction argument one obtains the …nal result (18).


D      Proof of Proposition 2
At t = T    1; the price of a generic asset without trading fees is given by

                                                                                       l;T
                                                   ST       1   = ET        1                  T     ;
                                                                                      l;T 1


whereas Equation (17) applied to time T                                    1 is

                                                                                               l;T
                                           Rl;T     1       ST       1    = ET        1                  T     :
                                                                                              l;T 1

    This can be rewritten as

                                                                    l;T                                      l;T                l;T
            Rl;T       1     ST       1   = ET          1                   T     + ET        1                                           T
                                                                l;T 1                                    l;T 1              l;T 1
                                                                    l;T
                                          = ET          1                   T     + ET        1          l;T           T    ;
                                                                l;T 1


                       l;T , l;T 1
                                l;T      l;T
where we de…ned                              :We can thus derive the following relation between
                                       l;T 1
the stock price in a zero-trading fees economy, ST 1 ; and the stock price in an economy with
trading fees, ST 1
                            Rl;T 1 ST 1 ST 1 = ET 1            l;T T :                      (25)

    At t = T       2; the stock price in an economy without trading fees is given by

                                                                          l;T 1
                                          ST   2   = ET         2                      T 1    + ST       1         ;
                                                                          l;T 2


whereas Equation (17) applied to time T                                    2 is

                                                                          l;T 1
                           Rl;T   2       ST   2   = ET         2                 (    T 1    + Rl;T         1         ST   1)        :
                                                                          l;T 2


Replacing Rl;T     1        ST    1   with expression (25), this can be rewritten as




                                                                           51
                                                                l;T 1
                Rl;T    2      ST     2   = ET      2                       T 1       + ST       1   + ET      1        l;T T
                                                                l;T 2



                                           l;T 1
                    = ET          2                 T 1         + ST        1
                                           l;T 2
                                                                                                              l;T 1
                            +ET       2         l;T 1       T 1      + ST         1    + ET           2                      l;T T
                                                                                                              l;T 2
                                                                                                          l;T 1
                    = ST          2   + ET      2       l;T 1              T 1    + ST       1       +                  l;T T
                                                                                                          l;T 2

We can thus derive the following relation between the stock price in a zero-trading fees
economy, ST 2 ; and the stock price in an economy with trading fees, ST 2

                                                                                                                      l;T 1
         Rl;T   2       ST    2       ST    2   = ET        2             l;T 1       T 1   + ST          1   +                      l;T T   :
                                                                                                                      l;T 2


    By an induction argument one reaches the …nal result (19).


E     The Algorithm
As has been noted by Dumas and Lyaso¤ (2012) in a di¤erent context, the system made of
(10) to (16) and (3) has a drawback. It must be solved simultaneously (or globally) for all
nodes of all times. As written, it cannot be solved recursively in a backward way because the
unknowns at time t include consumption at time t; cl;t ; whereas equation (12) if rewritten as

        X
        Kt

              t;t+1;j       u0l (cl;t+1;j ; ; t)        [       t+1;i;j   + Rl;t+1;i;j               St+1;i;j ] =      l;t      Rl;t;i       St;i
        j=1


can be seen to be a restriction on consumptions at time t + 1, which at time t would already
be solved for.
    In order to “synchronize”the solution algorithm of the equations and allow recursivity, we
…rst shift all …rst-order conditions, except the kernel and market clearing conditions, forward
in time, and, second, we no longer make explicit use of the trader’s positions l;t 1;i held
when entering time t, focusing instead on the positions l;t+1;i;j held when exiting time t + 1;
which are carried backward. Regrouping equations in that way, substituting the rewritten
de…nition (6) of the pot and appending market-clearing conditions (3) leads to the equation

                                                                          52
system of Section E.1.


E.1     A Shift of Equations
An equilibrium can then be calculated by means of a single backward-induction procedure.
Given endogenous state variables, which are the dual variables         l;t ; Rl;t;i , one solves the
following equation system. Note that the shift of equations amounts, from a computational
standpoint, to letting traders at time t plan their time-t + 1 consumption cl;t+1;j but choose
their time-t portfolio l;t;i (which will, in turn, …nance the time-t + 1 consumption).

   1. First-order conditions for time-t + 1 consumption:

                                                  u0l (cl;t+1;j ; ; t + 1) =          l;t+1;j :



   2. The set of time-t + 1 ‡ow budget constraints for all traders and all states of nature of
      that time:

                       X
                       I                                                                             X
                                                                                                     I
          cl;t+1;j +         (   l;t+1;i;j        l;t;i ) St+1;i;j Rl;t+1;i;j   = el;t+1;j +                l;t;i t+1;i;j   +   l;t+1;j ;
                       i=1                                                                            i=1


      where the central pot             l;t+1;j    is de…ned in (6).

   3. The third subset of equations (“kernel conditions”) says that, when they trade, all
      traders must agree on the prices of traded securities and, more generally, they must
      agree on the “posted prices”inclusive of the shadow prices R that make units of paper
      securities more or less valuable than units of consumption.

                             1          X
                                        Kt

                                                  t;t+1;j       1;t+1;j     (    t+1;i;j    + R1;t+1;i;j         St+1;i;j )
                    R1;t;i           1;t j=1

                                 1        XKt
                 =                                  t;t+1;j      2;t+1;j        (   t+1;i;j   + R2;t+1;i;j        St+1;i;j )
                       R2;t;i         2;t j=1



   4. De…nitions:
                                             l;t+1;i;j   = ^l;t+1;i;j +         l;t+1;i;j         l;t;i :




                                                                 53
   5. Complementary-slackness conditions:

                                    ( Rl;t+1;i;j + 1 +            i;t+1;j )
                                                                                      ^l;t+1;i;j            l;t;i     = 0;                        (26)
                                        (Rl;t+1;i;j     (1       "i;t+1;j ))              l;t;i      l;t+1;i;j        = 0:                        (27)

   6. Market-clearing restrictions:                                X
                                                                              l;t;i   =      i:
                                                                   l=1;2

   7. Inequalities:

                                l;t+1;i;j       l;t;i
                                                         ^l;t+1;i;j ; 1        "i;t+1;j           Rl;t+1;i;j          1+    i;t+1;j :



       This is a system of 2Kt +2Kt +I +2Kt I +2Kt I +2Kt I +I equations (not counting the in-
equalities) with 2Kt +2Kt +2Kt I+2I+2Kt I+2Kt +I unknowns cl;t+1;j ;                                                       l;t+1;j ; Rl;t+1;i;j ; l;t;i ;

^l;t+1;i;j ;   l;t+1;i;j ; l   = 1; 2; i = 1; :::; I; j = 1; :::; Kt .54
    Besides the exogenous endowments el;t+1;j and dividends t+1;i;j ; the “givens” are the
time-t trader-speci…c shadow prices of consumption                l;t ; l = 1; 2 and of paper securities
fRl;t;i ; l = 1; 2; i = 1; :::; Ig ; which must henceforth be treated as state variables and which
we refer to as “endogenous state variables.”Actually, given the nature of the equations, the
                                                        R
latter variables can be reduced to state variables R2;t;i 1;t;i
                                                                and       +
                                                                           1;t
                                                                                ; all of which are naturally
                                                                                                     1;t        2;t
                               1 "i;t       R2;t;i      1+ i;t                         1;t                 55
bounded a priori:              1+ i;t
                                          and 0
                                            R1;t;i      1 "i;t
                                                               1.
                                                     1;t + 2;t
    In addition, the given securities’ price functions St+1;i;j and the given future position
functions l;t+1;i;j are obtained by backward induction of the previous solution of the above
system. All the functions carried backward are interpolated by means of quadratic interpo-
lation based on the modi…ed Shepard method.
    Moving back through time until t = 0; the last portfolio holdings we calculate are l;0;i .
These are the post-trade portfolios held by the traders as they exit time 0. We need to
translate these into entering, or pre-trade, portfolios holdings so that we can meet the initial
conditions l;i . This is done by solving a time-0 system of equations that consists of the
two traders’budget constraints, de…nitions, complementary slackness, and market clearing
  54
    The size of the system is reduced when some securities do not carry trading fees.
  55
    In a given exogenous node, the two variables 1;t and 2;t are one-to-one related to the consumption
shares of the two traders, so that consumption scales are actually used as state variables. Consumption
shares of the two traders add up to 1 because the trading fees are refunded in a lump-sum.


                                                                       54
conditions for time 0. However, the equation system does not contain the kernel conditions,
which have already been solved. In essence, it includes all equations from the global system
that had not been solved yet because of the time-shift.


E.2    The Interior-Point Algorithm
The system of equations described above can be solved numerically by Newton iterations.
However, the iterations can run into indeterminacy because of the KKT complementary-
slackness conditions (26, 27), which contain a product of unknowns equated to zero. Indeed,
if a Newton step produces, for instance, a value Rl;t+1;i;j +1+ i;t+1;j on the boundary, where
it is equal to zero, then the requirement placed on ^l;t+1;i;j    l;t;i drops out of the system
and indeterminacy follows. The Interior-Point algorithm is a solution to that problem. It
amounts to replacing the above equation system by a sequence of equation systems in each
of which the complementary-slackness conditions are relaxed, as shown in equations (15) and
(16) where is a small number, which is made to approach zero as the algorithm progresses.
In this way, the indeterminacy is avoided.


F     Impulse-response Functions
A new de…nition of an impulse-response function is called for to re‡ect the concept of a shock
occurring along the way.
    We generate 500,000 paths of a simulation, at each point in time drawing three [0; 1]
uniform random numbers –and transforming them through cumulative probability distribu-
tions as needed –to determine (i) whether total output goes up or down, (ii) whether Trader
3 gets a high or a low share (…rst Markov chain), and (iii) whether Trader 1 or Trader 2
gets a high or a low endowment share. Importantly, note that the draws from the uniform,
as opposed to the output and endowment realizations themselves, make up purely transient
processes.
    Then, we segregate the 500,000 paths into two subsets depending on the third draw from
the uniform distribution (setting the endowment share between traders 1 and 2) is above or
below 0:5 – “the impulse.” We compute the average of each of these two subsets of paths
and take the di¤erence between them. This is the di¤erence between two sets of paths, both
of which are expected conditional on two levels of the impulse. They represent the e¤ect of
the impulse that an observer would actually witness on average. Empirical event studies à la
Fama, Fisher, Jensen and Roll (1969) plot an average path for cumulative abnormal return
(CAR) that is de…ned exactly the same way.

                                              55
   References
Acharya, V. and L. H. Pedersen, 2005, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 77, 375-4010.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986a, “Asset Pricing and the Bid-ask Spread,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 17, 223-249.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986b, “Liquidity and Stock Returns,” Financial Analyst
   Journal, 42, 43-48.
Amihud, Y., H. Mendelson and L. Pedersen, 2005, “Liquidity and Asset Prices,”Foundations
   and Trends in Finance, 4, 269-364.
Armand, P., J. Benoist and D. Orban, 2008, “Dynamic Updates of the Barrier Parameter
   in Primal-Dual Methods for Nonlinear Programming,”Computational Optimization and
   Applications, 41, 1-25.
Bacchetta, P. and E. van Wincoop, 2010, “Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution to the
   Forward Discount Puzzle,”American Economic Review, 100, 870–904.
Barro, Robert J., 2009, “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 99, 243-64.
Bismut, J. M., 1973, “Conjugate Convex Functions in Optimal Stochastic Control,”Journal
   of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 44, 384-404.
Björk, T., Y. Kabanov and W. Runggaldier, 1997, “Bond Market Structure in the Presence
   of Marked Point Processes,”Mathematical Finance, 7, 211–223.
Bongaerts, D., J. Driessen and F. de Jong, 2016,“An Asset Pricing Approach to Liquidity
   E¤ects in Corporate Bond Markets,”Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Bouchard, B., 2002, “Utility Maximization on the Real Line under Proportional Transactions
   Costs,”Finance and Stochastics, 6, 495-516.
Bogousslavsky, V., 2016, “Infrequent Rebalancing, Return Autocorrelation, and Seasonal-
   ity,”Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Brunnermeier, M. and L. H. Pedersen, 2008, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2201-2238.
Buss, A., R. Uppal and G. Vilkov, 2017, “Where Experience Matters: Asset Allocation and
   Asset Pricing with Opaque and Illiquid Assets,”Working paper, INSEAD.
Campbell, J. Y., 2003, “Consumption-based asset pricing, ”Handbook of the Economics of
   Finance, 1, Part B, 803–887.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
   Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107,
   205 -251.
Chien, Y., H. Cole and H. Lustig, 2012, “Is the Volatility of the Market Price of Risk Due
   to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing?”, American Economic Review, 102, 2859–2896.


                                           56
Constantinides, G. M., 1976a, “Optimal Portfolio Revision with Proportional Transactions
  Costs: Extension to HARA Utility Functions and Exogenous Deterministic Income,”
  Management Science, 22, 921-923.
Constantinides, G. M., 1976b, “Stochastic Cash Management with Fixed and Proportional
  Transactions Costs,”Management Science, 22, 1320-1331.
Constantinides, G. M., 1986, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Transactions Costs,”Journal
  of Political Economy, 94, 842-862.
Cuoco, D., 1997, “Optimal Consumption and Equilibrium Prices with Portfolio Constraints
  and Stochastic Income,”Journal of Economic Theory, 72, 33-73.
Cvitanic J. and I. Karatzas, 1992, “Convex Duality in Constrained Portfolio Optimization,”
  The Annals of Applied Probability, 2, 767-818.
Cvitanic J. and I. Karatzas, 1996, “Hedging and Portfolio Optimization under Transactions
  Costs: a Martingale Approach,”Mathematical Finance, 6, 113-165.
Davis, M. H. and A. R. Norman, 1990, “Portfolio Selection with Transaction Costs,”Math-
  ematics of Operations Research, 15, 676-713.
Deelstra, G., Pham, H. and N. Touzi, 2001, “Dual Formulation of the Utility Maximization
  Problem under Transaction Costs,”The Annals of Applied Probability, 11, 1353-1383.
Delgado, F., Dumas, B. and G. Puopolo, 2015, “Hysteresis Bands on Returns, Holding
  Period and Transactions Costs,”Journal of Banking and Finance, 57, 86-100.
Demsetz, H., 1968, “The Cost of Transacting,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82, 33-53.
Du¢ e, D., 2010, “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,”
  The Journal of Finance, 55, 1237-167.
Du¢ e, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2002, “Securties Lending, Shorting, and Pric-
  ing,”Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 307–339.
Du¢ e, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2007, “Valuation in Over-the-counter Markets,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1865–1900.
Du¢ e, D., G. Manso, and S. Malamud, 2014, “Information Percolation with Segmented
  Markets,”Journal of Economic Theory, 153, 1–32.
Du¢ e, D., and B. Strulovici, 2012, “Capital Mobility and Asset Pricing,”Econometrica, 80,
  2469–2509.
Dumas, B. and E. Luciano, 1991, “An Exact Solution to a Dynamic Portfolio Choice Problem
  under Transactions Costs,”The Journal of Finance, 46, 577-595.
Dumas, B. and A. Lyaso¤, 2012, “Incomplete-Market Equilibria Solved Recursively on an
  Event Tree,”The Journal of Finance, 67, 1897-1940.
Edirsinghe, C., Naik, V., and R. Uppal, 1993, “Optimal Replication of Options with Transac-
  tions Costs and Trading Restrictions,”The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy-
  sis, 28, 117-138.
Fama, E. F., L. Fisher, M. C. Jensen and R. Roll, 1969, “The Adjustment of Stock Prices
  to New Information,”International Economic Review, 10, 1-21.

                                            57
Foucault, T., 1999, “Order Flow Composition and Trading Cost in a Dynamic Limit Order
   Market,”, Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 99-134.
Foucault, T., O. Kadan and E. Kandel, 2005, “Limit Order Book as a Market for Liquidity,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1171-1217.
French, K., 2008, “The Cost of Active Investing,”Journal of Finance, 63, 1537–1573.
Gârleanu, N., 2009, “Portfolio Choice and Pricing in Illiquid Markets,”Journal of Economic
   Theory, 144, 532–564
Gârleanu, N. and L. Pedersen, 2013, “Dynamic Trading with Predictable Returns and Trans-
   actions Costs,”The Journal of Finance, 68, 2309–2340.
Gennotte, G. and A. Jung, 1994, “Investment Strategies under Transaction Costs: The
   Finite Horizon Case,”Management Science, 40, 385-404.
Gerhold, S., P. Guasoni, J. Muhle-Karbe and W. Schachermayer, 2011, “Transactions Costs,
   Trading Volume and the Liquidity Premium,”Working paper.
Goettler, R., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan, 2005, “Equilibrium in a Dynamic Limit Order
   Market,”, Journal of Finance, 60, 2149–2192.
Gourinchas, P.-O., and J. Parker, 2002, “Consumption over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica,
   70, 47–89.
Hau, H., 2006, “The Role of Transaction Costs for Financial Volatility: Evidence from the
   Paris Bourse,”Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 862-890.
He, H. and D. M. Modest, 1995, “Market Frictions and Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 103, 94-117.
Heaton, J. and D. Lucas, 1996, “Evaluating the E¤ects of Incomplete Markets on Risk
   Sharing and Asset Pricing,”Journal of Political Economy 104, 443-487.
Hendershott, P., S. X. Li, A. Menkveld and M. Seasholes, 2014, “Asset Price Dynamics with
   Limited Attention,”Working paper, VU University of Amsterdam.
Holmström, B., J. Tirole, 2001, “LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal
   of Finance, 56, 1837-1867.
Kühn, C. and M. Stroh, 2010, “Optimal portfolios of a small investor in a limit order market:
   a shadow price approach,”Mathematics and Financial Economics, 3, 45-72.
Jang, B.-G., H. K. Koo, H. Liu and M. Lowenstein, 2007, “Liquidity Premia and Transactions
   Costs,”The Journal of Finance, 62, 2329-2366.
Jouini, E. and H. Kallal, 1995, “Martingales and Arbitrage in Securities Markets with Trans-
   actions Costs,”Journal of Economic Theory, 66, 178-197.
Kallsen, J., J. Muhle-Karbe, 2008, “On Using Shadow Prices in Portfolio Optimization with
   Transaction Costs,”Working paper, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel.
Leland, H. E., 2000, “Optimal Portfolio Implementation with Transactions Costs and Capital
   Gains Taxes,”Working paper, University of California, Berkeley.
Liu, H. and M. Loewenstein, 2002, “Optimal Portfolio Selection with Transactions Costs
   and Finite Horizons,”Review of Financial Studies, 15, 805-835.

                                             58
Lo, A. W., H. Mamaysky and J. Wang, 2004, “Asset Prices and Trading Volume under Fixed
   Transactions Costs,”Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1054-1090.
Longsta¤, F., 2001, “Optimal Portfolio Choice and the Valuation of Illiquid Securities,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 14, 407-431.
Longsta¤, F., 2009, “Portfolio Claustrophobia: Asset Pricing in Markets with Illiquid As-
   sets,”The American Economic Review, 99, 1119-1144.
Luttmer, E. G. J., 1996, “Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions,” Econometrica, 64,
   1439-1467.
Magill, M. and G. M. Constantinides, 1976, “Portfolio Selection with Transactions Costs,”
   Journal of Economic Theory, 13, 245-263.
Milne, F., E. Neave, 2003, “A General Equilibrium Financial Asset Economy with Transac-
   tion Costs and Trading Constraints,”Working paper, Queen’s University.
Novy-Marx, R. and M. Velikov, 2015, “A Taxonomy of Anomalies and their Trading Costs,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 29, 104-147.
Obizhaeva, A. and J. Wang, 2013, “Optimal Trading Strategy and Supply/demand Dynam-
   ics,”Journal of Financial Markets, 16, 1–32.
Parlour, C. 1998, “Price Dynamics in Limit Order Markets,” Review of Financial Studies,
   11, 789-816.
Pástor, L, and R. F. Stambaugh, 2003, “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,” The
   Journal of Political Economy, 111, 642-685.
Peress, J., 2005, “Information vs. Entry Costs: What Explains U.S. Stock Market Evolu-
   tion,”The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40, 563-594.
Philippon, T., 2015. “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less E¢ cient? On the Theory
   and Measurement of Financial Intermediation,” American Economic Review, 105, 1408-
   38.
Rachedi, O., 2014, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Inattention,”Working paper, Univer-
   sidad Carlos III de Madrid.
Roşu, I., 2009, “A Dynamic Model of the Limit Order Book,” Review of Financial Studies,
   22, 4601-4641.
Shreve, S. E. and H. M. Soner, 1994, “Optimal Investment and Consumption with Transac-
   tions Costs,”Annals of Applied Probability, 4, 609-692.
Stoll, H. R., 2000, “Friction,”The Journal of Finance, 55, 1479-1514.
Vayanos, D., 1998, “Transaction Costs and Asset Prices: A Dynamic Equilibrium Model,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 11, 1-58.
Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila, 1999, “Equilibrium Interest Rate and Liquidity Premium with
   Transaction Costs,”Economic Theory, 13, 509-539.




                                           59
