                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE MEDICAID PROGRAM

                                        Thomas Buchmueller
                                            John C. Ham
                                       Lara D. Shore-Sheppard

                                        Working Paper 21425
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21425


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




This chapter was prepared for the conference and volume “Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States, II,” organized and edited by Robert Moffitt. We are grateful to Morgan Henderson,
Yuvraj Singh and Ken Ueda for excellent research assistance and to our discussant Amy Finkelstein
and other conference participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Thomas Buchmueller, John C. Ham, and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Medicaid Program
Thomas Buchmueller, John C. Ham, and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
NBER Working Paper No. 21425
July 2015
JEL No. I11,I13,I18,I3

                                             ABSTRACT

In both its costs and the number of its enrollees, Medicaid is the largest means-tested transfer program
in the United States. It is also a fundamental part of the health care system, providing health insurance
to low-income families, indigent seniors, disabled adults and, in some states, low-income adults more
broadly. This paper reviews the history and structure of the Medicaid program and the large body
of economic research that it has spawned in the nearly half century since it was established. We begin
by summarizing the program’s history, goals and current rules. We then present program statistics,
mainly related to enrollment and expenditures. Finally we turn to the research on the impact of
Medicaid on a broad range of outcomes, discussing theoretical and methodological issues important
for understanding these effects and reviewing the empirical literature, describing what has been
learned thus far, investigating areas where studies seem to reach different conclusions and pointing
to areas where we believe additional research would be fruitful.


Thomas Buchmueller                                  Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
Stephen M. Ross School of Business                  Department of Economics
University of Michigan                              Williams College
701 Tappan                                          24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                 Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER                                            and NBER
tbuch@umich.edu                                     lshore@williams.edu

John C. Ham
Department of Economics
Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
National University of Singapore
AS2 #06-02, 1 Arts Link, Singapore 117570
john.ham.econ@gmail.com
I. Introduction

       In both its costs and the number of its enrollees, Medicaid is the largest means-tested

transfer program in the United States. It is also a fundamental part of the health care system,

providing health insurance to low-income families, indigent seniors and disabled adults. In

2010, Medicaid covered 59 million individuals at a cost to state and federal governments of

nearly $390 billion. Federal Medicaid expenditures, which historically have averaged between

50 and 60 percent of total program expenditures, represent about 8 percent of the federal budget

and nearly 2 percent of gross domestic product (Congressional Budget Office 2014). In 2012,

the median state spent 22.4 percent of its budget on Medicaid (National Association of State

Budget Officers 2013).

       Because it finances different types of services for different groups of beneficiaries, it is

often noted that Medicaid is essentially four public insurance programs in one (Gruber 2003).

First, Medicaid is the primary source of health insurance for low-income children and parents,

providing coverage for a full range of outpatient and inpatient services. Second, Medicaid

provides complementary insurance for low-income seniors for whom Medicare is the primary

source of insurance. Third, Medicaid covers the medical expenses of low-income disabled

individuals. Fourth, Medicaid is the largest source of financing for nursing home care. In

addition to differences related to the characteristics and needs of different beneficiary groups,

there is considerable heterogeneity across states. Although the federal government establishes

important standards, states have considerable flexibility in terms of eligibility rules, the method

and level of provider payment and, to a lesser extent, program benefits. Thus, it is also often

argued that Medicaid is not one program, but 51.




                                                 1
       Expanded eligibility for Medicaid is a critical component of the Patient Protection and

Affordable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of

2010—together known as the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Initial projections were that roughly

half of all individuals who gain insurance coverage as a result of the ACA would be enrolled in

Medicaid. By establishing a new federal income standard, it was expected that the ACA would

significantly reduce the variation across states in eligibility rules. However, because of the 2012

Supreme Court ruling that essentially made the ACA Medicaid expansions voluntary to states,

implementation of the ACA has reduced variation in eligibility rules among expansion states

while accentuating differences between states that have and have not elected to expand their

programs. And a number of expansion states have received waivers from the federal government

allowing them to innovate on a number of dimensions. Thus, the ACA has continued not only

the growth of Medicaid in terms of enrollment and expenditures but it has contributed to the

increased complexity of the program.

       This chapter reviews the history and structure of the Medicaid program and the large

body of economic research that it has spawned in the nearly half century since it was established.

Section II summarizes the program’s history, goals and current rules and Section III presents

program statistics, mainly related to enrollment and expenditures. Then we turn to the research

on the impact of Medicaid on a broad range of outcomes. In Section IV we discuss theoretical

and methodological issues important for understanding these effects. Section V reviews the

empirical literature, describing what has been learned thus far, investigating areas where studies

seem to reach different conclusions and pointing to areas where we believe additional research

would be fruitful. Section VI concludes.




                                                 2
II. Program History, Goals, and Current Rules

       Founded in 1965 as Title XIX of the Social Security Amendments, Medicaid is a joint

state-federal program. The federal government provides the majority of the program’s funding

and establishes general guidelines for eligibility, services to be covered, and reimbursement

rates; states provide additional funding and have some flexibility in how they administer the

program in terms of eligibility levels and procedures, benefits, provider payments and care

delivery approaches. Over its 50-year history, the program has undergone many changes and

modifications, although there are characteristics of Medicaid that were present at its inception

and remain important in the program today. One of these is the existence of both mandatory

actions that states must take—groups of individuals that states must cover and services that states

must provide—and optional actions that states may take. As a result, the program differs

substantially across states with respect to eligibility, covered services, and provider

reimbursement rates.

       While some fundamental features of Medicaid have remained constant throughout its

history, there is one key element of Medicaid that has changed in recent years. From its

inception, Medicaid was available only for individuals who were actual or potential recipients of

cash assistance, resulting in a means-tested program that was unavailable to large portions of the

poor population. In particular, only the elderly, the disabled, or members of families with

dependent children where one parent is absent, incapacitated, or unemployed (the latter only in

some states) could be eligible for Medicaid. The requirement for membership in one of these

groups began to be relaxed beginning with the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, but not until the

ACA was implemented was eligibility for Medicaid extended more broadly to low-income adults




                                                  3
who were not elderly, disabled, or parents of a dependent child. The ACA thus represents both a

continuation of the program as it has existed and a fundamental shift.

       The history of the program can be divided into three main periods.1 First is the period

between 1965 and the early 1980s, when the program was characterized by strict limits on

eligibility that were not solely income-based. Since many of the features of the program

established at its enactment survive in some form today, in this section we also lay out the basic

structure of eligibility for the program, services covered, and the structure of reimbursement.

Second is the period between the early 1980s and prior to the passage of the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA), when definitions

of eligibility began to expand although the primary route to Medicaid eligibility remained

eligibility for cash assistance. In this section we focus primarily on the incremental changes that

were occurring with eligibility. Finally, there is the period beginning with the passage of

PRWORA and culminating with the implementation of the ACA. During this time there were

major changes in the program that resulted in the rules in place today.

       We summarize the major legislative actions affecting Medicaid in Table 1. From these

legislative actions it can be seen that Medicaid is a program of fundamental tensions: between a

recognition that many poor individuals lack health insurance, resulting in a desire for expanded

eligibility, and concern about substantial and growing costs of the program; between a desire to

compensate providers at sufficiently high levels to ensure participation and a desire to contain

costs by capping provider compensation; and between giving states flexibility to design their



1
  Sources for this section include Congressional Research Service (1993), Gruber (2003),
Schneider et al. (2002), Schneider (1997), Congressional Budget Office (2001), Urban Institute
(2015), Kaiser Family Foundation (2008), US Social Security Administration (2011), Office of
the Legislative Counsel (2010), Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2009), and
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) (2013).
                                                 4
own programs and ensuring uniform standards across the country. In addition to legislative

action, Medicaid has been shaped in important ways by federal regulatory decisions and state

choices. Below we discuss these important policy elements as well.

II.A. Implementation and Adaptation: 1965-1983

       The establishment of Medicaid in 1965 grew out of earlier medical care vendor payment

programs that were linked to cash assistance receipt. These earlier programs, established by the

Social Security Amendments of 1950 and expanded by the Kerr-Mills Act of 1960, had the

fundamental feature continued in Medicaid of providing Federal funding at state option for

vendor payments for the benefit of cash assistance beneficiaries. Historical accounts of the

origin of Medicaid indicate that it passed Congress with very little discussion, being viewed as

largely an improvement on the existing Kerr-Mills program (Moore and Smith 2005).

       The combination of building on an existing program that was tightly linked to cash

assistance receipt and responding to widespread concern about impoverishment through rising

health care costs led to the creation of two classes of beneficiaries. The first group was the

categorically needy: recipients of certain cash assistance programs, including Aid to the Blind,

Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), and Aid to the Permanently and Totally

Disabled. These programs not only were strictly means-tested, but they also applied only to the

blind, the elderly, the disabled, and members of families with a single parent. The second class

of beneficiaries was the medically needy: individuals who would be categorically eligible except

that their income and resources were above the eligibility cutoff, but who had sufficient medical

expenses to bring their income after medical expenses below the cutoff (known as “spend-

down”). The goals of the program at its creation were thus to provide access to medical care to

those viewed as the neediest members of society and to prevent medical expense-induced



                                                 5
indigence among single-parent families, the disabled, and the elderly (Moore and Smith 2005,

Weikel and LeaMond 1976).

        As with the Kerr-Mills program that preceded it, participation in Medicaid was made

optional for states, although if a state elected to participate it had to include all of the public

assistance categories and all recipients within those categories, and if a state chose to have a

medically needy program it had to open that program to members of all eligibility categories.

Although state participation was optional, Congress included in the legislation incentives for

states to participate. Federal funds for earlier medical assistance programs were scheduled to

end within five years, funds were offered not only to match state expenditures but also to help

pay for the administration of the Medicaid program, and states participating in the Medicaid

program could use its more favorable matching rate for their other categorical assistance

programs (Moore and Smith 2005). The federal match rate, or federal matching assistance

percentage (FMAP), is determined annually for each state s based on a formula that compares a

state’s average per capita income level (Ys) with the national average income level (YN):

FMAPs = 1 - 0.45(Ys /YN)2. According to this formula, a state where per capita income equals

the national average pays 45 percent of program expenditures. No state is required to pay more

than 50 percent; in most years since the start of the program between 10 and 14 higher income

states have had an FMAP of 50 percent. A state’s FMAP is capped by law at 83 percent.2

        Over half of the states began participating in the first year of the program (see the rows of

Table 2, which show which states began participating in each year), with another 11 states



2
  Since Fiscal Year 1998, Washington DC’s FMAP has been set permanently at 70 percent. At
different times Congress has temporarily increased FMAPs in response to economic crises. The
most recent case was in 2009 as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. FMAPs
from the beginning of Medicaid through the current year may be found at
http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/fmap.cfm.
                                                   6
beginning to participate in 1967. By 1970 all but two states (Alaska and Arizona) were

participating. Generosity of the FMAP was not the only factor determining when states began

participating, as some states with high match rates (including Alabama, Arkansas, and

Mississippi) began participating much later than other states. For comparison, the table also

shows which states have decided (as of spring 2015) to participate in the Medicaid expansion

offered by the ACA; there is some correlation between deciding not to participate in the ACA at

its inception and late participation in the Medicaid program. The ACA participation decision

and what it entails are discussed further in the section on the most recent time period, below.

Eligibility for Families

       In the initial period of Medicaid, eligibility for poor children and their families required

eligibility for AFDC. To qualify for AFDC a family was required to pass stringent income and

resource tests which were far below the poverty level in most states, and generally the family

must have been either headed by a single parent or have an unemployed primary earner (in states

with the optional AFDC-Unemployed Parent program). An exception to the family structure

requirements was created shortly after the establishment of Medicaid by the Social Security

Amendments of 1967, which allowed states to extend Medicaid coverage to “Ribicoff children.”

Named after the senator who sponsored the legislation, these were children who did not meet the

family structure requirements for AFDC but who nevertheless met the income and resource

requirements. The income tests required that family income less disregards for work expenses

and child care be below the state-determined need standard, an amount that differed depending

on family size. Beginning in the early 1980s additional income tests were added, so that income

less disregards less a small amount of earnings needed to be below the state’s payment standard

(also a function of family size) and gross income needed to be below a multiple of the state’s



                                                 7
need standard. Finally, the resource test required family resources to be below $1000, not

including the value of the home.

        For illustration, calculations of the income eligibility limits as a percentage of the poverty

line for a family with three members for 1987 are shown in column 1 of Table 3. The limits in

column 1 illustrate two points: there was considerable variation in eligibility limits across states,

and the income limits were well below the poverty line. Even the most generous states required

family incomes to be below 85 percent of the poverty line, while the least generous states only

covered families with incomes below one-third of the poverty line. (The other columns of Table

3, which show eligibility limits for children in later years, are discussed below.)

Eligibility for Disabled Individuals

        Eligibility limits for the disabled population were also fairly stringent, although

somewhat less stringent than for families. From 1966 to 1972, disabled individuals needed to

qualify for the Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled or Aid to the Blind programs to

receive Medicaid, but in the Social Security Amendments of 1972, Congress replaced the non-

AFDC cash assistance programs with Supplemental Security Income for the Aged, Blind and

Disabled (SSI). Under the SSI program, the federal government funds payments and sets

eligibility standards. Income eligibility for SSI is determined by comparing an individual’s

countable income (monthly income less disregards of $20 of any income and $65 plus one half

of the amount over $65 of earned income) to the Federal Benefit Rate (FBR). The FBR, which

was set in 1972 and has been increased by the amount of inflation since then, is roughly 74

percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). States have the option of including a state

supplement, and a little less than half of the states do, which increases the income eligibility

limits in those states.



                                                  8
          Following the introduction of SSI, Medicaid was intended to continue to be automatic for

disabled individuals receiving assistance, but since the SSI eligibility standards were more

lenient than what many states had in place in 1972, states could choose not to make Medicaid

eligibility automatic with SSI eligibility. This option to use a state-specified standard, known as

the “209(b)” option after the section of the 1972 Social Security Amendments enacting it,

allowed a state to use eligibility criteria for Medicaid under disability no more restrictive than the

ones it used in January 1972.3 States choosing the 209(b) option must allow individuals to

“spend down” to eligibility by deducting medical expenses incurred from countable income.

States may also choose not to extend Medicaid eligibility to individuals who are eligible only for

the state supplement.

          In addition to income eligibility, eligibility for Medicaid under SSI or the 209(b) option

also requires individuals to meet asset limits and disability standards. A full discussion of asset

and disability provisions of SSI is beyond the scope of this chapter (see the chapter on SSI in this

volume) but there are a few elements of these provisions important to note. First, asset limits,

unlike income limits, are not indexed for inflation, so aside from occasional increases passed by

Congress they have been declining in real terms. Second, the level of disability required to

receive SSI is severe: an adult must have an “inability to engage in any substantial gainful

activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment(s) which can be

expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period

of not less than 12 months,” while a child will be considered disabled “if he or she has a

medically determinable physical or mental impairment or combination of impairments that




3
    There are eleven 209(b) states.
                                                   9
causes marked and severe functional limitations, and that can be expected to cause death or that

has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months.”4

        Because medical expenses for the disabled are usually quite high, the medically needy

provisions of Medicaid play a more important role for the disabled (and the elderly) than for the

low-income families eligibility category. The medically needy are individuals who would be

categorically eligible except that their countable incomes are above the relevant cutoff (for SSI

or AFDC) and who have incurred sufficient medical expenses to bring their income minus

expenses below the medically need income standard. (Their resources must be below the state-

set medically needy resource standard; there is no “spend down” applicable to resources.) States

electing to cover the medically needy not only specify the income and resource limits that apply,

but may also modify their standard benefits package for the medically needy population.5

Roughly two-thirds of states have a medically needy program.

Eligibility for the Elderly

        Eligibility for the elderly population resembles eligibility for the disabled in many ways,

with a key exception being the interaction with Medicare for this population. States that

participate in Medicaid are required to provide supplemental coverage through Medicaid to low-

income Medicare beneficiaries for services not covered by Medicare. Elderly individuals can

receive SSI if they are income-eligible for it (under the rules discussed above), and the same

rules for Medicaid eligibility (including the 209(b) option and the requirement for states to allow

spend-down to eligibility) apply to elderly SSI recipients as to the non-elderly disabled.

Similarly, the elderly may qualify under the medically needy provisions of their state, a common

4
  Social Security Administration, “Disability Evaluation Under Social Security”
(http://www.ssa.gov/disability/professionals/bluebook/general-info.htm).
5
  See Schneider et al. (2002) for a detailed discussion of the various pathways onto Medicaid for
different categories of disabled individuals.
                                                 10
route to eligibility for individuals in nursing facilities. Further expansions of eligibility among

the elderly occurred during the period of expansions in the 1980s.

Services and reimbursement

       Within federal guidelines, states choose their own eligibility standards and provider

reimbursement rates, resulting in wide variation in such rates across states. The federal

government requires certain medical services to be covered, including inpatient and outpatient

hospital services, laboratory and x-ray services, physicians’ services, and skilled nursing

facilities. Beginning with the 1967 Social Security Amendments, states were mandated to cover

“early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment” (EPSDT) services for eligible children.

States may also choose to cover services such as prescription drugs, eyeglasses, and dental care.

Importantly, Medicaid is an entitlement program, so eligible individuals have the right to receive

the services that states have chosen to cover, and states have the right to matching payments for

the cost of those services.

       However, the framers of Medicaid did not realize the significant potential costs of the

program (Moore and Smith 2005, Weikel and LeaMond 1976), and already by 1967 there were

moves to control expenditures. The 1967 amendments included legislation to cap eligibility

among the medically needy to those with incomes at most 133 1/3 percent of the AFDC income

eligibility level in a state. In addition, the 1972 amendments repealed the “maintenance of

effort” requirement that had previously prevented states from reducing expenditures on Medicaid

from one year to the next.

       Passage of cost-control measures continued in the early 1980s. The Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Act of 1981 (OBRA 81) implemented several changes with major long-term

implications for health care providers. First, OBRA 81 repealed the requirement that states pay



                                                 11
Medicare hospital payment rates. Instead, states were permitted to reimburse hospitals at lower

rates and to make additional payments to hospitals serving a disproportionate share of Medicaid

and other poor patients. These hospitals became known as disproportionate share hospitals

(DSH) and payments to them were known as “DSH payments.” OBRA 81 also established new

types of “Medicaid waivers” as additional potential cost-control mechanisms. A waiver is a

statutorily established permission for the federal agency charged with Medicaid implementation

and regulation to grant certain exceptions to the federal rules for states that apply for those

exceptions. Some waiver authority had already existed, notably that granted by section 1115 of

the Social Security Act, which allows the Secretary of Health and Human Services to permit a

state to use federal Medicaid matching funds to pay for a statewide demonstration covering

expenditures that would otherwise not be allowable. A state seeking a section 1115 waiver must

show that its demonstration will be “budget neutral” to the federal government over the five-year

period of the waiver.6 The new waivers included section 1915(b) freedom-of-choice waivers,

which allowed states to pursue mandatory managed care enrollment of certain Medicaid

populations, and section 1915(c) home- and community-based long-term care services waivers,

which allowed states to cover such services for the elderly and individuals with disabilities at

risk of institutional care. In addition, the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982

expanded state options for imposing cost-sharing requirements on beneficiaries.

II.B. Period of Incremental Expansions: 1984-1995

       Following a period of legislative focus on cost containment, beginning in the mid-1980s

there was a period of legislative focus on eligibility expansion. These expansions began by

relaxing some of the family structure, but not income, requirements for members of low-income

6
 Arizona’s Medicaid program has operated under a section 1115 waiver since its inception in
1982.
                                                 12
families. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 mandated coverage of three groups—children born

after September 30, 1983, first-time pregnant women, and pregnant women in two-parent

families with an unemployed primary earner—as long as the families were income-eligible for

AFDC. Then beginning in 1986, a series of federal laws began to diminish the link between

Medicaid eligibility and AFDC eligibility by extending Medicaid coverage to members of

families with incomes above the AFDC limits. Under these expansions, Medicaid eligibility

determination was different from AFDC eligibility determination in two fundamental ways: the

eligibility limits were linked to the federal poverty line rather than to the AFDC limits, and there

were no family structure requirements. In the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts (OBRAs) of

1986 and 1987, Congress gave states the authority to raise the income thresholds for Medicaid

coverage of pregnant women, infants, and very young children above the AFDC level. In

addition, OBRA 1987 required states to cover all children born after September 30, 1983 who

met AFDC income standards, regardless of their family composition. The Medicare

Catastrophic Coverage Act (MCCA) and Family Support Act (FSA), both of 1988, required

states to extend Medicaid eligibility even further. The MCCA required coverage of pregnant

women and infants and permitted coverage of children up to 8 years of age with family incomes

below 75 percent of the poverty level. Coverage of eligible two-parent families where the

principal earner was unemployed was mandated by the FSA, and the FSA also required states to

extend transitional Medicaid benefits for 12 months to members of families losing cash

assistance due to earnings from work. Even broader expansions took place as a result of OBRA

1989 and OBRA 1990. OBRA 1989 required coverage of pregnant women and children up to

age 6 with family incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, and OBRA 1990




                                                 13
required states to cover children born after September 30, 1983 and under the age of 18 with

family incomes below 100 percent of the federal poverty level.

       The resulting eligibility limits that states established under these mandatory and optional

expansions (and in some cases with the addition of state funds) as of the beginning of 1997 are

shown in column (2) of Table 3. The increase in eligibility limits was strikingly large, with

eligibility limits doubling, tripling, or increasing even more substantially over the AFDC income

limits. Notably, there was substantial variation in eligibility limits by age within states, with

limits being more generous for infants and least generous for older teens. The extent of within-

state variation also varied, with some states having fairly similar eligibility limits across the

board and others having larger differences. These differences in eligibility within and across

states and over time have proven useful in examining the impacts of Medicaid on various

outcomes, as discussed in section III, below.

       This period was also a time of considerable expansion in eligibility for the elderly.

Recognizing that there were substantial numbers of elderly Medicare beneficiaries with incomes

above the SSI cutoff level but who needed assistance with Medicare premiums and cost-sharing

requirements, OBRA 86 permitted and the MCCA required states to phase in coverage of

Medicare premiums and cost-sharing for Medicare beneficiaries with incomes below 100 percent

of the federal poverty level and resources at or below twice the SSI resource cutoff. States must

use income- and resource-counting methodologies that are not more restrictive than those used

for SSI, and may be less restrictive. These beneficiaries are known as Qualified Medicare

Beneficiaries, or QMBs. OBRA 1990 established an additional category of Medicare-Medicaid

dual eligibles, Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiaries, or SLMBs. States were required

to provide Medicare premium assistance through Medicaid to Medicare beneficiaries with



                                                  14
incomes between 100 and 120 percent of the FPL and with resources not exceeding twice the SSI

resource level. Together assistance to these two groups is known as the Medicare Savings

Programs.

       In addition to expansions in eligibility for the elderly, the MCCA included provisions to

prevent “spousal impoverishment” among spouses of individuals receiving long-term care

through Medicaid. These provisions have as their goal permitting the spouse still living in the

community to have sufficient resources and monthly income to avoid hardship. They are

triggered when one spouse enters a long-term care facility (and is likely to remain at least 30

days). The spouse remaining in the community is allowed to keep a fraction of the couple’s

resources and a fraction of the income received on a monthly basis. The rest is contributed to the

cost of care for the institutionalized spouse. In general, due to the high cost of institutional care

and the low level of income and resources required to qualify for Medicaid to pay for such care,

complex rules governing transfers of assets and income were developed over this period. These

rules included those attempting to discourage individuals from giving away resources to qualify

for Medicaid and those intended to provide individuals in states without medically needy

programs whose incomes or resources are too high to qualify for Medicaid but too low to pay for

needed institutional care with ways to qualify for Medicaid. For example, such individuals may

establish a Qualified Income, or Miller, trust by depositing enough income in the trust to fall

below an income limit equal to 300 percent of the SSI income limit; once the individual passes

away, the state receives any money remaining in the trust up to the amount Medicaid has paid on

behalf of the individual (see Schneider et al. 2002 for a detailed discussion of such rules).

       The period of incremental expansions was also one of substantial growth in Medicaid

expenditures, as can be seen in the discussion of program statistics later in the chapter. While



                                                  15
the increasing number of eligible individuals is one obvious source of an increase in

expenditures, a key element in the increase over this time period was the increasing state use of

DSH payments and related financing programs including provider-specific taxes and

intergovernmental transfers (Ku and Coughlin 1995). States developed creative financing

strategies in an effort to maximize federal transfers, requiring hospitals to pay provider taxes or

to make donations or intergovernmental transfers, using the revenue from these sources to make

DSH payments (usually back to the providers of the taxes or transfers), and then receiving the

federal match on these expenditures. Concern over rapidly rising federal expenditures on

Medicaid as a result of these strategies led to the Medicaid Voluntary Contribution and Provider-

Specific Tax Amendments of 1991, which essentially banned provider donations, capped

provider taxes and required such taxes to be broad-based and not targeted on a quid pro quo

basis, and capped DSH payments (Ku and Coughlin 1995).

       Another important change that occurred during this period was a move towards the use of

managed care contracts for Medicaid enrollees, including both capitated plans such as Health

Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and non-capitated primary care case management plans.

The potential benefits for states in using Medicaid managed care include a reduction in program

expenditures (through the incentive inherent in capitated plans to reduce the use of unnecessary

treatments), an improvement in quality through care coordination efforts, and a reduction in the

level of financial risk faced by the state (Duggan and Hayford 2013). While managed care plans

in the commercial market often reduce expenditures via contracting with providers for lower

reimbursement rates, the already low reimbursement rates in fee-for-service Medicaid leave little

room for savings along that dimension.




                                                 16
II.C. Major Changes: Welfare Reform to the Affordable Care Act7

       While the mid-1980s to mid-1990s were a period of incremental changes, the changes in

Medicaid since the mid-1990s have been some of the most far-reaching in Medicaid’s history,

with three major pieces of legislation fundamentally changing the program. The first was the

Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA), which

eliminated the AFDC program and replaced it with the Temporary Assistance for Needy

Families (TANF) program, completing the process of decoupling Medicaid for low-income

families from cash assistance eligibility. Unlike AFDC, TANF eligibility does not confer

automatic Medicaid eligibility. Instead, Medicaid eligibility began to be determined separately,

although individuals who met the requirements for the former AFDC program were intended to

continue to be entitled to Medicaid. States were required to continue using the AFDC eligibility

determination processes they had in place as of July 16, 1996. Thus an individual could be

eligible for Medicaid but not TANF, or vice-versa.

       The most important impact of the decoupling of Medicaid from TANF eligibility was the

impact on coverage for low-income parents. The requirement that states continue to cover

parents who would have been eligible under the former AFDC standards (known as section 1931

eligibility) provided a basis for further expansions to parents. For the most part, the changes due

to PRWORA did not affect eligibility for children, since the expansion standards for children,

which were more generous than AFDC eligibility standards, remained in place. However,

Medicaid enrollment among children did fall immediately following the passage of PRWORA

before rising again a few years later (see section III of this chapter). Also as part of PRWORA,



7
 Additional sources for this section: Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2012,
2014a, 2014b), Rudowitz, Artiga, and Musumeci (2014).


                                                17
legal immigrants were required to wait five years before they could be eligible for federally

funded Medicaid, and illegal immigrants are ineligible for Medicaid. Both groups of immigrants

are eligible for emergency Medicaid, however, which covers services necessary to treat an

emergency medical condition for such individuals as long as they meet all other Medicaid

requirements except for their immigration status. Some states did continue to provide Medicaid

coverage with state funds to legal immigrants.

       Another key piece of legislation was the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997. The BBA

included many smaller changes to Medicaid and introduced a new public health insurance

program for low-income children. Among the smaller changes enacted in the BBA, states were

allowed to provide up to 12 months of continuous eligibility for children and to cover children

presumptively until a formal determination of eligibility is made. The BBA also established a

new level of support for Medicare beneficiaries with higher incomes, allowing partial coverage

of Medicare premiums for beneficiaries with incomes between 120 and 135 percent of FPL

(known as Qualified Individuals, or QIs), funded via a federal block grant. On the expenditure

and reimbursement side, the BBA eliminated minimum payment standards for state-set

reimbursement rates for hospitals, nursing homes, and community health centers, placed ceilings

on DSH payment adjustments, and allowed states to avoid paying Medicare deductibles and

coinsurance if their Medicaid payment rates for that service are lower than Medicare’s. Instead,

the state pays only the Medicaid reimbursement rate, and the providers are not permitted to bill

the beneficiary for the balance. This practice effectively reduces the incentive for providers to

treat low-income beneficiaries (Schneider et al. 2002). The BBA also allowed states to

implement mandatory managed care enrollment for most Medicaid beneficiaries without

obtaining section 1915(b) waivers.



                                                 18
       In addition, the BBA created the State Children's Health Insurance Program (called at the

time SCHIP but since changed to CHIP; we use the later acronym throughout this chapter),

which provided states with $40 billion over ten years in block grant funding to expand publicly

provided health insurance for children. The basic structure of CHIP differs from Medicaid in

several ways. First, each state is given a fixed allotment (rather than an entitlement to an

unlimited federal match of spending) based on the number of uninsured children in the state and

the state’s relative health care costs. Second, the match rate is higher than under Medicaid,

ranging from 65 to 85 percent. Third, states are given more flexibility by the federal government

in structuring CHIP coverage.

       States had three options for their CHIP funds: they could expand their Medicaid

programs to cover additional ages and income categories, design a new program, or do a

combination of the two, enacting an initial Medicaid expansion (for example to fill in gaps in

coverage across the age distribution) while designing further coverage under a state program.

However states could not tighten their Medicaid rules, and applicants who qualified for Medicaid

under the Medicaid eligibility standards in place prior to the introduction of CHIP had to be

enrolled in Medicaid. If a state expanded its Medicaid program, children eligible under the

CHIP expansion became entitled to all Medicaid benefits, and the state was required to conform

to all Medicaid rules. If a state created a new program (or expanded an existing state program),

then the state could design new benefits packages or arrangements for services, impose limited

cost sharing, and design its own eligibility rules. The state-designed programs sometimes

included some cost sharing (such as small premiums or copayments), were usually (though not

exclusively) operated separately from Medicaid, and often incorporated a managed care

component. In a few cases, the state plans included completely new features, such as premium



                                                 19
assistance for employer-supplied insurance or coverage for parents of eligible children. State

CHIP plans of all types involved new outreach efforts and were required to include efforts to

minimize substitution of public insurance for private insurance (known as “crowding out”). In

states with non-Medicaid-expansion CHIP plans, children who had other coverage were not

eligible for the CHIP expansion (such children would be eligible for Medicaid, if their family

incomes were low enough). In addition, many states incorporated a waiting period of between a

month and a year, depending on the state, before a child could be enrolled in the state program

after having private coverage. Other anti-crowd-out measures included premiums for higher-

income families and state assistance with employer-supplied insurance premiums.

       The resulting eligibility limits under CHIP as of 2001 are shown in column (3) of Table

3. Notably, CHIP permitted states to equalize eligibility across ages within a state, and while

some states continued to have higher levels of eligibility for younger children, the extent of the

disparity was considerably smaller. It is also clear that states were able to increase their

eligibility limits overall, in most cases to two to three times the FPL.

       States were permitted to spend up to 10 percent of their block grants for items other than

providing insurance, and most states used some of these funds to improve participation in public

health insurance. One important change in many states was the implementation of a period of

continuous coverage (usually 6 months or a year). This means that once children qualify for

coverage, coverage continues without interruption for the entire period, even if the child’s family

income increases. Other important changes that many states adopted include: elimination of a

requirement that family assets be below a given level, elimination of the requirement that

families come to the welfare office for a face-to-face interview (allowing applications to be

mailed in), making the application simpler and/or instituting a single application for both



                                                 20
Medicaid and CHIP programs, and outreach and publicity efforts. Outreach efforts that states

report implementing took many forms, including partnerships with community organizations

such as schools, health clinics, and community groups to promote enrollment, placing eligibility

workers who can help fill out the forms in locations other than welfare offices, instituting a toll-

free hotline to help with enrollment questions, and bilingual or multilingual applications and

eligibility workers.

       After its first ten years, CHIP came up for renewal in 2007. Twice Congress passed bills

reauthorizing CHIP, but both bills were vetoed by President Bush. One of the main areas of

disagreement was over offering coverage to higher income children, with Congress voting to

offer coverage to higher income children and the administration expressing concern about

negative effects of crowd-out. In late 2007 the Medicare, Medicaid and SCHIP Extension Act of

2007 was passed and signed, largely maintaining existing funding levels for the program on a

short-term basis. Then in 2009 the Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act

(CHIPRA) reauthorized the program, provided additional funding and made other significant

changes. An important change related to eligibility is the removal of the five-year waiting period

requirement for immigrant children and pregnant women in Medicaid and CHIP, giving States

the option of receiving federal funding to provide coverage to these populations without a

waiting period. CHIPRA also changed the financing formula. Instead of being based on

estimates of per capita health costs and the number of uninsured children, state allotments are

now based on historical CHIP spending, with rebasing every two years and annual updates for

cost inflation and population growth.

       The results of the coverage expansions to children beginning in the late 1980s and

continuing through CHIPRA can easily be seen in Figure 1, an updated version of a figure from



                                                 21
Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004). Health insurance coverage rates by family income as a

percent of the poverty line among children exhibited a distinct U-shape prior to the expansions,

as Medicaid was available only to the poorest children and private coverage rates did not equal

or exceed Medicaid coverage rates except for children in families with incomes around 1.5 times

the poverty line. Over the next 25 years, as the expansions took effect, insurance coverage rates

smoothed out across the income distribution so that even at the lowest point coverage rates were

around 85 percent, climbing above 90 percent for children with incomes above 3 times the

poverty line.

       In addition to the optional expansions in the laws discussed previously, over this period

the federal government used its regulatory authority to add several provisions to the Medicaid

rules or to encourage their use, permitting states to expand eligibility further. 8 The first policy

shift, known as the 1902(r)(2) option after the section that was added to the Social Security Act

by the MCCA, allowed states to use more liberal methods for calculating income and resources

for some categories of Medicaid eligible individuals. For example, states could choose to

disregard some family income or resources when determining eligibility. This raises the

effective income eligibility level above the official maximum level by reducing the amount of

income actually counted. Importantly, states were permitted to increase eligibility in this way for

section 1931 eligibles (low-income parents) as well as for children and pregnant women

(Davidoff et al. 2004). As a result, many states’ eligibility limits became considerably more

generous to parents (Aizer and Grogger 2003). The second change was to encourage the use of

section 1115 waivers. In 2001 the executive branch used its regulatory authority to implement



8
 The federal regulatory agency with primary authority in interpreting and implementing
Medicaid legislation was known as the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) until June
2001, when its name was changed to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).
                                                  22
the Health Insurance Flexibility and Accountability (HIFA) waiver initiative, which encouraged

states to apply for waivers that expanded coverage without expanding funding by using changes

in benefits packages and cost sharing provisions to help finance the expansions. In particular,

some states obtained section 1115 waivers in order to provide some coverage to childless,

nondisabled adults, the only way in which such individuals could be covered under Medicaid.

Because these waivers were required to be budget neutral for the federal government, they often

entailed limits on benefits, higher cost sharing, or enrollment caps (Rudowitz, Artiga, and

Musumeci 2014).

       A somewhat less well-known change that occurred to Medicaid during this period came

about because of the master settlement agreement between 46 states and the District of Columbia

and tobacco manufacturers. In the settlement, manufacturers agreed to make annual payments to

the states intended to recompense them for the cost to state Medicaid programs of treating

tobacco-induced illnesses (Schneider et al. 2002). In addition, the federal government allowed

states to keep the federal share as well, and moreover states were permitted to use the tobacco

payments to fund the state portion of Medicaid, effectively raising the federal match rate above

the nominal matching rate.

The Affordable Care Act

       Arguably the single most far-reaching change to Medicaid is the one that was

implemented most recently: the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 and the

Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010—together known as the Affordable Care

Act, or ACA. By the time of the passage of the ACA, Medicaid eligibility had expanded

substantially, but was still largely limited to individuals in the original mandated groups

(families, the disabled, and the elderly). As discussed above, a few states had extended eligibility



                                                 23
under waivers to able-bodied low-income adults who are not parents. Under the ACA, Medicaid

eligibility levels for children younger than 6 were intended to remain largely unchanged, as were

eligibility levels for pregnant women. For older children, if the state covered children with

family incomes between 100 and 133 percent of the FPL under a separate CHIP plan, sometimes

referred to as “stair-step” eligibility, the state was required to transition those children from

separate CHIP to Medicaid. The most significant change in the ACA, however, was the potential

expansion of Medicaid eligibility to adults. According to the original legislation, Medicaid was

to be expanded to all adults with family incomes below 138 percent of the FPL: 133 percent of

the FPL plus a 5 percent income disregard. The legislation included a higher federal match for

newly eligible adults—100 percent through 2016 then phasing down to 90 percent in 2020 and

following. However, the Supreme Court decision of June 2012 ruled that states would not lose

existing Medicaid funds if they did not expand Medicaid for all individuals under 138 percent of

the FPL, essentially making the expansion a state option. The decisions of the states about

whether to participate in the Medicaid expansion are shown in the columns of Table 2.

       In addition to changes in eligibility for Medicaid, the ACA called for the creation of

marketplaces (“exchanges”) for the purchase of non-group coverage which would be federally

subsidized on a sliding scale for individuals with family incomes below 400 percent of the FPL.

The ACA also mandated that individuals obtain insurance coverage or pay a penalty through the

tax system. Individuals who cannot obtain affordable coverage (including individuals with

incomes below the FPL in states not expanding Medicaid) are exempt from the penalty.9




9
 The affordability standard for individuals is that the plan should cost less than 8 percent of their
household income. For other exemptions, see https://www.healthcare.gov/fees-
exemptions/exemptions-from-the-fee/.
                                                  24
       Because eligibility for premium credits through the exchanges is based on income tax

rules for counting income and family size, states are required to base eligibility for Medicaid and

CHIP for families and able-bodied adults on these same rules to ensure that eligibility is

comparable across the different potential sources of coverage. Specifically, the tax-filing unit

becomes the basis for family structure calculations, and the ACA establishes a new definition of

income known as modified adjusted gross income (MAGI). MAGI is adjusted gross income

(AGI) as determined under the federal income tax, plus any foreign income or tax-exempt

interest that a taxpayer receives, and untaxed Social Security benefits (see UC Berkeley Labor

Center 2013 for a brief summary of the components of MAGI). Assets are not considered when

determining income eligibility. Any previously existing disregards (differing by state and

eligibility category) that were applied to income before it was compared to the limits were

eliminated and replaced with a single disregard equal to 5 percent of the FPL. Importantly, these

changes apply whether or not the state chooses to expand its Medicaid program. However, the

blind, elderly, and disabled populations will continue to have financial eligibility determined

using existing Medicaid rules (including both income and assets).

       The use of MAGI and a fixed 5 percent disregard represents a major change in the way

states calculate income eligibility for Medicaid. Prior to the ACA, under the freedom offered by

the 1902(r)(2) option, states had some discretion about which types of income to count and how

much income to disregard before comparing this net income level to the statutory net income

eligibility standard. Thus not only does the ACA standardize the way income is counted across

states, but it also changes how much of income is actually counted toward eligibility and which

family members are included in the family unit whose income is being combined. Under the

ACA, states were required to convert their net income standards to equivalent adjusted gross



                                                25
income standards using one of three possible strategies to determine equivalence and accounting

for disregards that were used previously, with the goal being to keep the number of eligible

individuals approximately the same (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 2012a).

Because of these changes in how income and family group are defined, however, some

individuals in eligibility groups not intended to be affected by the ACA—that is, groups that

were already eligible for Medicaid and were intended to remain so—may be affected.

        The effects of this change to income counting methodologies are reflected in the income

eligibility limits made public for states. In column (4) of Table 3 we show the 2013 income

eligibility limits for children, which were applied to income after state-specified disregards (that

were not well publicized) were subtracted. (We show the higher of the CHIP and Medicaid

eligibility limits, indicating with an asterisk states where Medicaid limits were lower than CHIP

limits.) Column (5) shows the income limits in 2014 incorporating the 5 percent disregard; these

income limits are applied to the family’s MAGI. In most cases the apparent increase between

2013 and 2014 reflects only the change in income counting methodology and not a true increase

in eligibility.

        In addition to the eligibility changes discussed above, there are some provisions of the

ACA that specifically affect immigrants (Kenney and Huntress 2012). Undocumented

immigrants are not eligible for Medicaid and are not eligible to purchase marketplace coverage.

Such immigrants will still be eligible for emergency Medicaid and optionally for prenatal care

under an option established for CHIP in 2002 allowing states to cover the unborn child

(Heberlein et al. 2013). Legal immigrants in states that did not relax the five-year residency rule

after being given the option in CHIPRA are still ineligible for Medicaid until they have been in

the country for five years, but they may purchase coverage through the exchanges and they are



                                                 26
eligible for the tax credit subsidies. Individuals with incomes below 100 percent of the FPL but

who are ineligible for Medicaid due to the five-year rule are eligible to receive tax credits for

coverage purchased through the exchanges (Stephens and Artiga 2013). They are subject to the

mandate, unless they are otherwise exempt for income reasons.

       Overall, Medicaid today resembles in many ways the program that was established 50

years ago, although with some key differences. It remains a state-federal partnership, with the

partnership being more or less contentious in different states and for different reasons including

federal restrictions on state desired program flexibility, federal requirements for coverage and

service provisions that states may find difficult to meet in difficult economic times, and state

attempts to maximize the funding obtained from the federal government. The services provided

to beneficiaries have become broader and have included some important additions, although key

elements remain the same. Eligibility continues to involve a categorical eligibility

determination, although the eligibility pathways have become broader and more numerous.

According to the CMS there are 48 mandatory eligibility groups, 32 optional eligibility groups

(including the ACA category of adults with incomes at or below 133% FPL that would subsume

many of the other categories), and 9 medically needy categories.10 The individual’s eligibility

pathway determines what income limit applies as well as which income counting methodology

will be used. The eligibility pathway also determines whether “spending down” is permitted to

qualify for coverage and whether a resource test applies and if so which one. Immigration status

and date of entry to the U.S. also affect eligibility. Overall, however, it is clear that the Medicaid

program has moved from being a small program that covered only some of the very poorest

members of society to a central part of the health care system in the United States.

10
  http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-
topics/Waivers/1115/Downloads/List-of-Eligibility-Groups.pdf
                                                 27
II. Program Statistics

Enrollment and Expenditures

       Figure 2 plots Medicaid enrollment by eligibility category from 1975 to 2010. By 1975,

all states but Arizona had implemented the program and total enrollment stood at 22 million

people. As has been the case throughout the history of the program, children represented the

largest eligibility category, accounting for 43.6 percent of total enrollment. The second largest

eligibility category consisted of non-elderly, non-disabled adults (20.6 percent of total

enrollment) followed by aged beneficiaries (16.4 percent) and the disabled (11.2 percent).

Enrollment remained essentially constant over the next ten years and then began to increase in

the late 1980s and early 1990s as a result of eligibility expansions for pregnant women and

children. In the mid-1990s the combined effect of a strong national economy and welfare reform

legislation led to declines in enrollment. Steady growth resumed in the early 2000s, and by 2010

more than 65 million people were enrolled in Medicaid.11

       Over the period shown in the figure, the eligibility category with the greatest total

enrollment growth was children; in 2010, children represented 48.4 percent of total Medicaid

enrollment. Enrollment among non-elderly adults grew at a slightly higher rate over this period:

by an average annual rate of 6.8 percent for non-disabled adults and 7.7 percent for the disabled.

In 2010, these two eligibility groups represented 23.8 and 14.3 percent of total Medicaid

enrollment, respectively. Enrollment grew much more slowly among the aged. As a result, by

2010 this was the smallest eligibility group, accounting for 6.6 percent of total enrollment.



11
  Enrollment figures based on administrative data may differ across sources and by the type of
count—for example, the number of people enrolled at a point in time or the number enrolled at
any point during a given year.
                                                 28
       Open enrollment for the Affordable Care Act’s new insurance options began in October

2013, for coverage that became effective in January 2014.12 For private coverage purchased

through the federal or state exchanges, the enrollment period closed at the end of March 2014

(though consumers meeting a variety of criteria could enroll after this date). Enrollment in

Medicaid can take place any time during the year. By early 2015, CMS was reporting that

Medicaid/CHIP enrollment had increased by between 10 and 11 million people between July-

September 2013 and November 2014 (CMS 2015). As of December 2014, total Medicaid/CHIP

enrollment was 69.7 million. Among the states that had implemented the ACA eligibility

expansion, enrollment had increased by nearly 9 million, an increase of roughly 27 percent.

Fifteen of the expansion states experienced increases of 30 percent or more. In states that chose

not to expand Medicaid eligibility, Medicaid/CHIP enrollment grew by 1.5 million or roughly 7

percent. This enrollment growth in non-expansion states can be interpreted as a “woodwork” or

“welcome mat” effect. For example, media attention to the ACA may have raised awareness of

the program among people who were previously eligible but not enrolled. In addition,

enrollment may have increased among previously eligible individuals who were afraid they

would be subject to a tax penalty if they did not obtain insurance.

       Table 4 compares 2011 enrollment figures from administrative data to total population

counts to calculate coverage rates for the different age groups. One important difference

between Table 4 and Figure 2 is that the data in the table include CHIP enrollment, whereas the

data in the figure do not. Out of 75.8 million people who were enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP at



12
  Several states took advantage of a provision in the law allowing states to expand before 2014.
These states transferred beneficiaries in existing state or local programs into Medicaid in
addition to expanding coverage to previously uninsured adults (Sommers, Kenney and Epstein
2014). According to CMS, nearly 950,000 individuals gained coverage as a result of these early
expansions (CMS 2014).
                                                29
some point in 2011, 40.2 million were children. This figure represents just over half of all

children in the U.S. Measuring enrollment at a point in time yields a coverage rate of 41.3

percent. In 2011, a similar percentage of non-elderly and elderly adults had Medicaid coverage.

The point-in-time Medicaid coverage rates calculated based on administrative data were 11.7

percent for 19 to 64 year olds and 13.7 percent for adults over age 65. The last two columns

report coverage estimates based on the two Federal surveys that are most often used in research

on health insurance: the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and the Current Population

Survey (CPS). Although the two surveys ask about insurance coverage in different ways, they

produce fairly similar estimates of coverage. Medicaid enrollment tends to be underestimated in

survey data (Davern et al. 2009), as can be observed in this table. For all ages, the coverage rate

in the two surveys is 16.5 percent, nearly 3 percentage points lower than the point-in-time

measure based on administrative data.

       Figures 3 and 4 plot expenditure data by eligibility category for the period 1975 to 2010.

Figure 3 presents total expenditures expressed in nominal dollars, while Figure 4 presents

payments per beneficiary expressed in 2010 dollars. In 1975, real per capita spending was

$9,165 for the disabled, $8,655 for the aged, $3,268 for other adults and $1,638 for children.

Because there were more aged than disabled beneficiaries, total spending was higher for the

aged. Per capita expenditures trended similarly for the two groups, but by the late 1980s total

spending was greater for the disabled because of higher enrollment growth. Together, the aged

and disabled account for roughly 20 percent of Medicaid enrollment but over 60 percent of

program expenditures. As would be expected, per capita spending is considerably lower for non-

disabled, non-elderly adults and is lowest for children. For both of these groups, the growth in

total expenditures from 1975 to 2010 is driven mainly by increased enrollment. Real per capita



                                                30
spending for adults was actually lower in 2010 than in 1975 ($3,102 vs. $3,268). In 2010, the

adult eligibility category accounted for 24 percent of enrollment and 14 percent of expenditures.

Children, who represent just under half of all Medicaid beneficiaries, account for roughly 20

percent of spending.

       Figure 5 breaks down Medicaid benefit spending by service category for the entire

program and for each of the main eligibility groups. A large share of spending for disabled and

aged enrollees is for long-term services and supports: 36 percent for the disabled and 66 percent

for the elderly. Across all eligibility categories, Medicaid enrollees who use long-term services

and supports represent 6% of enrollment and almost half of total spending (MACPAC 2014).

       Figure 6 plots Medicaid and CHIP spending by the Federal government and the states.

As noted in Section II.A, the FMAP formula that determines how the financing of Medicaid is

divided between the Federal government and states has not changed since the start of the

program. However, twice in the last 15 years Congress has temporarily increased FMAPs to

provide fiscal relief to the states. In 2003, it increased the matching rates by nearly 3 percent as

part of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act. Congress increased FMAPs even

more in 2009 as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), which included

$87 billion for a temporary increase in the FMAP.13 Under ARRA, all states received at least a

6.2 percent increase in their FMAP; states that had experienced large increases in unemployment

since 2006 received an additional reduction in their share of program spending. The temporary

FMAP bump expired in 2011 and in 2012 the Federal share of total Medicaid spending was

down to 56.5 percent.




13
  ARRA also provided Federal funds for states to provide incentives for eligible Medicaid
providers to purchase and implement certified electronic health records (MACPAC 2012).
                                                 31
Provider Reimbursement

       The amount that Medicaid pays providers varies across states and over time. Table 5

summarizes some of the variation in physician reimbursement rates. The figures come from

several studies by Stephen Zuckerman and colleagues, who collected data on Medicaid fees for

different services (Zuckerman et al. 2004, Zuckerman, Williams and Stockley 2009; Zuckerman

and Goin 2012). To provide a sense of how Medicaid compares to other payers, the

reimbursement rates are expressed as a percentage of Medicare rates, which tend to be lower

than private fees. The top panel reports the national average Medicaid/Medicare ratio by broad

service category. Considering all services, in 2003 Medicaid physician fees were 69 percent of

Medicare fees. The national average increased to 72 percent in 2008 before falling to 66 percent

in 2012. In general Medicaid fees tend to be higher relative to Medicare for obstetric services

and lower for primary care.

       The bottom panel of the table gives a sense of the variation across states. In each year,

the large majority of states pay physicians between 50 percent and 100 percent of what Medicare

pays. Several of the states that pay more than Medicare are sparsely populated states with small

Medicaid programs: Alaska and Wyoming in all three years and Idaho, Montana, Nebraska,

Nevada, New Mexico and North Dakota in 2008. At the other end of the spectrum, New Jersey

and Rhode Island were the two lowest paying states in all three years, with rates that were

between 35 and 42 percent of Medicare, depending on the year. New York, which has the

second largest program in terms of total enrollment, has historically also had low Medicaid rates.

In 2008, New York’s rates were the third lowest of all states at 43 percent of Medicare rates. In

2012, New York’s Medicaid fees were 55 percent of Medicare’s. California, which has roughly




                                                32
twice as many Medicaid enrollees as New York, has also historically had low reimbursement

rates. In 2012, California paid 51 percent of Medicare rates on average.

       The data summarized in Table 5 pertain to Medicaid and Medicare patients for whom

physicians are paid on a fee-for-service basis. One response states have made to the substantial

budgetary pressure of Medicaid has been to encourage or require recipients to enroll in managed

care plans. As noted in Section II, since the early 1990s, both programs have seen a significant

growth in the percentage of patients who are covered by managed care arrangements. As shown

in Figure 7, Medicaid managed care penetration grew from 9.5 percent in 1990 to 56 percent by

the end of that decade. Since then, the share of Medicaid enrollees in managed care has

continued to grow, though less rapidly. By 2012, roughly three-quarters of Medicaid

beneficiaries were in some form of managed care.

       Recall that in the context of Medicaid, the term managed care encompasses several

different types of arrangements, including comprehensive risk-based plans that received a fixed

payment per member per month—i.e., HMOs—as well as primary care case management

programs that pay primary care providers a monthly fee to coordinate the care of enrollees. The

prevalence of these arrangements varies across eligibility categories. In FY2010,

87 percent of children were covered by managed care; 62 percent of all Medicaid children were

in a comprehensive risk-based plan.14 Among non-disabled adults, 60.5 percent were in some

form of managed care, including 46.8 percent in a risk-based plan. The disabled were slightly

more likely to be in some form of managed care (63.1 percent) but much less likely to be

enrolled in a comprehensive plan (28.7 percent). The aged were least likely to be in managed




14
  Figures on managed care enrollment by eligibility category are from Table 17 of MACPAC
(2013).
                                                33
care overall: in 2010 40.6 percent were covered by a managed care arrangement and 11.9 percent

were in a comprehensive plan.



IV. Review of Issues

       Unsurprisingly given the magnitude of expenditures on the Medicaid program and the

sizeable number of recipients, Medicaid has garnered substantial research interest covering a

variety of areas. An important area of research focus is the effectiveness of the program and its

design, including examinations of whether Medicaid is accomplishing its intended goals of

improving access to timely and appropriate medical care, improving health, and reducing the

financial impact of health shocks. Research in this area has examined the impact of Medicaid

eligibility and Medicaid coverage as well as the impacts of particular policy elements, such as

reimbursement policy, on program effectiveness. A smaller but growing number of studies

investigate the effect of Medicaid on other aspects of individual well-being, including financial

well-being.15 There has also been an important research focus on the unintended consequences

of Medicaid and its design for beneficiaries and providers, including issues of crowding out of

other sources of insurance, labor supply, and provider financial impacts. In addition, the structure

of the program and its relation to other means-tested programs has given rise to research on

program interactions.




15
   The literatures on these various outcomes are large, including many more studies than we are
able to cite in this review. Despite the size of this literature, there is very little research that
attempts to perform a comprehensive welfare analysis comparing the social benefits of the
program to its costs. An important exception is a recent paper by Finkelstein, Hendren and
Luttmer (2015).
                                                 34
A. Program Take-up and Crowd-Out

       A key question in considering the impact of Medicaid is whether it is reaching

individuals whom it is intended to help. As discussed above, for much of Medicaid’s existence it

accompanied cash assistance receipt, and thus take-up of the program was intertwined with take-

up of cash assistance. However, the de-linking of Medicaid from cash assistance for many

eligibility groups means that take-up of Medicaid coverage can be considered separately.

Moreover, Medicaid is an in-kind benefit that may duplicate insurance an eligible individual

could potentially obtain privately, raising the question of the extent of crowding out of private

health insurance. The potential for Medicaid to crowd out private insurance coverage has direct

implications for program expenditures.

       Simple theoretical models of take-up and crowd-out such as those discussed in Cutler and

Gruber (1996) and Ham, Ozbeklik, and Shore-Sheppard (2014) suggest that an eligible family

will compare the benefits and costs associated with participating in Medicaid with the benefits

and costs of private insurance and will choose public coverage, private coverage, or both based

on which choice maximizes utility. Take-up is defined as the enrollment response to eligibility,

with estimates of take-up differing depending on whether an average take-up rate (that is, the

average rate of enrollment among all eligible individuals) or a marginal take-up rate (that is, the

rate of enrollment among an individual made newly eligible) is being calculated.

       The basic idea of crowd-out is simple: the availability of public insurance will lead some

families to substitute that coverage for private coverage. However, in practice there are multiple

conceptions of crowd-out and multiple ways to measure it, leading to some confusion about

which are comparable and which are not. One simple measure of crowd-out asks how making an

individual eligible for Medicaid affects his or her probability of having private coverage. This



                                                 35
measure has the advantage of being symmetric with the marginal take-up rate. In addition, it can

be estimated directly along with its standard error. Another measure rescales estimates of the

private response to eligibility by the take-up response to eligibility, measuring crowd-out as the

reduction in private insurance coverage associated with an increase in Medicaid coverage. This

measure has the characteristic that two equivalent private coverage responses to eligibility would

produce different magnitudes of crowd-out, with crowd-out considered to be larger when the

public coverage response to eligibility was smaller.16 Another measure of crowd-out is the

difference between the fraction of eligible children who would have private coverage if they

were (counterfactually) not eligible and the fraction of those children who actually have private

coverage. Still other measures use longitudinal or administrative data to look at explicit

transitions out of private coverage, measuring crowd-out as the transition rate out of private

coverage with eligibility.

       An important concern for researchers interested in estimating take-up and crowd-out is

the likely endogeneity of eligibility. This potential endogeneity arises because unobservable

factors affecting eligibility are likely to be correlated with unobservable factors affecting health

insurance choices, for example attitudes towards participation in public programs, the wages and

fringe benefits of jobs held by eligible and ineligible individuals, and factors affecting relative

costs of obtaining private insurance or enrolling in Medicaid. We discuss how researchers have

dealt with eligibility endogeneity below when we outline the strategies researchers have used for

identifying causal estimates.




16
  This ratio measure also has the problem that researchers who report it rarely provide a standard
error for this measure, and it is not possible to calculate one just from the standard errors on the
individual estimates.
                                                 36
B. The Effect of Public Health Insurance on Health Care Utilization and Health Status

       The effect of gaining Medicaid coverage on health care utilization and health status will

depend on an individual’s insurance coverage and access to care prior to enrolling in the

program. Relative to being uninsured, Medicaid lowers the out-of-pocket cost of all types of

care. The main effect of this cost reduction will be to increase utilization, though it is possible

that increased use of certain types of care may result in reduced use of others. For example,

improved access to primary and preventive care may lead to health improvements that reduce

hospitalizations. There is therefore a great interest among health services researchers in the

relationship between insurance coverage and “avoidable” or “ambulatory care sensitive” hospital

admissions. Health care utilization is less likely to increase for individuals who drop private

coverage to enroll in Medicaid. In fact, because Medicaid reimbursement rates are so much

lower than rates paid by private insurers, such individuals may experience reduced access to

care, particularly care involving costly technologies. Consequently the impact of Medicaid on

utilization in the presence of substitution is an empirical question.

       Although there is much interest in understanding how insurance coverage affects health,

measuring health outcomes can be challenging. Studies focusing on ambulatory care sensitive

hospital admissions often interpret reductions in such utilization as an improvement in health.

Other studies have examined the impact of Medicaid on health directly, looking at outcomes

such as blood pressure and other clinical measures of health, infant birth weight, infant or child

mortality, or self-reported health status.

C. Impacts on Health Care Providers

       The impact of Medicaid coverage on utilization of care and health will also depend on the

willingness of different types of providers to supply services to Medicaid patients, which will



                                                  37
depend on how Medicaid payment rates compare to what providers are paid for patients with

Medicare and private insurance (Sloan, Mitchell and Cromwell 1978). As shown in Table 5,

Medicaid fees vary across states and over time, but in general tend to be substantially lower than

those for other payers. In 2011-12, roughly 30 percent of all physicians did not accept new

Medicaid patients (Decker 2013).

       The effect of eligibility expansions on physicians and other providers will depend on the

mix of patients they were treating prior to the expansion, the degree of crowd-out and how

Medicaid payment rates compare to those of other payers. When there is little or no crowd-out,

the main effects of an eligibility expansion will be on physicians who were previously treating

low-income patients, including both those with Medicaid and the uninsured. Providers

specializing in treating privately insured patients will be less affected. In contrast, when

eligibility expansions induce a substitution of public for private insurance, many providers,

including those that were not previously treating Medicaid patients, will experience the

expansion as a reduction in payment rates for patients they are already seeing.

       Changes in fees, whether they arise implicitly through crowd-out or directly from a

change in a state’s fee schedule, will have both substitution and income effects. Some research

on Medicare suggests that for that program income effects are important; physicians respond to

reductions in Medicare payment rates by increasing the volume of services provided (see

McGuire (2000) for a good review). Such a response is less likely in the case of Medicaid given

that Medicaid patients represent a smaller share of the patients seen by most physicians in private

practice. When the substitution effect dominates, physicians will respond to a decrease in

Medicaid fees by reducing their supply of services to Medicaid patients.




                                                 38
       Medicaid eligibility and payment policies affect incentives for providers to invest in and

use medical technology. When Medicaid accounts for a large share of patients for particular

services, as is the case with obstetric care, hospitals will have less incentive to invest in costly

technology, such as neonatal intensive care units, and physicians will have less incentive to

provide more costly treatments.

       In addition to financing roughly half of all births, Medicaid pays for a large share of

nursing home care in the US. In 2011, Medicaid was the primary payer for over 60 percent of all

nursing home residents (Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured 2013). Therefore,

Medicaid payment policy has important implications for the quality of nursing home care,

though the relationship between payment rates and quality is complex. When supply-side

regulations limit capacity and quality is a common good that is experienced equally by all

patients in the same facility, an increase in Medicaid payments can lead to a reduction in quality

(Nyman 1985; Gertler 1989).17 This result is less likely when capacity is less constrained.

D. Impacts on Labor Supply and Other Program Participation

       From the beginning of its history Medicaid has been linked to cash assistance programs,

with participation in these other programs leading to eligibility for Medicaid. When participation

in a cash assistance program yields health insurance benefits as well as cash, participants would

be even less likely to work than if they only received the cash payment. The Medicaid

expansions of the late 1980’s and onwards that separated the receipt of Medicaid benefits from

welfare participation meant that individuals would be less likely to choose not to work since they




17
  The reason for this counterintuitive result is that higher payment rates will cause nursing
homes to attract more Medicaid patients. Homes that were already at full capacity will therefore
want fewer private pay patients, causing them to raise price and lower quality to private pay
patients.
                                                  39
could still obtain Medicaid while working. The effect of the expansions on hours is ambiguous

as some parents who were working may cut their hours to qualify for Medicaid.

       The potential effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion is also complex. As an effective

increase in unearned income, the availability of Medicaid coverage should reduce hours of work

and lower participation rates. However, the availability of subsidized private insurance for

individuals and families with incomes above the FPL should reduce the incentive for workers to

cut their hours in order to qualify for Medicaid. (And in states choosing not to expand Medicaid,

some low-income workers will have an incentive to increase hours to qualify for private

insurance subsidies.)

E.     Impacts on Family Structure

       There are several possible channels through which Medicaid may affect family structure.

The link between AFDC eligibility and Medicaid for poor children that existed for the first

twenty years of the program, and the fact that AFDC eligibility in most states was limited to

single parents (effectively, single mothers) meant that marriage deprived a woman not only of an

income source but also of health insurance for herself and her children. While marriage

presumably replaced potential AFDC income with potential spousal earnings, the need to obtain

health insurance for the entire family as well may have dissuaded some individuals from

marrying. Thus by making eligibility for Medicaid for one’s children not conditional on marital

status, it is possible that the Medicaid expansions that began in the 1980s had the effect of

encouraging marriage.

       Medicaid might also impact family structure by affecting fertility decisions. In the

framework developed by Becker (1960) and Becker and Lewis (1973), both the quantity and

quality of children enter the mother’s utility function. Thus covering the costs of prenatal care,



                                                 40
delivery, and infant care lowers the price of quantity, inducing substitution in favor of quantity

and causing a rise in fertility. In addition, Medicaid could also reduce miscarriages through

better prenatal care. Since in this model the shadow price of children with respect to quantity is

positively related to the level of quality, and vice versa, the theoretical impact of the expansions

on fertility is not unambiguously positive. The expansions for medical care for children lower

the price of quality, which may lead to lower birth rates.

       Another possible effect of Medicaid on fertility is the effect of Medicaid on the price of

ending a pregnancy or preventing conception. Following the Hyde Amendment of 1976, federal

funding of abortion under the Medicaid program was restricted to cases in which the mother’s

life is in danger. States have the option to cover abortions in their Medicaid program but will not

receive the federal match for them. Medicaid has covered the cost of family planning services

since 1972, and CHIP covers family planning services for adolescents. In addition, beginning in

the mid-1990s the federal government granted a number of states section 1115 waivers to offer

family planning services under Medicaid to higher income women or to women who otherwise

would have lost Medicaid eligibility, typically postpartum. While it may seem clear that

reducing the price of ending a pregnancy or preventing conception will reduce fertility,

interactions between take-up, existing private provision of such services, and changes in sexual

activity resulting from the change in the price make the fertility implications of such policies

unclear (Kearney and Levine 2009).

F. Impacts on Financial Well-Being

       There are a number of ways in which Medicaid may impact a family’s financial

circumstances. Because Medicaid insurance is generally offered below the fair insurance price,

it can be thought of as a transfer that improves the economic circumstances of the individual



                                                 41
through the reduction in medical insurance costs and out of pocket expenses that would

otherwise be incurred. Medicaid also helps families avoid catastrophic losses and bankruptcies

due to extreme medical expenses.

       Medicaid may also affect family savings, through four possible channels. First, by

reducing uncertainty about future medical expenses, Medicaid reduces the need for precautionary

saving. Thus eligible households would be expected to save less (and therefore have lower

assets) compared with ineligible households, all else being equal. However, to the extent that

households do not expect to qualify for Medicaid indefinitely, the effect of this channel would be

lessened. Second, the redistributive feature of Medicaid increases a household’s available

resources, and if the household’s marginal propensity to save is greater than zero, this increase

could lead to higher levels of asset holdings. The third channel by which the Medicaid program

may affect savings levels is through the asset test: households might reduce their wealth holdings

in order to qualify for insurance. Finally, Medicaid protects eligible families from health shocks

that can drive families into debt and bankruptcy. The current research in this area has generally

focused on how family medical debt, nonmedical debt and family bankruptcy are affected by

Medicaid expansions; available research indicates that it reduces a family’s medical debt and

probability of going into bankruptcy. In this way, Medicaid may increase a family’s assets.

G. Strategies for Identifying Causal Effects

       Empirical studies of all of the above questions generally aim to estimate causal effects.

However, given the means-tested nature of the program, there is a fundamental challenge for

research in this area as in other areas of policy evaluation: endogeneity of eligibility, enrollment,

and utilization. This endogeneity arises because unobservable factors affecting eligibility for the

program such as earnings ability, unobserved aspects of employment, availability of insurance



                                                 42
from other sources, and unobserved health status, are likely to be correlated with unobservable

factors that affect outcomes of interest such as health insurance choices, public program

participation, and labor supply. In addition, it may be difficult to control entirely for all of the

factors determining both eligibility and the outcome of interest, such as varying insurance

markets, changes in the economy, and changes in the supply of providers of various types.

       Due to this endogeneity, merely attempting to control for as many observable differences

between groups eligible and ineligible for Medicaid as possible is unlikely to produce

compelling estimates of the program’s effects. Researchers working on examining the impact of

Medicaid on a variety of outcomes have recognized this issue and have used a number of

identification strategies to try to obtain credible empirical estimates of the program’s effects.

These identification strategies have taken advantage of variation arising from the fact that

Medicaid parameters differ in every state. Moreover, these parameters can vary within a state

either geographically (as states implement changes in one place but not in another, for example),

by other subgroups in the population (by age, for example), or over time because of a policy

change at the state or federal level. The variation used can be truly random, as in the experiment

extending Medicaid to a subset of low-income adults in Oregon determined by lottery discussed

below, or more commonly, quasi-random. Below we give a general sense of how identification

is accomplished in studies of Medicaid and some important benefits and drawbacks of each

approach generally; we leave a more complete discussion of the details of specific papers to the

following section.

   1. Randomized Experiment

       Arguably, the strongest research design for estimating causal effects is a randomized

experiment, since by design there is no correlation between individual characteristics and the



                                                  43
policy of interest. While randomized experiments are rare in Medicaid research, an important

experiment, the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, is providing insights into key Medicaid

policy questions (see, e.g., Finkelstein et al. 2012, Baicker et al. 2013). In early 2008, Oregon

decided to make 10,000 additional places in its Medicaid program for low-income adults newly

available. Knowing that there were insufficient funds to cover everyone who would want to

enroll, the state applied for permission to use a random assignment mechanism. Approximately

90,000 people signed up for the reservation list, and the state ran a randomized lottery on that

group to determine which individuals would be permitted to apply for coverage. Individuals

chosen in the lottery were allowed to apply, and all selected individuals who filled out and

returned the application and who were found to be income-eligible were enrolled.18

        The researchers on the study matched an impressive wealth of data from hospital

discharge records, credit records, prerandomization demographics from the sign-up list, and a

follow-up survey of outcomes. Before looking at the data on outcomes for the treatment group,

most analyses were prespecified and publicly archived in order to minimize concerns about data

and specification mining. Since the population that received coverage through the experiment is

basically the same as the population gaining eligibility through the ACA, there is a high degree

of external validity with respect to that policy.

     2. Quasi-experiments

        Other studies in the literature exploit quasi-experimental variation arising from the fact

that income eligibility limits, provider reimbursement rates and other important program features



18
  Not all of the individuals chosen in the lottery obtained Medicaid coverage; according to
Finkelstein et al. (2012) “only about 60% of those selected sent back applications, and about half
of those who sent back applications were deemed ineligible, primarily due to failure to meet the
requirement of income in the last quarter corresponding to annual income below the poverty
level.”
                                                    44
vary across states. Changes in state and federal policy create additional variation over time.

Eligibility rules based on age create additional variation within state/year cells. Studies in the

literature exploit these different “natural experiments” in various ways.

       a. Regression Discontinuity

       In recent years, regression discontinuity (RD) techniques have become a standard

component of the empirical economist’s toolkit for estimating program effects. Such models

rely on the existence of a known cutoff or threshold in a variable (known as the “assignment”

variable) with different conditions occurring for observations falling on either side of it. As long

as individuals are unable to control precisely the assignment variable near the known cutoff, the

RD design isolates treatment variation that is “as good as randomized” (Lee and Lemieux 2010).

The examination of Medicaid, with its various eligibility cutoffs of different kinds, would seem

to be a fruitful place to use an RD design, and indeed several studies have used such an approach

to estimate the impact of Medicaid eligibility on insurance coverage and utilization. For

example, Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) use various discontinuities in eligibility arising from

the fact that eligibility under some expansions was extended only to children of certain ages. In

one formulation, they use the discontinuity in eligibility between children born before October 1,

1983, who had to meet the AFDC eligibility requirements in order to be eligible and children

born after that date, who could be in two-parent families and have family income as high as the

poverty level. The inability to control birthdate around that cutoff (particularly since that

birthdate cutoff was not established prospectively) makes it a compelling research design.

       Researchers have also applied RD methods to income cutoffs (see, e.g., de la Mata 2012,

Koch 2013), although the imperfect control assumption requires more justification in the case of

income. In addition, income is measured with considerably more error than birth date, and even



                                                 45
if it is measured well income at the time of the survey may not be the same as income at the time

an individual applies for coverage. Even more importantly, as discussed above prior to the ACA

each state had complicated rules about disregards that changed the actual level of the income

limits making the determination by the researcher of the correct income limit to apply to income

observed in the data more difficult.

       b. Difference-in-Differences

   Several variants of a difference-in-differences (DD) research design have been used to

estimate the effect of Medicaid policies. General methodological issues related to DD models

have been discussed extensively elsewhere (see, e.g., Meyer 1995; Bertrand, Duflo and

Mullainathan 2004), so here we highlight the way different authors have used DD methods to

leverage various sources of variation in the Medicaid program.

   Given the latitude that states have in determining program parameters, an important source of

variation is differences across states. For example, Gray (2001) uses a cross-sectional DD model

to estimate the effect of Medicaid physician fees on several birth outcomes. In this model,

pregnant women on Medicaid are the treatment group and other pregnant women are used as a

comparison group. Specifically, his regression models include a measure of Medicaid fees, an

indicator variable for Medicaid coverage and the interaction of the two. Choi (2011) takes a

similar approach to study the effect of adult dental benefits. The identifying assumption

underlying this approach is that state-level differences in Medicaid fees or dental benefits should

matter for Medicaid enrollees but not for other individuals in the state. An obvious limitation of

this approach is that state Medicaid policy may be correlated with other unmeasured factors

affecting the outcome, leading to biased estimates.




                                                46
       Other studies have used a DD strategy to compare changes over time for groups that were

subject to a change in Medicaid policy to control groups who should have been unaffected, or at

least less affected. The simplest application of this approach compares outcomes in two

periods—“pre” and “post”—for two groups—a “treatment” group that was the target of a policy

change and a “control” group that should have been unaffected, or at least less affected. For

example, to estimate the coverage effects of the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early

1990s, Dubay and Kenney (1996) compare changes in coverage for low-income women and

children, for whom income eligibility thresholds increased, with changes for low-income men,

who were not the target of the eligibility expansions. In these models, identification is based on

the assumption that in the absence of the Medicaid expansions, the outcomes studied would have

common trends across treatments and controls.

       These simple DD models do not take advantage of variation within states in eligibility

rules or other program parameters. To take advantage of such variation, researchers have turned

to triple difference models, with, for example, treatment and comparison groups within a state

over time. For example, Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo (2014) compare insurance

coverage among childless adults to other adults in Tennessee and other southern states before

and after a Medicaid policy change in Tennessee that affected childless adults more than parents.

Alternatively, policies may be more likely to apply to certain geographic areas within a state.

For example, Aizer (2007) studies the impacts on Medicaid enrollment of community-based

outreach organizations that were placed in some areas of California but not in other areas at

different times. The key identifying assumption in such models is that the trends would have

been the same for treatment and control groups within a state in the absence of the policy.




                                                47
        c. Instrumental Variables

        An alternative to the difference-in-differences approach that also utilizes variation arising

from policy changes to identify causal effects is to use policy variables as instrumental variables.

The most widely used instrumental variables approach in the Medicaid literature is the

“simulated eligibility” instrument that was pioneered by Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b) and

Cutler and Gruber (1996) and has been used in many papers since then. The idea of this

approach is to summarize the exogenous variation in Medicaid eligibility by determining the

fraction of a given sample that would be eligible for Medicaid under the rules applying in a

particular state at a particular time. This requires detailed knowledge of the rules for Medicaid

eligibility so that the eligibility for any individual in a sample can be determined based on his or

her observable characteristics. In order to remove the effects of any state and time-specific

economic conditions that might be correlated with both eligibility and the outcome of interest,

the fraction eligible is typically determined for a random sample at the national level, and often

for a fixed time period as well. This simulated fraction eligible, which is essentially an index of

the expansiveness of Medicaid eligibility for each subgroup in each state and time period, can

then be used as an instrument for actual (imputed) eligibility at the individual level (as in the

original papers by Currie and Gruber and Cutler and Gruber) or at an aggregated (cell) level (as

in Dafny and Gruber 2005).19

        The simulated eligibility instrumental variables approach typically involves estimating a

linear probability model (LPM) for the outcome of interest as a function of public insurance

eligibility (elig), which is imputed to individuals (i) on the basis of observed characteristics and

the eligibility rules in place for a given state and time period (t):

19
  Simulated eligibility has also been used in reduced form models as an arguably exogenous
index of availability of Medicaid (see, e.g., DeLeire, Lopoo, and Simon 2011).
                                                   48
        Outcomeitk =X it  k   k eligit  uitk

where k denotes the particular outcome of interest, X is a vector of additional variables affecting

the outcome, and u is an error term. In this framework, the effect of eligibility generally is

assumed to differ across individuals and resulting coefficients on eligit are best interpreted as

local average treatment effects (LATEs)— effects for individuals whose eligibility is affected by

marginal changes in the instrument, averaged across the different marginal changes present in the

data. So for example, when public coverage is the outcome of interest, the coefficient on eligit

represents the average take-up rate among individuals made eligible, and when private coverage

is the outcome of interest the coefficient is the average rate of loss of private coverage among

individuals made eligible. The ratio of the latter coefficient to the former is thus the rescaled

measure of crowd-out discussed earlier.

       This instrument has many benefits, as its widespread adoption makes clear: it is a useful

way to summarize complicated program rules in a simple but meaningful index, it is arguably

exogenous along several dimensions, and it has a very strong first stage relationship with

imputed eligibility. However, there are some issues that researchers who use this approach (and

also the difference-in-differences methods discussed above) must consider. One is policy

endogeneity: it is possible that government policy targets groups experiencing worse economic

conditions or occurs in response to other factors potentially correlated with the outcome of

interest, making state expansions potentially endogenous. This is a particular concern for

research examining later expansions that occur purely at state initiative and arguably a smaller

concern for research focusing on changes in eligibility that occurred in response to federal

requirements. It is also possible that groups experiencing worse economic conditions happened

to be those particularly affected by the expansions, even though the legislation was not


                                                   49
intentionally aimed to mitigate economic conditions for these groups (Shore-Sheppard 2008). To

try to account for such issues, researchers typically include state effects to account for

differences across states unrelated to the expansions, time effects to control for macroeconomic

shocks and economy-wide trends, and age effects to account for differences by age unrelated to

the expansions. Even these fixed effects may not be enough to account for differential trends

across ages or states, and if such trends are important, convincing identification may require the

inclusion of two-way interactions between age, state, or time to account for them (Shore-

Sheppard 2008). Even including such interactions may be insufficient if, for example, states are

targeting policy at particular groups in the population in response to changes in the outcome of

interest for those groups.

       Finally, mismeasurement (in income, for example) or the absence of information in the

data about other characteristics that would result in eligibility via other paths (such as high

medical expenses that would lead to medically needy eligibility or disability) may lead to

misclassification of eligibility status (Hamersma and Kim 2013). While many authors using

eligibility status have noted the problem, some have suggested that using simulated eligibility as

an instrument would mitigate the problem. Unfortunately, as measurement error in a binary

variable cannot be classical in the sense of being uncorrelated with the true value, an IV strategy

will not produce consistent estimates of the parameter of interest but may instead produce an

upper bound (Black, Berger, and Scott 2000).

       Another methodological issue is that as Ham, Ozbeklik, and Shore-Sheppard (2014) point

out, this framework has several limitations if one is interested in heterogeneity in the response to

the policy or in the effects of nonmarginal changes, and in addition the LPM approach allows an

individual to have a positive probability of having public insurance even if he or she is not



                                                 50
eligible for it. They suggest an alternative framework to deal with this issue and obtain estimates

of heterogeneous effects or the effects of nonmarginal changes (discussed further below).

However, their alternative approach relies on the same intuition as the simulated approach: since

the rules determining Medicaid eligibility are observable, they can be used to determine who in

the sample is affected by changes in policy.



V. Review of Research Evidence on Impacts of Medicaid

A. Eligibility, Take-Up, and Crowd-Out

1. Estimates for Children

       A number of studies have investigated how changes in Medicaid eligibility policy affect

insurance coverage, with the primary focus being changes in eligibility affecting children. One

set of papers focuses on the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s, while other

studies consider the effect of CHIP. In addition to examining the relationship between eligibility

and enrollment (take-up), these studies also estimate the effect of program eligibility on private

insurance coverage (crowd-out). Table 6 lists studies of take-up and crowd-out, focusing

primarily on studies that have been done since the Gruber (2003) review and studies done prior

to the review that were instrumental in informing the research that came later.20

       The seminal paper in the literature on Medicaid take-up and crowd-out is Cutler and

Gruber (1996)’s study on the effect of the eligibility expansions of the late 1980s and early

1990s. Using Current Population Survey (CPS) data for the period 1988 to 1993, they estimate

linear probability models of Medicaid coverage and of private coverage as a function of

eligibility using the simulated eligibility instrument discussed in section IV.G.2.c above. As

20
  In the tables for this section of the chapter we note standard errors of estimates where they are
known, although we omit them from the discussion of the studies below in the interest of space.
                                                51
noted above, the instrument is essentially an index of the generosity of Medicaid eligibility for

each age group in each state and year. It is correlated with individual eligibility for Medicaid but

not otherwise correlated with the demand for insurance, assuming that changes in a state’s

Medicaid provisions are not correlated with changes in the state’s availability or price of private

insurance.

       In this framework, the coefficient on eligibility in the Medicaid equation can be

interpreted as the average take-up rate among individuals whose eligibility is affected by

marginal changes in the instrument, while the coefficient in the private equation represents the

average private coverage response among these individuals. Cutler and Gruber estimate this

local average take-up rate to be 24 percent and the corresponding effect of eligibility on private

insurance to be 7 percent, both of which are statistically significant. As noted above, this effect

on private coverage can be interpreted as a measure of crowd-out. However, Cutler and Gruber

suggest scaling the private decline estimate by the estimate of the public coverage increase to

measure crowd-out as the ratio of these two coefficients, obtaining an estimate of crowd-out

(measured as the reduction in private insurance coverage associated with an increase in Medicaid

coverage) of 31 percent. They also try to account for the value of Medicaid to a family in

determining coverage decisions by examining the eligibility of all family members multiplied by

average health care spending for each family member’s age and gender. They find that for

children both own eligibility and the eligibility of other family members affects enrollment and

private coverage, with a one percentage-point increase in potential covered spending attributable

to own eligibility raising Medicaid coverage by 0.3 percentage points and reducing private

insurance by almost 0.2 percentage points. Unfortunately, the spending measures available were




                                                 52
rough averages by age groups and gender so it is unclear how well those averages correspond to

the actual circumstances facing families.

       Subsequent papers have reexamined the effect of these same eligibility expansions using

different data and methods. Shore-Sheppard (2008) investigates a number of critiques leveled at

the Cutler and Gruber paper, using CPS data for a slightly longer period (1988-1996) and the

same basic framework. Using the same data, she finds that the results are not qualitatively

affected by extending the sample period or by adding state X year and age X state dummies.

However, when she adds age X year dummies, either by themselves or with the other

interactions, she obtains smaller estimates of take-up (between 15 and 19 percent, depending on

whether other interactions are included) and crowd-out (the estimated rate of crowd-out with

eligibility is between 0.5 percent and 1.2 percent, with larger standard errors). She also finds

lower take-up rates when later expansions are included and small “wrong-signed” effects on

private coverage.

       Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005a) replicate Cutler and Gruber’s analysis using data on

children from the 1986-1993 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP),

which has several advantages relative to the CPS, including the fact that the reference period for

the insurance question is clearer and the period over which the respondent is asked to recall

information is much shorter. Compared to Cutler and Gruber, they obtain smaller estimates of

the marginal take-up rate (12 percent) and the effect of eligibility on private coverage (a fall of

0.6 percent), both estimated fairly precisely.

       With panel data, Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005a) are able to test whether the effects of

eligibility differ with time spent eligible and to estimate simple dynamic models that allow the

short-run and long-run effects of eligibility to differ. They find that the longer a child has been



                                                 53
eligible for Medicaid, the more likely she is to be enrolled in Medicaid and that the immediate

impact of eligibility on take-up (estimated using an endogenous lagged dependent variable as an

explanatory variable) is smaller than in the static models while the long-run impact from the

dynamic model is larger than in the static models. The dynamic models, like the static models,

show a statistically insignificant relationship between eligibility and private coverage.

       Ham, Li, and Shore-Sheppard (2009) estimate a simple descriptive model of transitions

between public insurance, private insurance, and no insurance coverage for children using the

SIPP 1986-1996 panels. They find that higher eligibility limits for public insurance increase the

transitions into, and out of, public coverage. While the latter effect seems counterintuitive, they

attribute it to higher income families, who are likely to have a greater preference for private

insurance and greater opportunities for jobs with private insurance, becoming eligible and

obtaining coverage when they hit hard times, but then leaving public insurance when the

economy recovers.

       As discussed in Section II, the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s

were the result of several legislative changes. In terms of their effect on eligibility levels, the

two most important changes in Medicaid rules came from the 1989 and 1990 Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Acts, which extended Medicaid eligibility to certain children in families with

incomes below 133 percent and 100 percent of the federal poverty level. A distinctive feature of

these laws is that eligibility was also tied to a child’s age or birthdate. The 133 percent

expansion applied to all children who were under age 6, while the 100 percent expansion applied

to children born after September 30, 1983. These rules created stark differences in coverage

options for children on either side of these age-related eligibility boundaries. Card and Shore-

Sheppard (2004) use regression discontinuity models applied to data from the SIPP and the



                                                  54
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) to exploit this quasi-experimental variation. For the

100 percent expansion they estimate a statistically significant Medicaid take-up rate of roughly 7

percent and a statistically insignificant effect of eligibility on other coverage. For the 133

percent expansion their parameter estimates are insignificant for both outcomes.

        Overall, the results from the research on Medicaid expansions prior to the

implementation of CHIP indicate marginal take-up rates that are fairly modest, typically ranging

between 15 and 24 percent although lower in some cases. While there is less of a consensus on

the magnitude of crowd-out, even the largest estimates of the marginal loss of private coverage

with eligibility are generally below 10 percent. Measuring crowd out as the estimates of private

coverage loss rescaled by the Medicaid take-up rate may suggest that private coverage loss is

more of a policy concern, although these estimates are driven as much by low levels of take-up

(the denominator) as by reductions in private coverage (the numerator). Therefore, large

estimates of crowd out may not necessarily imply that a large number of people are substituting

public coverage for private coverage—which is how such estimates are often interpreted—rather,

they may be a symptom of low take-up of public insurance. The appropriate policy responses to

a low take-up rate and a large effect of eligibility on private insurance coverage are likely to be

different.

        Researchers also used similar approaches to examine the effect of the CHIP eligibility

expansions, which states implemented in different years between 1997 and 2000. Using CPS

data, LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004) estimate a marginal take-up rate of 8 percent, lower than

Cutler and Gruber’s (1996) estimated Medicaid take-up rate, but similar to what Card and Shore-

Sheppard (2004) find for the expansion of Medicaid eligibility to 100 percent of the FPL.

Gruber and Simon (2008) obtain a similar estimate of the marginal take-up rate when they



                                                 55
estimate simulated eligibility IV models using SIPP data, whereas an analysis by Hudson,

Selden, and Banthin (2005) using data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)

produces take-up and crowd-out estimates that are closer to those of Cutler and Gruber.21

       LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004) find a small and statistically insignificant effect of

public insurance eligibility on private insurance. However, they also find evidence suggesting

that private insurance is mismeasured. Using private non-group insurance as the dependent

variable, they find that eligibility for CHIP has a positive and significant effect on coverage.

Since during this period many states either contracted with private managed care plans to provide

Medicaid benefits or designed their stand-alone CHIP plans to resemble private insurance, it is

possible that some parents whose children had Medicaid or CHIP coverage said that this

coverage was private when responding to the survey.22 Gruber and Simon (2008) also find a

small and statistically insignificant effect of public insurance eligibility on private coverage.

Rescaling by their estimated marginal take-up rate yields a substantial estimate of the impact of

actual public coverage on private coverage, but unlike most previous researchers reporting the

ratio estimate Gruber and Simon report standard errors, which show that the confidence interval

for the ratio estimate has a magnitude of over 50 percentage points, unsurprising since their

estimate of the effect of eligibility on private coverage is an imprecisely estimated 0. One

innovation of Gruber and Simon’s study is that they account for the fact that a non-trivial share



21
   This is one of the few studies to provide a standard error for the ratio crowd-out measure and
is to our knowledge the only study to find a statistically significant estimate of that measure.
22
   Card, Hildreth, and Shore-Sheppard (2004) examine a different issue of mismeasurement—the
accuracy of reported Medicaid coverage in the SIPP. Using administrative records from
California they find that the probability of correctly reporting coverage for those actually
covered by Medicaid is around 85 percent, with this probability rising for low-income children.
The probability that people who are not covered by Medicaid incorrectly report that they are
covered is about 1.3% for the population as a whole, but is higher (up to 7%) for low-income
children.
                                                 56
of children is reported to have public and private insurance at a point in time. They find that

eligibility has a positive effect on having both types of coverage.

       A recent addition to the literature on take-up and crowd-out presents an alternative to the

linear probability IV models that these and many other studies use. Ham, Ozbeklik, and Shore-

Sheppard (2014) develop a simple theory that suggests that one should estimate a Medicaid take-

up probit equation using only data on those eligible for Medicaid, and separate probit equations

for private insurance coverage for those covered and not eligible for Medicaid. Unlike the

standard LPM approach, in this set-up the effect of Medicaid eligibility on insurance coverage

will depend on a family’s characteristics. Additionally, because the coefficients are constant and

are not LATEs the model can be used to make out-of-sample forecasts of the effect of raising the

Medicaid income limits beyond their current levels. This greater usefulness comes at a cost: if

one wants to treat eligibility as endogenous, the computational burden of estimating the model

directly becomes quite high. However, they show that there is an efficient and relatively easy to

use indirect approach for estimating the model.

       The authors implement the model using data on children from the 1986-1993 SIPP

panels. Their estimated effects of eligibility on coverage are precisely estimated and vary widely

across the sample. The estimates show a clear pattern: eligible children from traditionally

disadvantaged groups take up Medicaid at a higher rate and private insurance at a lower rate than

do eligible children from typically less disadvantaged groups. Their estimates of the crowd-out

effect of eligibility for the entire sample and for the different demographic groups have relatively

small confidence intervals. The vast majority of crowd-out rates for the different demographic

groups are statistically distinguishable from zero and negative, indicating that private and public

insurance are indeed substitutes, although the degree of substitution is quite small.



                                                  57
2. Estimates for Adults

        A smaller number of studies examine the effects of changes in eligibility rules for adults.

Busch and Duchovny (2005) use a standard simulated eligibility model to study expansions

enacted in the wake of the 1996 welfare reform legislation, which allowed states to expand

Medicaid eligibility for adults, and a policy enacted in 2000 allowing states to use unspent CHIP

funds to insure low-income adults, mainly parents. They find that program eligibility raises a

parent’s Medicaid coverage by about 15 percentage points and reduces the probability of being

uninsured by about 11 points. The estimated effect of eligibility on private coverage is small and

statistically insignificant.

        Hamersma and Kim (2013) also examine parental Medicaid expansions, taking a

different approach to modeling the effect of eligibility on coverage. They point out the eligibility

is difficult to impute accurately since the information available in the data is not all of the

information used by those who make the actual eligibility determination, and they find that about

40 percent of Medicaid recipients in their sample were not assigned to be eligible by their

imputation procedure. Thus they take a reduced-form approach and use as their key independent

variable the state’s income eligibility threshold, rather than a measure of imputed eligibility. In

models where coverage is estimated as a quadratic function of the eligibility threshold they find

that raising the threshold increased Medicaid coverage, but at a decreasing rate. Their results

imply that an expansion in eligibility threshold by an “average” amount (about 12 percent of the

federal poverty level) increases Medicaid participation by about four percent of baseline

coverage rates. The estimated relationship between the Medicaid eligibility threshold and

private coverage is not statistically significant and often has the “wrong” sign. For comparability

to other studies they estimate the simulated eligibility instrument approach as well, finding



                                                  58
estimates of marginal take-up rates that are comparable to those found for children (on the order

of 15 percent) and still no evidence of crowd-out. Overall, the evidence on Medicaid expansions

to parents suggests similarly sized take-up effects to those estimated for children, and no

significant effect on private coverage. Since the expansions to parents tended to be focused on

fairly low-income families, these results are consistent with the results from studies of the early

expansions to children.

       Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo (2014) study a 2005 cutback in public insurance

eligibility for adults in Tennessee. The state’s program, TennCare, was unique among Medicaid

programs in that it offered coverage to adults, including those without children, with incomes

well above the poverty line if they were uninsured or “uninsurable.” In response to budget

shortfalls, Tennessee tightened its eligibility rules and disenrolled approximately 170,000 adults.

Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo’s analysis uses data from the CPS and a difference-in-

differences model that compares adults in Tennessee to adults in other Southern states. They

also estimate a triple-difference model that contrasts outcomes for childless adults, who were the

target of the disenrollment policy, and parents, who should have been less affected. Not

surprisingly, they find that public coverage fell in Tennessee relative to the comparison states.

Their baseline model indicates a coverage decline of roughly 4 percentage points; the triple-

difference model implies a 7-point decline. Turning to private insurance, their difference-in-

differences model implies that the elimination of TennCare eligibility led to a statistically

insignificant 1.7 percentage point increase in coverage while their triple-difference specification

implies a marginally significant gain of 4.3 points (p-value=.09). The ratio of these estimates to

the corresponding coefficients from the public coverage regressions yields large but imprecise




                                                 59
crowd-out estimates. For example, the triple-difference model implies crowd-out of 59.5

percent, but this estimate has a standard error of 38.4.23

3. The Impact of Other Policies Affecting Enrollment for Families

       Along with changes in eligibility policy, states have implemented many other policies

that have implications for take-up of the program. Some of these policies are intended to affect

take-up, such as administrative reforms to make enrollment easier (presumptive eligibility,

offering continuous coverage, or simplifying the application and renewal processes, for example)

or outreach to encourage take-up. Other policies are intended to achieve other goals for the

Medicaid program and have spillover effects on enrollment, such as the introduction of

premiums, the implementation of eligibility for parents at higher income levels, or changes in

physician fees. Still other policies that are not directly related to Medicaid such as immigration

enforcement, may affect Medicaid take-up.

       One concern about public health insurance expansions is that eligible individuals may be

unaware that they are eligible. Consequently, some states implemented information provision or

outreach campaigns. An important paper on the effectiveness of outreach is by Aizer (2007)

who uses data on Medicaid enrollment outreach efforts in California to address two questions: 1)

how successful are various types of outreach efforts at encouraging new enrollment? and 2) what

impact does this new enrollment have on ambulatory-care-sensitive hospital admissions? (The

second question is discussed below in the section on utilization of care.) Outreach includes

community-based application assistants (organizations trained in enrolling eligible individuals--

CBOs) and a state advertising campaign. Aizer obtained data on CBO placement and



23
   Finkelstein et al. (2012) examine the insurance response to the Oregon lottery as the first stage
in their examination of the impact of insurance on health. Their estimate is that the lottery
increased Medicaid coverage by approximately 20 percent and did not reduce private coverage.
                                                 60
administrative data on new Medicaid enrollment by ZIP code, race, and month for February 1996

to December 2000 among all children age 0 to 15. Collapsing the data to zip code-year-month-

race cells, she examines the impact on enrollment of the number of CBOs in a ZIP code

controlling for ZIP code fixed effects to account for the fact that areas with more intense

outreach efforts may have higher numbers of low-income children, and time fixed effects to

control for general trends in enrollment over this time period, respectively. She finds significant

effects of CBOs, especially for Hispanic and Asian children. The estimates suggest that an

additional Spanish-language CBO increases total new monthly Medicaid enrollment for Hispanic

children by 9%, while an additional Asian-language CBO increases enrollment by 27% among

Asian children. The effects are larger when the CBO is also a healthcare provider. She also

looks at advertising, including Spanish and English language TV ads, using a similar approach

and finds that any effect of advertising is likely small. Thus it appears that information provision

is important for enrollment, but informational interventions that are targeted and accompany the

ability to provide services are more effective than a general information campaign.

       In addition to outreach, as eligibility limits were raised the federal government began

allowing states to implement a variety of policies intended to increase enrollment among the

eligible. These policies included allowing applicants to apply in different places and with

simpler processes. Currie and Grogger (2002) examine whether such policies were correlated

with Medicaid caseloads at the state level for the period 1990-1996 and find no statistically

significant relationship. However when they examine vital statistics data on births they find

some evidence that shorter forms or being allowed to mail in forms instead of having to apply in

person is associated with earlier initiation of prenatal care. Outstationing of eligibility workers is




                                                 61
associated with inadequate prenatal care, however, suggesting that there may be omitted

variables correlated with which states choose a particular policy.

       A potential concern about increasing take-up for policymakers is that it may come at the

cost of private coverage crowd-out, so under the CHIP program states were encouraged or

required to implement policies to reduce crowd-out, such as mandatory waiting periods for

previously insured children. In their analysis of the CHIP eligibility expansions, LoSasso and

Buchmueller (2004) test for the effect of waiting periods on insurance coverage. They find that

longer waiting periods decrease the probability that a child has public coverage, increase the

probability of private coverage and increase the probability of being uninsured. Thus, their

results suggest that waiting periods are effective in reducing private coverage declines, though at

the cost of limiting gains in the number of children with any health insurance. Wolfe and

Scrivner (2005), who investigate state policy design features under CHIP using data from the

2000-2001 CPS, also find that waiting periods reduce public insurance take-up and increase the

probability of being uninsured. In contrast, Gruber and Simon (2008) find no significant

relationship between waiting periods and either public or private coverage. They suggest the

difference may be due to differences between the data sets used in their study and that of

LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004).

       Wolfe and Scrivner (2005) find little effect for other program design variables, perhaps

because there is relatively little variation in state policies over such a short time period. Bansak

and Raphael (2006) compare insurance outcomes in 2001 to outcomes in 1997, just before CHIP

implementation. To estimate the differential effect of state policy choices, they estimate

regressions in which program design variables are interacted with an indicator variable that

differentiates the pre-CHIP and post-CHIP periods. They estimate the models with state fixed



                                                 62
effects to account for unobserved state characteristics that may be correlated with both baseline

levels of insurance coverage and program features. They also find that waiting periods designed

to prevent crowd-out reduce the probability a child has public insurance, and their results suggest

that policies allowing for continuous enrollment increase public coverage.

       Another policy that was at least partly intended to dissuade crowd-out but was also a way

to cover rising state spending on public health insurance was the adoption of premiums for

higher income individuals. While Medicaid generally does not permit substantial amounts of

cost-sharing (unless a state has obtained a waiver to do so), states have more flexibility with

CHIP, and during the early 2000s several states adopted premiums. Several studies using data

from selected states find a negative relationship between premiums and enrollment. Ku and

Coughlin (1999/2000) find such an effect in Hawaii, Minnesota, Tennessee and Washington.

Kenney et al. (2006) examine state administrative enrollment records from 2001 to 2004-2005

from three states (Kansas, Kentucky, and New Hampshire) and find that increases in premiums

were associated with lower caseloads in all three states and with earlier disenrollment in

Kentucky and New Hampshire. Similarly, Marton (2007), who also studies Kentucky, finds that

the introduction of premiums reduced enrollment duration, with larger effects in the first three

months after the premium was introduced.

       Dague (2014) uses a regression discontinuity design to study the introduction of

premiums in Wisconsin’s Medicaid program. Premiums in Wisconsin’s program increase with

income, with sharp breaks in the level of the premium at various income levels. While

regression discontinuity designs with income can be problematic, as discussed above, in this case

the administrative data that Dague uses permit her to observe the state’s exact determination of

family income, which is initially self-reported by applicants but is verified either through



                                                 63
documentation such as paycheck stubs or direct employer verification. One issue with the

administrative data that she faces is that she only observes outcomes for enrollees, however she

shows that in the case of studying the impact of premiums on enrollment spell length, selection

would bias her against finding an effect. Interestingly, she finds large behavioral responses to

the introduction of a relatively small premium, with a $10 premium requirement making

enrollees 12–15 percentage points more likely to exit the program, but she finds very little

evidence of responses to changes in premiums of a similar magnitude. This suggests that it is the

premium per se, rather than its amount that affects individual enrollment behavior.

       There are two other policies that states may pursue that could have implications for

enrollment in the program. First, the implementation of eligibility for parents at higher income

levels than the AFDC level may encourage enrollment of children since the marginal benefit

from completing the enrollment process would be higher if more individuals in the family could

gain eligibility. The difficulty in examining the impact of parental eligibility expansions on their

children is in finding variation in parental enrollment that is uncorrelated with unobserved

factors determining child enrollment. Sommers (2006) uses the March CPS matched across

years, focusing on loss of coverage among children who appeared eligible in both years and

modeling the probability of drop-out (loss of coverage while still eligible) as a function of

parental and/or sibling coverage in year 1. He uses eligibility of the parent or sibling as an

instrument for parent/sibling coverage. However, elsewhere in the literature researchers have

recognized that eligibility may be endogenous, since unobserved factors that are more likely to

make a parent eligible may also affect coverage. Sommers attempts to circumvent this issue by

controlling for income, although the exogeneity of income is also questionable. He finds that if a




                                                 64
parent is covered, the child is less likely to drop Medicaid, but there is no statistically significant

effect of a sibling being covered.

        Second, changes in physician fees may be associated with participation if, for example,

raising fees leads to greater physician participation and individuals are more likely to enroll

when they believe they can obtain needed care. Indeed, Hahn (2013) estimates models of the

probability of various types of coverage as a function of the ratio of Medicaid to Medicare fees

and controlling for state and year fixed effects and finds that a 10 percentage point increase in

the ratio is associated with a 1.24 percentage point decrease in the uninsured rate among low-

income children.

        Finally, it is possible that policies not particularly aimed at Medicaid may have spillover

effects on Medicaid participation. Using newly obtained data on immigration enforcement

activity (number of deportable aliens located per noncitizen) in the 1990s across the 33

Immigration and Naturalization Service administrative districts, Watson (2014) estimates the

impact of enforcement activity on children of noncitizens. Controlling for a number of possible

confounding effects with a rich set of fixed effects and demographic variables, she finds that a

one log point increase in enforcement efforts (about the size of the increase in enforcement

between 1994 and 2000) reduces Medicaid participation by children of noncitizens relative to

children of citizens by 10.1 percentage points. Her results imply that much of the observed

decline in participation in Medicaid by immigrants around the time of welfare reform can in fact

be attributed to increased enforcement of immigration law. Similarly, Sommers (2010) shows

that a later (2005) change requiring proof of citizenship at the time of Medicaid application was

associated with a reduction in enrollment among noncitizens, although he points out that the




                                                  65
costs of the policy (particularly the burden on citizen applicants) are significantly larger than the

savings.

4. Eligibility, Take-Up, and Crowd-Out in Long-Term Care

       Long-term care expenditures account for a large and growing share of total health care

spending in the United States. As noted in Section II, a large share of Medicaid spending for

aged and disabled adults is for institutional and non-institutional long-term care services. Care

provided in nursing homes is a main component of long-term care expenditures. Medicaid is the

largest purchaser of nursing home care, accounting for roughly three-fifths of national

expenditures (CMS 2014). In contrast, private health insurance accounts for only 8 percent of

payments to freestanding nursing care facilities. Why so few people purchase insurance for

long-term care and the extent to which Medicaid reduces the demand for long-term care

insurance are important research questions with significant policy implications.

       In a series of papers, Brown and Finkelstein (2007, 2008, 2009, and 2011) provide a

comprehensive view of the market for long-term care insurance and examine the puzzle of why

so few Americans take up coverage. Brown and Finkelstein (2007) consider the potential

importance of supply side market failures as explanations. They find that premiums for long-

term care policies are well above the actuarially fair level, which suggests the presence of

supply-side impediments. The difference between actual premiums and actuarially fair

premiums is substantially larger for men than for women. Yet, private insurance coverage rates

are similar for men and women. This pattern points to the importance of demand-side factors

that reduce the demand for insurance among women relative to men. They note that one

potentially important explanation is that Medicaid imposes a larger implicit tax on private long-

term care insurance for women.



                                                 66
       In another paper, Brown and Finkelstein (2008) consider the effect of this implicit tax.

They do so in the context of a calibrated life cycle model of a consumer considering the purchase

of private long-term care insurance taking the supply side of the market as given. The model

incorporates key institutional features of the Medicaid program that create the implicit tax on

private insurance. They estimate that for a male at the median of the wealth distribution, $3 out

of every $5 worth of private benefits simply replaces benefits that Medicaid would have paid.

For women, the implicit tax is even larger: almost 80 percent of private benefits go for services

that Medicaid would have paid for in the absence of private coverage.

       One of the features of Medicaid that affects the demand for private long-term care

insurance is the program’s asset test. Brown, Coe and Finkelstein (2007) empirically investigate

the role of the asset test using the restricted access version of the Health and Retirement Study

(HRS). Their dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if a family purchases long-term

care insurance and 0 otherwise. They use a linear probability model to express this dummy

variable as a function of the amount of assets a family can protect under state law; in the model

they also use demographic controls and state fixed effects. They address the endogeneity of

assets by regressing assets on demographic variables and state dummies, putting the predicted

assets through the nonlinear formula for protected assets to form an instrument for protected

assets. Thus, although they do not have an exclusion restriction they can legitimately exploit the

nonlinearity of the protection formula. They estimate that a $10,000 decrease in the asset limits

would increase private long-term care coverage by 1.1 percentage points. Their estimates imply

that if every state moved from its current Medicaid asset eligibility requirements to the lowest

(most stringent) Medicaid eligibility requirements allowed by federal law—a change that would

decrease average household assets protected by Medicaid by about $25,000—demand for private



                                                67
long-term care insurance would rise by 2.7 percentage points. While this represents a 30-percent

increase in insurance coverage relative to the baseline ownership rate of 9.1 percent, it also

indicates that the vast majority of households would still find it unattractive to purchase private

insurance.

       Starting in the mid-1990s a number of states introduced tax subsidies for private long-

term care insurance with the goal of shifting long-term care costs away from Medicaid. Goda

(2011) analyzes the effect of these policies using data from the restricted version of the HRS.

Her dependent variable is a dummy variable coded 1 if the individual buys long-term insurance

and her main explanatory variable is the after-tax price of $1 of private long-term care insurance

in terms of foregone consumption. She treats the tax price as endogenous, using a simulated

instrument in the spirit of Currie and Gruber’s simulated eligibility variable. The variation in this

instrument comes from changes in tax subsidies for long-term care insurance across states and

time. She finds that a 5 percent reduction in the after-tax price of private insurance would result

in about a 3 percentage-point increase in private coverage. However, this response to the tax

subsidy is concentrated among wealthier households who generally would not have qualified for

Medicaid in the absence of the incentive policy. Simulations based on her model suggest that $1

in tax expenditures produces $0.84 in Medicaid savings.



B. Access, Utilization, and Health

1. Children, Infants, and Pregnant Women

       Because women and children have historically accounted for the majority of Medicaid

enrollment, much of the research examining effects on medical care utilization and health

focuses on those populations. Table 7 lists both seminal and some of the more recent studies



                                                 68
from this literature. In addition, various features of Medicaid coverage for these populations

have made obtaining plausibly causal inferences more feasible. Several important studies in this

literature exploit variation arising from the eligibility expansions of the 1980s and 1990s.

       Currie and Gruber (1996b) estimate the effect of Medicaid eligibility on several measures

of health care utilization for children, using data from the National Health Interview Survey

(NHIS) from the 1984-1992 period and the simulated eligibility measure they developed as an

instrumental variable calculated using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). One

outcome is the probability of not having at least one physician visit over the past 12 months.

Since it is recommended that all children have an annual “well child” visit, this outcome can be

seen as a general measure of access to care. Their IV estimates imply that Medicaid eligibility

reduces the probability of not having a visit by nearly 10 percentage points, or roughly half of the

baseline rate. They use data on the location of care to investigate whether Medicaid eligibility

reduces the use of hospital emergency departments and outpatient clinics in favor of care

received in physician offices. They find that Medicaid eligibility has a fairly large, though

imprecisely estimated, effect on the probability of receiving care in a doctor’s office. The

estimated effect on the probability of visiting a hospital emergency department or clinic is also

positive, though again not statistically significant.

       In order to explore whether the increased eligibility resulted in an improvement in health

Currie and Gruber then examine child mortality in vital statistics data, which has the advantage

of being calculated from the universe of US death certificates. Regressing the death rate by

state-year-age-race cell on the imputed fraction eligible in that cell from the CPS and using

simulated eligibility for a national sample by state, year, and age as instruments, they find a

reduction of 0.13 percentage points in mortality for every 10 percentage point increase in



                                                  69
Medicaid eligibility. While this estimate is imprecisely measured, it does indicate that there was

an effect of Medicaid on child health. This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that Currie and

Gruber find no evidence of an effect on deaths from “external causes” (accidents, homicides,

suicides, etc.) but do find an effect on deaths from “internal causes.”

       Currie and Gruber (1996a) also use data from the vital statistics, for the period 1979-

1992, to explore the impact of Medicaid eligibility changes on the fraction of births that are low

birth weight and the infant mortality rate by state and year. The analysis is essentially the same

as the analysis described above for children, although in this paper they distinguish between the

earliest expansions that were aimed at women well below the poverty line and that sometimes

included income increases through AFDC as well as expanded access to health insurance

coverage (what they call “targeted” expansions) and later expansions aimed at women with

incomes as high as the poverty line or slightly higher (what they call “broad” expansions). They

find evidence both for a reduction in low birth weight incidence and a reduction in infant

mortality. However, these reductions appear only to come from the earlier “targeted” expansions

that might also have involved cash assistance changes; later insurance-only expansions higher up

the income distribution show no statistically significant effect.

       Work by Currie and Grogger (2002) that focuses on a later time period (1990-1996) finds

similar results. They use a reduced-form methodology, regressing individual measures of

prenatal care use from the vital statistics natality data on the Medicaid-only income cutoff for

pregnant women in the relevant state and year, the welfare participation rate in the state and year,

and various measures of state policies intended to increase enrollment in Medicaid. One obvious

concern with this specification is that the welfare participation rate may reflect unobserved

factors that may affect both welfare participation and infant health outcomes, although Currie



                                                 70
and Grogger attempt to control for such factors by including state and year effects,

unemployment rates, and state-specific time trends. They find that increases in the income cutoff

increase the adequacy of prenatal care for whites though not for blacks, while increases in the

welfare rolls are associated with increases in the adequacy of prenatal care for both groups (and

the results for state policies are mixed and generally weak). They find little effect of either the

income cutoffs or the size of the welfare rolls on birthweight, but do find that welfare

participation is negatively related to the fetal death rate.

        Currie, Decker and Lin (2008) estimate IV models for utilization and health in later

childhood using data from 1986 to 2005. They find that eligibility has a significantly positive

effect on the probability of having at least one physician visit in a year. They also find that the

relationship between family income and utilization became less pronounced over time,

suggesting that the expansion of public health insurance reduced disparities in access to care.

Finally, they find that living in a state with more generous Medicaid eligibility as a toddler is

associated with slightly better self-reported health between the ages of 9 and 17.

        Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) examine the effect of Medicaid eligibility on the

probability of having at least one doctor visit in a year using a regression discontinuity design as

discussed in the section on take-up and crowd-out, above, and data from the National Health

Interview Survey. As with their results for take-up, they find the largest (and most statistically

significant) effects for the expansion of eligibility to children below poverty, with estimates

suggesting that children with newly available health insurance coverage have a 60 percent higher

probability of at least one annual doctor visit, although the confidence interval on this estimate is

fairly wide (the standard error is 31 percent). The estimate for children eligible only under the




                                                   71
expansion to 133 percent of the FPL, while positive, has a substantial standard error.24 De la

Mata (2012) also uses a RD design, in income, though (as discussed earlier) the use of income as

the assignment variable is somewhat problematic because of unobserved differences in the

income counting methodologies across states that lead to actual income eligibility cutoffs

differing from reported cutoffs. Using data on children ages 5-18 from the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics, she finds increases in the probability of at least one doctor visit of 12-14

percentage points, but only for children eligible under lower eligibility thresholds (100-185

percent of the FPL). She finds no statistically detectable effect on health, either for

contemporaneous or lagged eligibility.25

       Currie and Gruber (1996b) also examine the effect of Medicaid on inpatient utilization.

As described in Section IV, the effect on this outcome is theoretically ambiguous. On one hand,

there is likely to be an access effect: by providing access to costly care that low-income patients

could not otherwise afford, Medicaid should have a positive effect on inpatient utilization. At

the same time, by improving timely access to primary and preventive care, Medicaid may lead to

health improvements that reduce the number of “avoidable” hospitalizations for conditions like

asthma, gastroenteritis, dehydration and certain infections. Currie and Gruber’s results suggest

that the first of these two effects dominates: Medicaid eligibility increases the probability of

having a hospital stay by about 4 percentage points, which represents nearly a doubling of the

baseline rate. The NHIS data they use does not provide details on the nature of the inpatient care



24
   In an unpublished working paper, Meyer and Wherry (2012) use the same discontinuity as
Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) to investigate later life mortality among teens. They find a
substantial reduction in mortality among black teens, but no reduction for white teens.
25
   Other studies using different data and different research designs also find that utilization
increased for children who gained eligibility for public insurance because of CHIP relative to
children who did not gain eligibility (Selden and Hudson 2006; Lurie 2009; Li and Baughman
2010; Choi, Sommers and McWilliams 2011).
                                                 72
received, so they are not able to assess whether the Medicaid expansion reduced avoidable

admissions.

       Dafny and Gruber (2005) explore this issue in more detail by matching data on Medicaid

eligibility measured for state/year/age group cells with data from the National Hospital

Discharge Survey, adapting the simulated eligibility IV approach to these aggregate data. Their

results for total hospitalizations are nearly identical to Currie and Gruber’s (1996b): a 10-

percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility increases the pediatric hospitalization rate by

8.4 percent. They then estimate separate regressions for hospitalizations classified as avoidable

or unavoidable based on the prior health services literature in this area. According to their

definition, roughly one-quarter of pediatric hospitalizations during the period they study were

classified as avoidable. When the dependent variable is the natural log of unavoidable

hospitalizations, the coefficient on the Medicaid eligibility variable is positive and significant,

with a magnitude that is similar to the estimate for all hospitalizations. For avoidable

hospitalizations, the coefficient on the Medicaid eligibility rate is still positive, but smaller and

not significantly different from zero.

       Aizer (2007) also uses IV methods to estimate the effect of Medicaid on avoidable

hospitalizations, though she estimates the effect of Medicaid enrollment on children who were

already eligible rather than the effect of eligibility. She finds that a 10 percent increase in

Medicaid enrollment leads to a 2 to 3 percent decline in avoidable hospitalizations but has no

effect on hospital admissions for other conditions. These effects are large enough that the

savings from reduced admissions were likely greater than the cost of the outreach program. The

difference between her results and those of Dafny and Gruber may be explained by the fact that

the children who gain insurance coverage because of a change in eligibility experience improved



                                                  73
access to both outpatient and inpatient care. In contrast, since children who enrolled because of

the outreach efforts already had “conditional coverage” for inpatient care in the sense that they

could sign up for Medicaid if they presented at a hospital in need of acute care, the main effect of

gaining coverage was improved access to primary and preventive care.

       Overall, the results from the literature thus far point to expansions in eligibility for

Medicaid leading to improvements in access to care and health, although the magnitudes of the

effects are sometimes difficult to pinpoint and estimates often differ for different groups or at

different times. Generally, expansions that occurred earlier and that affected lower income

children tend to show more consistent positive effects.26 While the pattern of greater effects for

lower income children makes sense given the greater availability of alternative health insurance

sources for higher income children, the pattern is worth further exploration; in particular, it

would be worthwhile to investigate whether these results are related to the way that cash

assistance was a part of the earliest expansions. This is particularly important for those

researchers interested in exploring long-term effects of the health improvements discussed here.

       In addition, the role of policy endogeneity in state choices is an issue that has been little

explored but is worth exploring given the frequent use of state-level variation to identify models.

To the extent that state choices about how far to expand their programs reflect conditions faced

by individuals in the state, estimated effects of Medicaid eligibility may also reflect state

responses to these conditions. Continued examination of the impact of Medicaid and CHIP

expansions on short run and long run health outcomes is valuable to assess more fully the impact

of these programs.

26
  Consistent with this pattern, unpublished work by Goodman-Bacon (2014) examining the
impact of Medicaid’s initial introduction on child mortality finds dramatic decreases in the
mortality rates of nonwhite children and nonwhite neonates in high-eligibility states relative to
low-eligibility states.
                                                 74
       In addition to impacts of eligibility expansions on health, researchers have examined the

impacts of other Medicaid policy shifts, particularly payment policy. Aizer, Lleras-Muney, and

Stabile (2005) examine the infant mortality effects of an increase in Medicaid payments to

hospitals in California through the DSH program. Pregnant women with Medicaid insurance

may obtain care from different providers if due to low reimbursement rates providers are

unwilling to treat Medicaid patients. Using infant linked birth-death certificate data, Aizer,

Lleras-Muney, and Stabile find that the DSH program hospital payment increase led to a

substantial move by pregnant women with Medicaid insurance to hospitals with prior low use by

the Medicaid population. The desegregation of hospitals by insurance type was associated with

an improvement in neonatal mortality, particularly among those with the highest levels of

neonatal mortality: black infants and twins. The larger effects for black infants were particularly

noteworthy since black mothers were the least likely to increase their use of private hospitals,

indicating the continuing existence of some barriers (informational or otherwise) to use of higher

quality care by black Medicaid recipients.

       Another set of papers has examined the impact of physician fees on health outcomes.

These papers use variation in fees paid to physicians either across states relative to private fees

(Gray 2001), across states and time relative to private fees (Currie, Gruber, and Fischer 1995), or

in the availability of enhanced prenatal care services relative to regular prenatal care services

associated with the Medicaid eligibility expansion in New York (Joyce 1999). All of these

papers find that higher fees are associated with improved health outcomes.

2. Nondisabled Adults

       There has been much less research on the utilization and health effects of Medicaid for

adults, even though very poor single parents have had access to Medicaid coverage since its



                                                 75
inception and parental Medicaid has expanded considerably in recent years. However, recent

expansions to nonparents under various waivers have led to a rise in research on this

population.27 This research is of particular interest since the Medicaid expansion of the ACA

will mainly affect adults, particularly childless adults, and thus these studies on programs in

individual states provide valuable evidence on the likely effect of public insurance on the health

care utilization and health of this population.

     The best evidence on the effect of Medicaid on health care utilization and health for adults

comes from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (OHIE). In three different papers

(Finkelstein et al. 2012; Baicker et al. 2013; Taubman et al. 2014) the OHIE researchers estimate

utilization effects using both survey and administrative data. Results from the survey data

indicate sizeable effects on outpatient visits and prescription drug use. Gaining Medicaid

coverage through the lottery increased the probability of having an outpatient visit by 35 percent

and increased the probability of filling a prescription by 15 percent. The increased visits

coincided with greater receipt of recommended preventive services. Medicaid coverage led to a

20 percent increase in the likelihood of having a cholesterol test, a 15 percent increase in blood

tests for diabetes, a 60 percent increase in mammograms and a 45 percent increase in the

percentage of women getting a Pap test. However, although testing clearly increased, the

researchers found no significant effect of Medicaid coverage on the prevalence or diagnosis of

hypertension or high cholesterol levels or on the use of medication for these conditions. For

diabetes, on the other hand, having Medicaid coverage significantly increased the probability of




27
  Interestingly, despite the large fraction of expenditures devoted to the elderly and disabled
populations, there is a dearth of research on the health and utilization effects of Medicaid for this
population.
                                                  76
a diagnosis and the use of diabetes medication, but there was no significant effect on measures of

diabetes control (Baicker et al. 2013).

     There was no significant change in inpatient utilization in the survey data, though hospital

discharge data indicate that Medicaid coverage increased the probability of an admission by 2.1

percentage points, a 30 percent effect relative to the mean for the control group. This effect was

driven by an increase in admissions that did not originate in the emergency room. There was

also a small positive effect on the intensity of inpatient treatment as measured by a composite

outcome that combines the number of inpatient days, the number of procedures and total charges.

     The initial analysis of survey data indicated no significant effect of Medicaid coverage on ER

utilization, with wide confidence intervals (Finkelstein et al. 2012). However, follow-up analysis

using administrative data from 12 Portland area hospitals found that Medicaid coverage

increased outpatient ER visits by 40 percent over an 18-month period. There was no statistically

significant increase in ER visits leading to an inpatient admission.28 Additional analyses indicate

that the effect of Medicaid on ER visits was fairly consistent across different times of day and

different types of care. Medicaid led to a significant increase in visits for conditions not

requiring immediate care and most types of conditions where immediate care is required.

     Examining general measures of health in addition to the clinical outcomes discussed above,

the treatment group reported significantly better outcomes for seven different measures of self-

reported physical and mental health from a survey of lottery participants, including a significant



28
   Other studies using different research designs also find a positive correlation between
Medicaid coverage and ER utilization. For example, Shen and Zuckerman (2005) find that
controlling for observable characteristics, individuals with Medicaid coverage are twice as likely
to have an ER visit than someone who is uninsured. Anderson, Dobkin and Gross (2012) use a
regression discontinuity approach that exploits the fact that many young adults lose private
health insurance, and to a lesser extent Medicaid, when they turn 19. They find that there is also
a significant decrease in ER visits and inpatient admissions at that age.
                                                 77
decrease in the probability of depression (Finkelstein et al. 2012). Since Medicaid enrollees’

credit reports indicated significantly lower probability of having any debt in collection and

particularly any medical debt in collection and they reported significantly lower signs of

financial strain in the survey, it is possible that self-reported physical and mental health may

largely reflect a generally improved sense of well-being rather than physical health

improvements per se (the financial results are discussed further below). Nevertheless, to the

extent that health is measured by the definition of the World Health Organization (“a state of

complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or

infirmity”) it is clear that coverage by Medicaid improved enrollees’ health.

   In addition to the Oregon experiment, there are other recent state programs that provide

insight on how the ACA Medicaid expansions will affect the health care utilization of poor

adults who will gain coverage. DeLeire et al. (2013) evaluate the utilization effects of a

Wisconsin program, BadgerCare Plus Core, which closely resembles Medicaid. The program

enrolled poor adults in Milwaukee County who tended to have high rates of chronic illness and

who had previously received care at facilities reimbursed by Medicaid Disproportionate Share

funds. DeLeire and colleagues find that enrollment in the new plan led to an increase in all types

of outpatient utilization, including ER visits. In another study evaluating the utilization effect of

the same program but on a rural low-income (FPL<200%) population, Burns et al. (2014) found

a similar effect on outpatient visits, but inconclusive results on ER use. One interesting contrast

with the Oregon results is that when BadgerCare Plus Core was implemented in Milwaukee,

inpatient utilization fell for individuals who transitioned to the new program. In particular, there

was a large and significant decline in admissions for ambulatory care sensitive conditions. One

possible explanation is that because these patients previously faced restricted access to outpatient



                                                 78
specialty care, ER physicians may have admitted them in order to ensure they received

diagnostic tests. With better access to specialists in outpatient settings, these admissions fell.

   There have been several studies of Massachusetts’ 2006 health care reform, which like the

ACA increased both Medicaid and private insurance. The results from these studies paint a more

optimistic picture concerning the potential for coverage expansions not only to improve access to

care, but also to shift the source of care from hospitals to lower cost settings. Miller (2012)

examines the change in ER visits after the Massachusetts coverage expansion using pre-reform

variation in insurance coverage rates to identify causal effects. She finds that the reforms led to a

reduction in ER utilization of between 5 and 8 percent. Two other results are consistent with the

hypothesis that patients who gained insurance coverage shifted their source of care from the ER

to physician offices. First, visits for non-urgent conditions account for nearly all the decline in

ER use; Miller finds no significant effect on visits for non-preventable emergencies like heart

attacks. Second, ER visits declined most during regular office hours when physician offices

were likely to be open. An analysis of survey data by Long, Stockley and Dahlen (2012) also

finds that ER use fell after the Massachusetts reform. And Kolstad and Kowalski (2012) find

that while overall hospital admissions did not fall after the state’s reforms went into effect, there

was a decline in admissions coming through the emergency room and admissions for preventable

conditions.

   Like the Milwaukee results on inpatient admissions, Miller’s finding that expanding coverage

caused ER visits to fall can be understood by considering the services available to low-income

uninsured patients before the reform. In Massachusetts, a state program, the Uncompensated

Care Pool, paid for hospital care for residents with incomes less than 200 percent of the federal

poverty level at no cost to the patient. Thus, when these individuals gained full insurance



                                                 79
coverage through Medicaid, their access to office-based primary care improved but there was

little or no change in their access to an ER and other hospital-based facilities. The cost of ER use

went up for some low-income individuals who gained subsidized private insurance because of

the reforms, as plans sold in the Massachusetts Connector included nontrivial co-pays for ER

visits.

    Sommers, Baicker, and Epstein (2012) compared all-cause county-level mortality (from

mortality statistics), rates of insurance coverage and self-reported health status (from the CPS),

and rates of delayed care because of costs from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System

(BRFSS) for three states that substantially expanded Medicaid eligibility for adults since 2000

(New York, Maine, and Arizona) to neighboring states without expansions (Pennsylvania, New

Hampshire and New Mexico). They find that Medicaid expansions increased Medicaid coverage

by 2.2 percentage points and decreased rates of uninsurance by 3.2 percentage points, and were

associated with a significant reduction in all-cause mortality, particularly for older adults,

nonwhites, and residents of poorer counties. In addition, the authors find reduced rates of

delayed care because of costs and increased rates of self-reported health status of “excellent” or

“very good.”



C. Effects on Providers

1. Impact of Medicaid Eligibility

          In most studies on how Medicaid affects medical care utilization, the patient is the unit of

analysis and the results can be interpreted mainly as demand-side effects: Medicaid reduces the

pecuniary cost of receiving care, leading patients to seek more treatment. Because most of these

studies identify the effect of Medicaid from either cross-sectional differences or from relatively


                                                   80
small changes in eligibility or coverage, a partial equilibrium perspective is probably justified.

However, the impact of large policy changes such as the ACA Medicaid expansions will depend

on how providers respond to the resulting changes in the overall demand for care and payer mix.

A small literature on how physicians and other providers respond to changes in Medicaid

eligibility, coverage and reimbursement policy sheds some light on these issues. Key studies in

this literature are summarized in Table 8.

        Several studies examine the response of providers to public insurance expansions. Baker

and Royalty (2000) use two years of panel data from the American Medical Association’s

Survey of Young Physicians to examine the impact of Medicaid eligibility expansions for

pregnant women on the percentage of a physician’s patients who are poor or on Medicaid. An

important feature of their analysis is that they are able to distinguish between physicians in

private practice and those in public health settings. They find that increased Medicaid eligibility

leads public health physicians to see a greater percentage of poor patients and patients covered

by Medicaid. In contrast, they find that an expansion of Medicaid eligibility has no significant

impact on physicians in private practice. Survey data indicate that on the eve of the ACA

Medicaid expansions, physicians in public health clinics were substantially more likely to accept

new Medicaid patients than those in private practice (Decker 2013; Rhodes et al. 2014).

       Two recent studies examine how pediatricians responded to the demand changes caused

by the CHIP expansion (Garthwaite 2012; He and White 2013). As noted above, a share of the

children who enrolled in Medicaid or stand-alone CHIP plans was covered previously by private

insurance. As a result of this crowd-out, for many physicians the main effect of the CHIP

expansion was a reduction in the amount they were paid for some of their existing patients.




                                                 81
Consistent with this, both studies find that the implementation of CHIP led pediatricians to see

more publicly insured patients while at the same time reducing their weekly hours worked.

       This decline in physician hours does not necessarily imply that fewer children were

receiving care. Rather, physicians may have reduced their hours by spending less time with

each patient. Garthwaite considers this possibility by comparing changes in visit length for

pediatricians and other types of physicians between 1993 and 2002. He finds suggestive

evidence that the CHIP expansion coincided with a reduction in visit length and an increase in

the percentage of visits that were shorter than 10 minutes. This response to the implicit

reduction in fees associated with crowd-out is consistent with research by Decker (2007) on the

effect of changes in Medicaid fees.

       It is also possible that part of the increased demand caused by the CHIP expansions was

met by non-physician providers. A recent study examining the response of dental practices to

changes in Medicaid coverage of dental benefits for adults highlights the important role that

auxiliary providers play in treating Medicaid patients (Buchmueller, Miller and Vujicic 2014).

Although state Medicaid programs are required to cover dental services for children, adult dental

coverage is an optional benefit that most states do not provide. The study uses repeat cross-

section data from the American Dental Association’s annual Survey of Dental Practice to

estimate the effect of changes in Medicaid coverage policy on several supply-side outcomes:

participation in the Medicaid program; the number of visits by patient insurance status and type

of visit; dentists’ labor supply; and the employment of dental hygienists.

       The results indicate that when Medicaid covers dental care for adults, dental practices

provide significantly more care to publicly insured patients. The analysis of employment

practices suggest that an important way that dentists respond to increased demand from public



                                                82
insurance is by making greater use of dental hygienists. A 10-point increase in the percentage of

a county’s adults covered by Medicaid is estimated to increase the probability that a dentist

employs a hygienist by 4 percent and the number of visits with hygienists by roughly 10 percent.

Other results suggest that the ability of dental practices to respond to Medicaid-induced demand

shocks is mediated by state scope of practice regulations. The increase in visits and the use of

hygienists is greater in states where hygienists are allowed greater autonomy. A state’s scope of

practice environment also seems to affect the extent to which increased demand from Medicaid

patients leads to crowding. In states with restrictive scope of practice regulations, an expansion

of Medicaid dental coverage leads to modest but significant increases in the time that it takes to

get an appointment and the average time spent by patients in the waiting room. Waiting times

did not increase in states where hygienists are allowed more autonomy.

2. Impact of Fees

       Historically, access to care has been limited by the fact that many doctors do not accept

Medicaid patients. Data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey indicate that in

2011-12, two-thirds of primary care physicians and 70 percent of physicians overall accepted

new Medicaid patients (Decker 2013). Because low provider participation is attributed to

Medicaid’s low payment rates, the ACA includes a provision that temporarily increases

Medicaid payment rates for primary care to Medicare levels. A number of studies have

examined the relationship between Medicaid fees and provider participation in the program.

Cunningham and Nichols (2005) and Decker (2007) find that higher Medicaid fees are positively

associated with the willingness of physicians to treat publicly insured patients. Baker and

Royalty (2000) find such a response for private physicians in their sample. Their results suggest

that higher Medicaid payments shift the site of care for low-income patients from public health



                                                83
settings to private physician practices. Gruber, Adams and Newhouse (1997) find a similar

result when studying the effect of increased Medicaid payments in Tennessee.

       An audit study by Polsky et al. (2015) provides suggestive evidence that despite a

problematic implementation, the increase in Medicaid physician payments brought by the ACA

led to an improvement in access for Medicaid patients. Researchers posing as patients with

different types of insurance contacted primary care practices in ten states to schedule a new-

patient appointment. The calls were made during two periods: November 2012 to March 2013,

just prior to the implementation of the fee increase, and mid-2014, just after the increase went

into effect. Although the percentage of privately insured callers offered an appointment

remained constant at 86 percent, appointment availability for Medicaid callers increased to 66.4

percent from 58.7 percent. The percentage of Medicaid callers able to schedule an appointment

increased most in states where the increase to Medicare rates led to the largest increase in fees.

       Because of the way that changes in payment policy can shift the site of care, increasing

payment rates may or may not increase overall utilization. Some studies using cross-sectional

data find a significant relationship between Medicaid payment rates and the site of care, but find

no significant relationship between payment rates and overall utilization (Long, Settle and Stuart

1986; Rosenbach 1989; Cohen and Cunningham 1995). However, other studies that analyze

changes in fees suggest that access to physician services improves when Medicaid payments are

increased (Gabel and Rice 1985; Shen and Zuckerman 2005; Decker 2009; White 2012).

       Access problems attributed to low Medicaid fees are a significant concern in the case of

dental care as dentists are even less likely than physicians to accept Medicaid (US GAO 2000).

Buchmueller, Orzol and Shore-Sheppard (2015) find that increases in Medicaid dental fees

increase the percentage of dental practices that treat publicly insured patients. Their estimates



                                                 84
imply supply elasticities of between .12 and .23, which are slightly lower than supply elasticity

estimates for physicians (Baker and Royalty 2000; Decker 2007). They and Decker (2011) also

find that higher Medicaid fees are positively correlated with the dental visits for children.

However, the magnitude of the effect is relatively small: a $10 increase in average Medicaid

dental fees—a change slightly larger than the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles for

this variable—is predicted to lead to a 2 to 3 percentage point increase in the probability that a

publicly insured child has at least one dental visit in a year. Because of this modest response,

most of the expenditures associated with a fee increase go for inframarginal visits, making fee

increases a costly way to increase utilization.

       In addition to increasing access to care, higher provider reimbursement can influence the

type of care that Medicaid patients receive. In most states, Medicaid pays obstetricians more for

a cesarean section than for a normal delivery, though the differential is generally not as large as it

is for private insurance. Gruber, Kim and Mayzlin (1999) examine how the Medicaid fee

differential affects the cesarean rate for Medicaid patients. Theoretically, the effect is

ambiguous, depending on the relative magnitudes of a positive substitution effect and a negative

income effect. Using 1988 to 1992 data from 11 states, they find that the substitution effect

dominates: larger fee differentials lead to more cesarean deliveries.

       To the extent that higher fee differentials lead physicians to over-provide cesarean

sections relative to what is optimal based on clinical criteria, reducing the differential payment

for performing C-sections will not only lower program expenditures, but will improve care

quality. In other cases, however the additional care induced by higher levels of reimbursement

may be beneficial. Currie, Gruber and Fischer (1995) use birth data aggregated to the state/year

level to investigate the relationship between the ratio of Medicaid to private insurance fees and



                                                  85
infant mortality. They find a significant negative relationship between the fee ratio and infant

mortality. Gray (2001) examines the relationship between relative Medicaid fees and birth

outcomes using a cross-sectional difference-in-differences approach that compares Medicaid

births and non-Medicaid births. He finds that women on Medicaid are more likely to deliver

infants with low birth weight but this difference is smaller in states where Medicaid fees are

higher. Higher Medicaid fees also increase the receipt of early prenatal care, which may be an

important mechanism for the birth weight result.

       As a result of eligibility expansions for pregnant women, today Medicaid pays for over

half of all births in the US. Freedman, Lin and Simon (2015) examine how the changes in

coverage brought about by those expansions affected hospital decisions to adopt neonatal

intensive care units (NICUs). Theoretically, the way hospitals respond should depend on the

extent of crowd-out. In markets with high rates of insurance coverage at baseline, increases in

hospital revenue resulting from uninsured patients gaining Medicaid may be more than offset by

a decline in revenue from patients who transition from private insurance to Medicaid. Such a

decrease in reimbursement for deliveries will make investments in medical technologies like

NICUs less profitable.

       Freedman and colleagues find that while on average Medicaid expansion was not

significantly related to NICU adoption, in areas where more new Medicaid enrollees were

coming from private insurance Medicaid expansion led to a slowing of NICU adoption. This

negative effect was most pronounced in states with the lowest Medicaid payment rates. These

results are broadly consistent with earlier work by Currie and Gruber (2001) finding that

increases in Medicaid eligibility increased access to costly obstetric procedures for less educated

women who likely gained insurance coverage as a result of the expansion while decreasing



                                                86
procedure use for more highly educated women, many of whom would have had more generous

private insurance in the absence of the Medicaid expansion.

    3.   Impact of Disproportionate Share Hospital Payments

         Because of Medicaid’s low payment rates and the fact that hospitals with large numbers

of Medicaid patients also treat many uninsured patients, state Medicaid programs make

disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments to hospitals treating a high volume of low-

income patients. Duggan (2000) studies how public, non-profit and for-profit hospitals in

California responded to the introduction of DSH payments in the early 1990s. His results

indicate significant differences between public and private hospitals, but little difference between

private non-profit and for-profit hospitals. When DSH patients made Medicaid patients more

financially attractive, there was a shift in Medicaid patients from public hospitals to private ones.

At the same time, there was a reallocation of uninsured patients in the opposite direction. This

pattern is consistent with private hospitals cream-skimming the more profitable low-income

patients.

         Duggan also examines what hospitals that received DSH payments did with that windfall.

For public hospitals the increased funding from Medicaid was offset essentially one-for-one by

reductions in funding from state and local governments. DSH payments led to an increase in

total revenue for for-profit and non-profit facilities, both of which used the additional funds to

increase their holdings of financial assets, rather than investing in new patient care facilities.

Finding no significant relationship between changes in payments arising from the DSH program

and infant mortality, Duggan concludes that the increased funding did not improve health

outcomes for low-income patients.




                                                  87
       Baicker and Staiger (2005) delve more deeply into what happens when states use

intergovernmental transfers to divert federal DSH payments. On average, they find that during

the first decade of the DSH program, states expropriated nearly half of the DSH transfers from

the federal government. There was more diversion in larger states, states with more public

hospitals and states where there is a greater difference in the tendency of public and private

hospitals to treat poor patients. Like Duggan (2000) they examine the effect of DSH payments

on patient health outcomes, though they use differences across state expropriation behavior and

hospital ownership to distinguish between “effective” DSH payments that led to net increases in

hospital funding and “ineffective” payments that did not. They find that effective DSH

payments led to large reductions in mortality for infants and heart attack patients, whereas DSH

payments that were expropriated by state governments had no significant effect on mortality.

   4. Impact of Managed Care

One of the most significant changes in provider reimbursement was the shift toward managed

care that began in the early 1990s (Figure 7). States moved Medicaid enrollees into managed

care primarily in an attempt to better control health care spending. Although managed care is

widely credited with reducing the growth in commercial health insurance premiums, the

potential for managed care to reduce Medicaid spending is not clear. There is good evidence that

much of the savings achieved by commercial managed care plans in the 1990s came from the

ability of plans to negotiate lower prices with providers (Cutler, McClellan and Newhouse 2000).

Since in most states Medicaid reimbursement rates are significantly lower than private fees, price

reductions are not a likely source of savings. On the other hand, Medicaid managed care

organizations may be able to reduce expenditures by managing utilization more effectively, for

example by reducing inpatient admissions or emergency department visits. However, even if



                                                88
such utilization efficiencies are achieved, the shift to managed care contracting is likely to be

associated with an increase in administrative costs.

       Research on this issue finds little evidence that managed care has produced cost savings.

Duggan (2004) examines the impact of managed care contracting on Medicaid expenditures in

California, exploiting variation arising from the way that the state implemented the policy. The

state mandated 20 counties to require certain beneficiaries to enroll in managed care. These

mandates were implemented on a staggered basis between 1994 and 1999. Because the timing

was essentially random, Duggan uses the mandates as instruments for managed care enrollment.

He finds that, contrary to the state’s objective, the managed care mandates led to a large and

statistically significant increase in spending. The point estimates suggest that the mandates

increased spending by between 17 and 27 percent.

       Given that California’s Medicaid program long had lower than average provider

reimbursement rates, it is perhaps not surprising that increased managed care enrollment did not

produce savings. More recent work by Duggan and Hayford (2013) provides further evidence

that the effect of Medicaid managed care on program expenditures varies depending on the level

of state reimbursement rates. They analyze state-level data on total Medicaid spending and

Medicaid managed care enrollment from 1991 to 2009. When they instrument for managed care

enrollment with the share of the state’s population that is subject to a managed care mandate, the

estimated managed care effect is negative but statistically insignificant. However, models in

which managed care enrollment is interacted with a measure of Medicaid fee generosity indicate

that this null effect masks important heterogeneity among states. The coefficient on the

interaction term is negative and significant, implying that in states where Medicaid fees are




                                                 89
relatively high, the shift to managed care does reduce program spending. In states such as

California where fees are low, managed care is associated with higher expenditures.

        Several studies have examined the effect of Medicaid managed care on access to care and

health outcomes. Here again, positive or negative effects are theoretically plausible. On one

hand, by emphasizing coordinated primary care and making greater use of non-physician

providers, managed care organization may improve access to care. Improved access combined

with an emphasis on prevention may lead to improved enrollee health. On the other hand,

capitated payment arrangements can create an incentive to stint on care, especially for higher risk

enrollees.

        Currie and Fahr (2005) use national survey data on low-income children to examine the

relationship between state-level Medicaid managed care penetration and the probability of

having at least one physician visit in a year. Overall, their results indicate little relationship

between Medicaid managed care and this proxy for access. Kaestner, Dubay and Kenney (2005)

use data from the National Natality Files to test for an effect of county-level Medicaid managed

care penetration on the utilization of prenatal care. Because they do not directly observe

mothers’ insurance status, they stratify the analysis by education and marital status, two variables

that are correlated with Medicaid enrollment. For unmarried women with less than 12 years of

education, they find that living in a county with a mandatory Medicaid managed care program is

negatively associated with the number of prenatal visits. However, they find generally similar

results for married women with 12 to 15 years of education, who are much less likely to have

Medicaid coverage. Difference-in-differences models that treat unmarried, less educated women

as the treatment group and married more educated women as controls yield generally

insignificant results.



                                                  90
       In his study on California’s county level mandates, Duggan uses hospital discharge data

to examine the effect of managed care on in-hospital infant mortality and the percentage of

premature births. He finds no statistically significant effect of managed care on either outcome.

Aizer, Currie and Moretti (2007) also study birth outcomes in California over a similar period

and find that managed care is associated with a lower likelihood of receiving prenatal care in the

first trimester and an increased likelihood of low birthweight and neonatal mortality. They argue

that the main reason for the difference between their results and Duggan’s null results is that

their analysis focuses more closely on women who were likely to be subject to a managed care

mandate.

   5. Medicaid Reimbursement and Nursing Homes

       As noted, Medicaid beneficiaries represent a majority of nursing home patients in the US.

There are a number of studies on how Medicaid reimbursement policy affects the nursing home

market. Norton (2000) and Grabowski and Norton (2006) provide good reviews of this

literature. One issue that has received considerable attention is the relationship between

Medicaid payment levels and nursing home quality. As described in Section IV.C, the

relationship can be positive or negative depending on the extent to which supply-side constraints

lead to a situation of excess demand. Several early studies find evidence of a negative

relationship between Medicaid payment rates and input-based proxies for quality in individual

states (Nyman 1985, 1988; Gertler 1989). However, more recent research finds a positive

relationship between Medicaid payment rates and a number of different process and outcome-

based measures of quality (Cohen and Spector 1996; Grabowski 2001, 2004; Grabowski and

Angelelli 2004; Grabowski, Angelelli and Mor 2004). In one of the more recent studies,

Grabowski (2001) replicates the analysis in one of the earlier papers (Gertler 1989). Applying



                                                91
the methods and quality measures from the earlier study to more recent data, Grabowski finds a

positive relationship between Medicaid payment and quality, which suggests that changes in

market conditions are at least part of the explanation for the divergent results from the earlier and

later studies. In particular, nursing home occupancy rates, an indirect indicator of excess

demand, declined substantially between the mid-1970s and early 1990s.



D. Financial Impacts on Households

       Given that a fundamental purpose of health insurance is to protect individuals and

families from the financial burden of large medical expenditures, there is surprisingly little

research on the effect of Medicaid on financial outcomes. Several recent studies suggest that

such effects are important.

       Gross and Notowidigdo (2011) exploit the variation provided by expansions between

1992 and 2004 to examine the effect of Medicaid eligibility on bankruptcies, applying a

simulated eligibility instrumental variables model to state-level data. Their results imply that a 10

percent increase in Medicaid eligibility reduces personal bankruptcies by 8 percent. They then

use their estimates to calibrate a theoretical model and find that the model implies that out-of-

pocket medical costs are pivotal in roughly a quarter of personal bankruptcies among low-

income households.

       In their randomized control trial in Oregon, Finkelstein et al. (2012) analyze the impact of

Medicaid coverage on multiple measures of financial strain. The analyses are based on both

administrative and survey data. The administrative data are from the Consumer Credit Database

of the credit bureau TransUnion and include such things as delinquent credit accounts, bills sent

to collection agencies, bankruptcies, liens and judgments. The survey questions ask about



                                                 92
medical expenditures and debt and whether respondents had to borrow money or delay paying

other bills in order to pay medical bills. They find that Medicaid coverage is associated with a

significant decline in the probability of having a bill sent to collection and this result is driven by

a decline in medical collections. They find no significant decline in bankruptcies or liens, which

are less common events that occur with a greater lag than collections. The survey results

indicate large, statistically significant declines in out-of-pocket medical expenditures and the

probability of having to borrow money or skip paying other bills because of medical expenses.

       Mazumder and Miller (2014) use similar credit report data to examine the effect of the

2006 Massachusetts health care reform on financial outcomes for those who were uninsured

before the reforms. The credit report data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s

Consumer Credit Panel. They use a triple-difference regression model that compares consumers

in Massachusetts with those in other states, and within states, compares individuals in areas with

high and low rates of insurance coverage prior to the reforms. They find that the Massachusetts

reform led to significant improvement in credit risk scores while significantly reducing the

fraction of debt past due, the incidence of bankruptcy in the last 24 months and (at the 10%

level) total collections. However, the reform did not significantly affect the size of total debt.



E. Impact of Medicaid on Labor Supply and Program Participation

       Prior to the expansions in eligibility beginning in the mid-1980s, researchers interested in

identifying the effect of Medicaid on labor force and welfare participation faced the issue that it

was difficult to tease out separate effects of cash payments and health insurance when one

benefit always accompanied the other. To address this issue, researchers attempted to

distinguish different potential values of Medicaid for different potential recipients. For example,



                                                  93
Moffitt and Wolfe (1992) develop a proxy for the dollar value of Medicaid for each family that

takes into account actual health conditions in the family. They find that the value of Medicaid

affects welfare participation but only for families with high expected medical expenses.

       By separating the receipt of Medicaid benefits from welfare participation the eligibility

expansions offered researchers the possibility of observing explicitly the impact of becoming

eligible for Medicaid. Yelowitz (1995) was the first to investigate the delinking of Medicaid

from welfare on AFDC participation and on labor market participation. Using data from the

March CPS for 1989-1992, he examines the relationships between each of these participation

decisions and the difference in the maximum income limits conferring only Medicaid eligibility

for the youngest child and the maximum income limits permitting AFDC eligibility. He

estimates a probit model for both AFDC participation and for labor market participation, and

finds that a larger difference strongly and significantly decreases AFDC participation and

increases labor market participation. He concludes that the Medicaid expansions have had strong

effects on the labor market behavior of women heading families with children.

      However, Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005b) note a peculiar feature of Yelowitz’s

specification: the effects of the Medicaid income limits and the AFDC income limits are

constrained to be equal in magnitude but opposite in sign. Ham and Shore-Sheppard show that

imposing this constraint is not consistent with economic theory, since it implies that welfare

benefits had no effect on labor force or welfare participation in the period prior to the decoupling

of Medicaid and AFDC. They consider probit equations for AFDC and labor force participation

using March CPS data from both Yelowitz’s sample and a slightly longer time period (1988-

1996). Using Yelowitz’s specification they generally replicate his results, however when

Medicaid and AFDC income limits are allowed to have separate coefficients, they find that only



                                                94
the AFDC income limits significantly affect AFDC and labor market participation. They

conclude that the Medicaid expansions did not affect the labor market behavior of women

heading families with children; Yelowitz’s results were driven by his imposing a constraint that

is not supported by either theory or the data.

      Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) consider the effect on labor force participation of several

programs simultaneously, including Medicaid. They model expected utility when working and

not working and include the value of Medicaid coverage if a woman works and the value of

Medicaid coverage if she does not work (using the per capita cost of Medicaid to determine the

value) in their model. Using data from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group Files and the March

CPS 1984 to 1996, they find little effect of Medicaid on the employment decisions of single

mothers.

       The research just discussed focusing on expansions of Medicaid to children and pregnant

women found little effect of expanded Medicaid on labor supply except among families with a

priori high medical costs. However, expanded availability of Medicaid may have additional

effects on labor market behavior beyond participation. Hamersma and Kim (2009) investigate

whether the parental Medicaid expansions increase job mobility. The idea is that if individuals

obtain coverage through Medicaid, they will be more mobile since they do not need to stay on

their current job just for the insurance coverage provided by the job. On the other hand,

expanded eligibility could decrease mobility for those without health insurance, since there is

now less pressure to move to a job that offers health insurance. Using data from the 1996 and

2001 SIPP panels they estimate a probit equation for quit behavior which depends on the

Medicaid eligibility income threshold determined by family size, state, and month, as well as

controls for demographics, current labor market conditions in a state, and state and year



                                                 95
dummies. They find that higher Medicaid thresholds lead to greater job turnover, but only among

unmarried women.

      While all of the research discussed in this section thus far has focused on the labor market

impacts of Medicaid expansions for low-income families with children, more recent research has

examined the impact of eligibility changes for low-income nondisabled adults without children

that occurred in individual states, including Tennessee, Wisconsin, and Oregon. Since the ACA

targeted such adults, these studies provide very useful information about the likely impacts of the

ACA on the labor market, although it is important to keep in mind that the experiences of

individual states may not be entirely applicable to the impacts on the country as a whole.

      The study focusing on Tennessee, Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo (2014), examines

the loss of Medicaid coverage discussed earlier in the section on take-up and crowd-out. Using

the same approach discussed above (a difference-in-differences model comparing adults in

Tennessee to adults in other Southern states and a triple-difference model contrasting outcomes

for childless adults and other adults), Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo estimate that the

disenrollment led to a 2.5 percentage point increase in employment using the difference-in-

differences model or a 4.6 percentage point increase using the triple-difference model. (To put

these results in perspective, the employment rate in the Tennessee sample was 69 percent.)

Scaling by the estimated impacts on public coverage suggests that employment rose by

approximately 63 percent among TennCare disenrollees. These are sizeable effects, although the

confidence intervals are fairly wide.

       Dague, DeLeire, and Leininger (2014) study a policy change in Wisconsin, where

enrollment into Wisconsin’s Medicaid program for childless adults with household incomes

below 200% of the federal poverty level was suddenly suspended in October 2009, with



                                                96
everyone who attempted to enroll after the cutoff date being placed on a waitlist. Dague,

DeLeire, and Leininger use a regression discontinuity approach to measure the impact of this

policy change. They use state administrative records on enrolled and waitlisted applicants and

earnings records from Wisconsin’s unemployment insurance system from the first quarter of

2005 to the fourth quarter of 2011 and compare outcomes for those who enrolled before the

announcement to those who were waitlisted after the announcement. They find that enrollment

into public insurance leads to reductions in employment of about 5.5 percentage points (a

reduction of 12 percent), with a net effect on quarterly earnings of $300. Notably, both

recipients and waitlisted applicants were increasing their labor supply over the time period of the

study; nonrecipients increased their labor supply by more.

        Finally, Baicker et al. (2014) measure the labor market impacts in the Oregon lottery

experiment. They estimate intent-to-treat (ITT) models that compare labor market outcomes

including employment status and earnings among the treatment group to outcomes in the control

group. They also estimate the impact of being covered by Medicaid (the local average treatment

effect) using lottery status as the instrument for Medicaid coverage. They find no statistically

significant impact of Medicaid on any of their labor market outcomes. Their point estimate for

the LATE for employment is a decline of 1.6 percentage points (or about 3 percent, relative to

the control group), and despite its statistical insignificance the confidence interval is tight,

allowing Baicker et al. to reject a decline in employment of more than 4.4 percentage points or

an increase of more than 1.2 percentage points.

        Taken together, the three sets of estimates from the three different states suggest wildly

different magnitudes of Medicaid effects on employment for childless adults, from close to no

effect in the Oregon study to a 12 percent reduction in employment among recipients in the


                                                  97
Wisconsin study to a 60 percent increase in employment among disenrollees following

disenrollment in the Tennessee study. Dague et al. suggest that part of the explanation for the

differences in the estimates is the economic conditions prevailing at the time of the policy

changes, noting that the state unemployment rate was 5.6 percent in Tennessee in 2005, 11.1

percent in Oregon in 2009, and 8.5 percent in Wisconsin in 2010. In addition, Oregon’s program

was available only to individuals with incomes below the poverty level, while Tennessee’s and

Wisconsin’s were both available to individuals with incomes up to twice the poverty level,

suggesting that employment effects may be less likely when the program is targeted at lower-

income individuals.




F. Effects of Medicaid on Family Structure

       As discussed in Section IV, Medicaid may well have impacts on family structure both by

affecting marriage probabilities and by affecting fertility. There has been very little research on

the impact of Medicaid per se on marriage, though there is a long literature on the impact of

AFDC and other cash welfare programs on marriage. The main results on the impact of

Medicaid on marriage come from Yelowitz (1998), who looks at the probability a woman is

married as a function of whether all of her children are age-eligible for Medicaid or whether any

of her children are age-eligible using variation in eligibility by state, year, and age of child

caused by the eligibility expansions for children of the late 1980s and early 1990s. He finds that

women with all children eligible are 1.5 percentage points more likely to be married than women

with at least one ineligible child, but he finds no effect for women with only some of their

children eligible. Yelowitz notes that at least some of the effect that he finds may be due to




                                                  98
selection into childbearing as a result of the expansions, but the results suggest that the marriage

effect is likely to outweigh the selection effect.

       The effect of Medicaid on childbearing is an active research area in itself. Studies in this

area have considered three possible avenues by which Medicaid might affect fertility. First,

expanded eligibility for pregnant women, infants, and children reduces the cost of having a child.

Second, differences across states in whether Medicaid funds abortions may lead to differences in

abortion rates. Third, the fact that Medicaid covers the cost of contraception for certain groups

may reduce pregnancies.

       To study the first avenue, expanded eligibility, researchers have compared birth and

abortion rates for groups of women who were more or less likely to be eligible for Medicaid for

exogenous reasons. Joyce and Kaestner (1996), an early paper in this area, use vital statistics data

from three states and a difference-in-differences approach that compares outcomes before and

after a Medicaid eligibility expansion for groups defined by race, marital status and education

level. Their results suggest that the eligibility expansion led to a decline in the abortion rate for

unmarried non-black women with less than a high school degree, a group that was more likely to

gain eligibility. However, since women with higher levels of education may still be income-

eligible for the expansions, this method may result in misclassification, particularly for black

women.

       Joyce, Kaestner, and Kwan (1998), use state-quarter-race specific data from 15 states and

examine the association between birth and abortion rates and Medicaid expansion using

indicators for the state expanding eligibility to the poverty level and for the state expanding to

185 percent of the poverty level, controlling for state, year, quarter, and state-specific linear

trends. The identification is thus from changes in eligibility over time within a state. They find



                                                     99
that increased eligibility is associated with a 5 percent increase in the birth rate for white women,

but find no significant association for black women, and no effect on abortions. However,

because they do not control for other changes that might be occurring within a state over the time

period, their results are suggestive rather than definitive.

        DeLeire, Lopoo and Simon (2011) try to take advantage of within state variation in

eligibility by creating age-education-marital status demographic cells and using Currie and

Gruber’s simulated eligibility index to obtain a measure of eligibility at the state-year-

demographic cell level. Controlling for a variety of welfare policies and the state unemployment

rate in addition to the simulated eligibility index, they find fertility is positively associated with

the expansions for both whites and blacks, but once they include fixed effects for demographic

cells the relationship disappears entirely. Zavodny and Bitler (2010) use a similar methodology

over a somewhat longer time period. They use alternatively the Medicaid eligibility threshold

applying in a demographic cell or the fraction of women in a cell who would be eligible, control

for additional policy changes (including the EITC) and simultaneously examine the impact of

Medicaid funding restrictions on abortion. They find some evidence of higher birth rates among

whites with less than a high school education in response to expanded eligibility thresholds but

no statistically significant effect when the simulated fraction eligible is used to measure

eligibility. The results from these two papers suggest that any impact of Medicaid eligibility on

fertility is limited and not particularly robust.

        Zavodny and Bitler do find that restrictions on Medicaid funding of abortions are

associated with decreases in abortion rates and increases in birth rates. This latter result

generally accords with the earlier literature on Medicaid funding of abortion, (e.g. Haas-Wilson

1996; Blank, George, and London 1996; Levine, Trainor, and Zimmerman 1996; Kane and



                                                    100
Staiger 1996), at least in finding decreases in abortion rates. The results in the literature for birth

rates are somewhat more equivocal, however, with some authors finding birth rate increases

(Currie, Nixon, and Cole 1996; Zavodny and Bitler 2010) and others finding birth rate decreases

(Levine, Trainor, and Zimmerman 1996; Kane and Staiger 1996).

       Researchers have also studied other possible effects of Medicaid abortion funding

restrictions. Bitler and Zavodny (2001) find no significant effect of Medicaid funding

restrictions on abortion timing, while Currie, Nixon, and Cole (1996) find no evidence of an

effect on birthweight. Currie, Nixon, and Cole also find suggestive evidence of policy

endogeneity in Medicaid abortion funding laws, with restrictive laws having the same effect

whether or not they are enjoined by the courts and finding similar effects on high-income and

low-income women. Sen (2003) finds no relationship between Medicaid funding restrictions and

rates of sexually transmitted diseases among women, suggesting that Medicaid funding

restrictions do not lead to increased use of safe sex behavior that prevents sexually transmitted

disease, although the use of contraceptive methods such as the pill would not be detected with

such an empirical strategy.

       Examining contraception more directly, Kearney and Levine (2009) estimate the impact

of Section 1115 waivers obtained by states to extend Medicaid family planning services to

women who would otherwise not be eligible for them. They identify states and time periods

with two types of waivers—expansions of family planning eligibility based solely on income and

extensions of family planning eligibility to women who would otherwise lose eligibility

postpartum. Using data from the Medicaid Statistical Information System and similar older data,

they show that waivers, and particularly income-based waivers, were associated with larger

proportions of women reported to be receiving Medicaid family planning services. Looking at



                                                 101
birth rates by state and year and controlling for state effects, year effects, time-changing

variables for states, and state-specific linear and quadratic time trends, they find that the presence

of an income-based waiver reduces births by around 2 percent for non-teens and between 4.2 and

4.7 percent for teens. They also find evidence in individual data of changes in the probability of

contraceptive behavior for women in states with a waiver in effect. They find that it is a

relatively cost-effective approach to reducing unwanted births.



VI. Summary and Future Research Questions

       Medicaid is a massive, multifaceted program touching almost every aspect of the health

care and long-term care delivery systems. Covering a substantial percentage of long-term care

recipients and children, and with the covered population expanding considerably under the ACA,

Medicaid has moved from the margins to the mainstream. To conclude this chapter, we discuss

some areas that we see as being important for future research.

       Unsurprisingly, many of these areas concern the ACA. First, there is the question of the

impact of states’ decisions about whether and how to participate in the ACA expansion of

Medicaid. What are the implications of these decisions in terms of fiscal pressures on states or

the federal government? How much will fiscal pressures increase as Medicaid is used to finance

coverage for growing subsets of the population? States’ decisions also have implications for

individuals, both in states that do and do not choose to participate. In nonparticipating states,

one question is how is inequality in access to health care changing, and what are the implications

of the continuing lack of insurance coverage for many low-income adults in terms of health and

financial well-being? In participating states, the expansion of Medicaid eligibility to new groups

brings new dimensions to old questions of take-up, crowd-out, labor supply, and job lock. In



                                                 102
addition, there is the added dimension of the interaction between Medicaid and the insurance

exchanges. How well integrated are the public and private dimensions of the exchanges, and

how easily can individuals experiencing changes in their circumstances move from one type of

coverage to another?

       There are also perennial issues that are brought to the fore by the ACA, such as the

relationship of the Medicaid program with providers. As we have noted, Medicaid does not

compensate providers well, in general, and the question of supply of care to the insured will be

an important one. In addition, there are important implications for the well-being of providers,

particularly those that serve a large share of Medicaid patients, of increasing the share of

Medicaid coverage in the market. Since the writers of the ACA recognized these issues and built

in temporary reimbursement increases for some providers, it will be important to see how

provider behavior and patient well-being are affected both by the increase and by its

disappearance.

       There is also the continuing and essential question of the impact of Medicaid on health.

While there have been some important recent advances with the Oregon health study, health

effects for adults, including for the disabled and elderly, are not well understood and thus far

have been little studied. Finally, we need a better understanding of the financial impacts, again

for all eligible groups, of Medicaid coverage. With expenditures of nearly $390 billion,

measuring the benefits as well as the costs of this major program is crucial.




                                                103
   References


Aizer, Anna. 2007. "Public Health Insurance, Program Take-up, and Child Health." The Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 400-15.
Aizer, Anna; Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti. 2007. "Does Managed Care Hurt Health?
    Evidence from Medicaid Mothers." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 385-99.
Aizer, Anna and Jeffrey Grogger. 2003. "Parental Medicaid Expansions and Health Insurance
    Coverage." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 9907.
Aizer, Anna; Adriana Lleras-Muney and Mark Stabile. 2005. "Access to Care, Provider Choice,
    and the Infant Health Gradient." American Economic Review, 95(2), 248-52.
Anderson, Michael, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. 2012. "The Effect of Health Insurance
    Coverage on the Use of Medical Services." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1):
    1-27.
Baicker, Katherine; Amy Finkelstein; Jae Song and Sarah Taubman. 2014. "The Impact of
    Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon
    Health Insurance Experiment." American Economic Review, 104(5), 322-28.
Baicker, Katherine and Douglas Staiger. 2005. "Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal Health Care
    Funds, and Patient Mortality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 345-86.
Baicker, Katherine; Sarah L. Taubman; Heidi L. Allen; Mira Bernstein; Jonathan H. Gruber;
    Joseph P. Newhouse; Eric C. Schneider; Bill J. Wright; Alan M. Zaslavsky and Amy N.
    Finkelstein. 2013. "The Oregon Experiment — Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes." New
    England Journal of Medicine, 368(18), 1713-22.
Baker, Laurence C. and Anne Beeson Royalty. 2000. "Medicaid Policy, Physician Behavior, and
    Health Care for the Low-Income Population." The Journal of Human Resources, 35(3), 480-502.
Bansak, Cynthia and Steven Raphael. 2006. "The Effects of State Policy Design Features on
    Take-up and Crowd-out Rates for the State Children's Health Insurance Program." Journal of
    Policy Analysis and Management, 26(1), 149-75.
Becker, Gary. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and Economic Change
    in Developed Countries, Princeton, NJ: Columbia University Press for the Universities-National
    Bureau Committee for Economic Research, 209-240.
Becker, Gary and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality
    of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), S279-S288.
Bertrand, Marianne; Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How Much Should We
    Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-
    75.
Bitler, Marianne P. and Madeline Zavodny. 2001. “The effect of abortion restrictions on the
    timing of abortions.” Journal of Health Economics, 20(6), 1011-32.
Black, Dan A.; Mark C. Berger and Frank A. Scott. 2000. "Bounding Parameter Estimates with
    Nonclassical Measurement Error." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95(451), 739-
    48.
Blank, Rebecca M.; Christine C. George and Rebecca A. London. 1996. "State Abortion Rates
    the Impact of Policies, Providers, Politics, Demographics, and Economic Environment." Journal
    of Health Economics, 15(5), 513-53.




                                                 104
Brown, Jeffrey R.; Norma B. Coe and Amy Finkelstein. 2007. "Medicaid Crowd-out of Private
   Long-Term Care Insurance Demand: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey,"
   National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 1-34.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and Amy Finkelstein. 2007. "Why Is the Market for Long-Term Care Insurance
   So Small?" Journal of Public Economics, 91(10), 1967-91.
____. 2008. "The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid and the Long-Term Care
   Insurance Market." American Economic Review, 98(3), 1083-102.
____. 2009. "The Private Market for Long-Term Care Insurance in the United States: A Review of
   the Evidence." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76(1), 5-29.
____. 2011. "Insuring Long-Term Care in the United States." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   25(4), 119-42.
Buchmueller, Thomas C.; Sarah Miller and Marko Vujicic. 2014. "How Do Providers Respond
   to Public Health Insurance Expansions? Evidence from Adult Medicaid Dental Benefits."
   National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 20053.
Buchmueller, Thomas C.; Sean Orzol and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2015. "The Effect of
   Medicaid Payment Rates on Access to Dental Care among Children." American Journal of
   Health Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2: 194–223.
Burns, Marguerite, Laura Dague, Thomas DeLeire, Mary Dorsch, Donna Friedsam, Lindsey
   Leininger, Gaston Palmucci, John Schmelzer, Kristin Voskuil. 2014. “The Effects of
   Expanding Public Insurance to Rural Low-Income Childless Adults.” Health Services Research,
   49(6-1)
Busch, Susan H. and Noelia Duchovny. 2005. "Family Coverage Expansions: Impact on Insurance
   Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents." Journal of Health Economics, 24(5), 876-90.
Card, David; Andrew K. G. Hildreth and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2004. "The Measurement of
   Medicaid Coverage in the SIPP." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 22(4), 410-20.
Card, David and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2004. "Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to
   Identify the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low-Income Children." The Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 86(3), 752-66.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 2012a. “Letter to State Health Officials RE:
   Conversion of Net Income Standards to MAGI Equivalent Income Standards, December 28,
   2012,” http://www.medicaid.gov/Federal-Policy-Guidance/downloads/SHO12003.pdf
_____ . 2012b. “Medicare and Medicaid Statistical Supplement, 2012 Edition.”
   (http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
   Reports/MedicareMedicaidStatSupp/2012.html)
_____ . 2013. “Legislative Update.” (http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
   Guidance/Legislation/LegislativeUpdate/index.html?redirect=/LegislativeUpdate/)
_____ . 2014. National Health Expenditures Tables http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-
   and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
   Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html.
_____ . 2015. “Medicaid & CHIP: December 2014 Monthly Applications, Eligibility
   Determinations and Enrollment Report.” February 23, 2015. Available at
   http://medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/program-
   information/downloads/december-2014-enrollment-report.pdf.
Choi, Miji; Benjamin D. Sommers and John McWilliams. 2011. “Children’s Health Insurance
   and Access to Care During and After the CHIP Expansion Period.” Journal of Health Care for
   the Poor and Underserved. 22(2), 576-589.


                                                105
Choi, Moonkyung Kate. 2011. "The Impact of Medicaid Insurance Coverage on Dental Service
   Use." Journal of Health Economics, 30(5), 1020-31.
Cohen, Joel and Peter Cunningham. 1995. “Medicaid Physician Fee Levels and Children’s
   Access to Care,” Health Affairs, 13:255-262
Cohen, Joel and William Spector. 1996. “The effect of Medicaid reimbursement on quality of
   care in nursing homes,” Journal of Health Economics, 15(1), 23-48.
Congressional Budget Office. 2001. “Pay-As-You-Go Estimate H.R. 5661 Medicare, Medicaid,
   and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (Incorporated in H.R. 4577, the
   Consolidated Appropriations Act).” September 20, 2011,
   http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/hr5661_0.pdf.
_____. 2014. “Updated Budget Projections: 2014 to 2024.” April.
   http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/45229-UpdatedBudgetProjections_2.pdf.
Congressional Research Service. 1993. Medicaid source book: Background data and analysis
   (“The Yellow Book”). Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Cunningham, Peter J. and Len Nichols. 2005. “The Effects of Medicaid Reimbursement on the
   Access to Care of Medicaid Enrollees: A Community Perspective,” Medical Care Research and
   Review, 62(6), 676-696.
Currie, Janet; Sandra Decker and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. "Has Public Health Insurance for Older
   Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?" Journal of Health
   Economics, 27(6), 1567-81.
Currie, Janet and John Fahr. 2005. "Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children's Medicaid
   Coverage and Utilization." Journal of Public Economics, 89(1), 85-108.
Currie, Janet and Jeffrey Grogger. 2002. "Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions:
   Offsetting Effects on Prenatal Care and Infant Health?" Journal of Health Economics, 21(2),
   313-35.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
   Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women." Journal of Political Economy, 104(6),
   1263-96.
____. 1996b. "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and Child Health." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 431-66.
____. 2001. “Public health insurance and medical treatment: the equalizing impact of the Medicaid
   expansions.” Journal of Public Economics 82: 63-89.
Currie, Janet; Jonathan Gruber and Michael Fischer. 1995. "Physician Payments and Infant
   Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Fee Policy." The American Economic Review, 85(2), 106-11.
Currie, Janet; Lucia Nixon and Nancy Cole. 1996. "Restrictions on Medicaid Funding of
   Abortion: Effects on Birth Weight and Pregnancy Resolutions." The Journal of Human
   Resources, 31(1), 159-88.
Cutler, David M and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. "Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private
   Insurance?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 391-430.
Cutler, David M and Louise Sheiner. 1994. "Policy Options for Long-Term Care," Studies in the
   Economics of Aging. University of Chicago Press, 395-442.
Cutler, David; Mark McClellan and Joseph Newhouse. 2000. “How Does Managed Care Do
   It?” Rand Journal of Economics, 31(3), 526-548.
Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. "Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
   Access and Efficiency Effects." Journal of Public Economics, 89(1), 109-29.



                                                106
Dague, Laura. 2014. "The Effect of Medicaid Premiums on Enrollment: A Regression
   Discontinuity Approach." Journal of Health Economics, 37(0), 1-12.
Dague, Laura; Thomas DeLeire and Lindsey Leininger. 2014. "The Effect of Public Insurance
   Coverage for Childless Adults on Labor Supply," National Bureau of Economic Research
   Working Paper Series, No. 20111.
Davern, Michael; Jacob Klerman; David Baugh; Kathleen Thiede Call and George Greenberg.
   2009. “An Examination of the Medicaid Undercount in the Current Population Survey:
   Preliminary Results from Record Linking,” Health Services Research, 44(3): 965-987.
Davidoff, Amy; Anna S. Sommers; Jennifer Lesko; and Alshadye Yemane. 2004. "Medicaid and
   State-Funded Coverage for Adults: Estimates of Eligibility and Enrollment.” Kaiser Commission
   on Medicaid and the Uninsured policy brief.
Decker, Sandra L. 2007. "Medicaid Physician Fees and the Quality of Medical Care of Medicaid
   Patients in the USA." Review of Economics of the Household, 5(1), 95-112.
____. 2009. "Changes in Medicaid Physician Fees and Patterns of Ambulatory Care." Inquiry, 46(3),
   291-304.
____. 2011. "Medicaid Payment Levels to Dentists and Access to Dental Care among Children and
   Adolescents." JAMA, 306(2), 187-93.
____. 2013. Two-Thirds Of Primary Care Physicians Accepted New Medicaid Patients In 2011–12:
   A Baseline To Measure Future Acceptance Rates,” Health Affairs, 32(7), 1183-1187.
De La Mata, Dolores. 2012. "The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility on Coverage, Utilization, and
   Children's Health." Health Economics, 21(9), 1061-79.
DeLeire, Thomas, Laura Dague, Lindsey Leininger, Kristen Voskuil, and Donna Friedsam.
   2013. “Wisconsin Experience Indicates That Expanding Public Insurance to Low-Income
   Childless Adults Has Health Care Impacts.” Health Affairs 32(3):1037-1045.
DeLeire, Thomas; Leonard M Lopoo and Kosali I Simon. 2011. "Medicaid Expansions and
   Fertility in the United States." Demography, 48(2), 725-47.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen; Bernadette D. Proctor and Jessica C. Smith. 2012. “Income, Poverty,
   and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2011.” U.S. Census Bureau, Current
   Population Reports, P60-243, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Dubay, Lisa C. and Genevieve M. Kenney. 1996. "The Effects of Medicaid Expansions on
   Insurance Coverage of Children." The Future of Children, 6(1), 152-61.
Duggan, Mark G. 2000. "Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1343-73.
____. 2004. "Does Contracting out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs? Evidence from
   Medicaid HMOs." Journal of Public Economics, 88(12), 2549-72.
Duggan, Mark and Tamara Hayford. 2013. "Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid
   Expenditures? Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates." Journal of Policy Analysis and
   Management, 32(3), 505-35.
Finkelstein, Amy; Sarah Taubman; Bill Wright; Mira Bernstein; Jonathan Gruber; Joseph P.
   Newhouse; Heidi Allen; Katherine Baicker and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012.
   "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1057-1106.
Finkelstein, Amy; Nathaniel Hendren; and Erzo Luttmer. 2015. “The Value of Medicaid:
   Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment”NBER Working Paper No.
   21308 (June).



                                                107
Freedman, Seth; Haizhen Lin and Kosali Simon. 2015. "Public Health Insurance Expansions and
   Hospital Technology Adoption." Journal of Public Economics, 121, 117-131.
Freund, Deborah A. and Eugene M. Lewit. 1993. "Managed Care for Children and Pregnant
   Women: Promises and Pitfalls." The Future of Children, 3(2), 92-122.
Gabel, Jon and Thomas Rice. 1985. “Reducing Public Expenditures for Physician Services: The
   Price of Paying Less,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 9(4): 595-609.
Garthwaite, Craig L. 2012. "The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public
   Health Insurance Expansions." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3), 190-215.
Garthwaite, Craig; Tal Gross and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2014. "Public Health Insurance,
   Labor Supply, and Employment Lock." The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Gertler, Paul J. 1989. "Subsidies, Quality, and the Regulation of Nursing Homes." Journal of
   Public Economics, 38(1), 33-52.
Goda, Gopi Shah. 2011. "The Impact of State Tax Subsidies for Private Long-Term Care Insurance
   on Coverage and Medicaid Expenditures." Journal of Public Economics, 95(7–8), 744-57.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2014. "Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
   Implementation," Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Grabowski, David C. 2001. "Medicaid Reimbursement and the Quality of Nursing Home Care."
   Journal of Health Economics, 20(4), 549-69.
____. 2004. "A Longitudinal Study of Medicaid Payment, Private-Pay Price and Nursing Home
   Quality." International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 4(1), 5-26.
Grabowski, David and Edward Norton. 2006. “Nursing Home Quality of Care,” in The Elgar
   Companion to Health Economics, Andrew Jones Ed. Cheltenham, UK: Elgar Publishing, Inc.,
   296-305.
Grabowski, David C. and Joseph J. Angelelli. 2004. "The Relationship of Medicaid Payment
   Rates, Bed Constraint Policies, and Risk-Adjusted Pressure Ulcers." Health Services Research,
   39(4p1), 793-812.
Grabowski, David C.; Joseph J. Angelelli; and Vincent Mor. 2004. “Medicaid payment and
   Risk-Adjusted Nursing Home Quality,” Health Affairs, 23(5): 243-252.
Grant, Darren. 2009. "Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Delivery: New Conclusions
   from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project." Journal of Health Economics, 28(1), 244-50.
Gray, Bradley. 2001. "Do Medicaid Physician Fees for Prenatal Services Affect Birth Outcomes?"
   Journal of Health Economics, 20(4), 571-90.
Gresenz, Carole Roan; Sarah E. Edgington; Miriam Laugesen and José J. Escarce. 2012.
   "Take-up of Public Insurance and Crowd-out of Private Insurance under Recent CHIP
   Expansions to Higher Income Children." Health Services Research, 47(5), 1999-2011.
Gross, Tal and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2011. "Health Insurance and the Consumer Bankruptcy
   Decision: Evidence from Expansions of Medicaid." Journal of Public Economics, 95(7–8), 767-
   78.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid,” in Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States,
   Robert Moffitt, ed., University of Chicago Press.
Gruber, Jonathan; Kathleen Adams and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1997. "Physician Fee Policy and
   Medicaid Program Costs." The Journal of Human Resources, 32(4), 611-34.
Gruber, Jon; John Kim and Dina Mayzlin. 1999. "Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity: The
   Case of Cesarean Delivery." Journal of Health Economics, 18(4), 473-90.




                                                108
Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon. 2008. "Crowd-out 10 Years Later: Have Recent Public
   Insurance Expansions Crowded out Private Health Insurance?" Journal of Health Economics,
   27(2), 201-17.
Gruber, Jonathan and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. "Public Health Insurance and Private Savings."
   Journal of Political Economy, 107(6), 1249-74.
Haas-Wilson, Deborah. 1996. "The Impact of State Abortion Restrictions on Minors' Demand for
   Abortions." The Journal of Human Resources, 31(1), 140-58.
Hahn, Youjin. 2013. "The Effect of Medicaid Physician Fees on Take-up of Public Health
   Insurance among Children in Poverty." Journal of Health Economics, 32(2), 452-62.
Ham, John C.; Xianghong Li and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2009. “Public Policy and the Dynamics
   of Children's Health Insurance, 1986-1999.” American Economic Review (Papers and
   Proceedings) 99: 522-26
Ham, John C.; I. Serkan Ozbeklik and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2014. "Estimating Heterogeneous
   Takeup and Crowd-out Responses to Existing Medicaid Income Limits and Their Nonmarginal
   Expansions." Journal of Human Resources, 49(4), 872-905.
Ham, John C. and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2005a. "The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-
   Income Children on Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the
   SIPP." Journal of Public Economics, 89(1), 57-83.
Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2005b. "Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare
   Participation?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 452-70.
Hamersma, Sarah. 2013. "The Effects of Medicaid Earnings Limits on Earnings Growth among
   Poor Workers." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 13(2), 887-919.
Hamersma, Sarah and Matthew Kim. 2009. "The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansions on Job
   Mobility." Journal of Health Economics, 28(4), 761-70.
____. 2013. "Participation and Crowd Out: Assessing the Effects of Parental Medicaid Expansions."
   Journal of Health Economics, 32(1), 160-71.
He, Fang and Chapin White. 2013, “The Effect of the Children’s Health Insurance Program on
   Pediatricians’ Work Hours,” Medicare & Medicaid Research Review, 3(1), E1-E32.
Heberlein, Martha; Tricia Brooks; Joan Alker; Samantha Artiga and Jessica Stephens. 2013.
   “Getting into Gear for 2014: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
   Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2012–2013.” Washington, DC:
   Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, January,
   https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/8401.pdf
Hudson, Julie L.; Thomas M. Selden and Jessica S. Banthin. 2005. "The Impact of SCHIP on
   Insurance Coverage of Children." INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization,
   Provision, and Financing, 42(3), 232-54.
Joyce, Theodore. 1999. "Impact of Augmented Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes of Medicaid
   Recipients in New York City." Journal of Health Economics, 18(1), 31-67.
Joyce, Theodore and Robert Kaestner. 1996. "The Effect of Expansions in Medicaid Income
   Eligibility on Abortion." Demography, 33(2), 181-92.
Joyce, Theodore; Robert Kaestner and Florence Kwan. 1998. "Is Medicaid Pronatalist? The
   Effect of Eligibility Expansions on Abortions and Births." Family Planning Perspectives, 30(3),
   108-27.
Kaestner, Robert; Lisa Dubay and Genevieve Kenney. 2005. "Managed Care and Infant Health:
   An Evaluation of Medicaid in the US." Social Science & Medicine, 60(8), 1815-33.



                                                 109
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. 2009. “State Children’s Health Insurance
    Program (CHIP): Reauthorization History.” (February).
    (https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/7743-02.pdf)
_____ . 2012. “An Overview of Recent Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waiver Activity.”
    Policy Brief (May). (https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8318.pdf)
_____ . 2013. “Overview of Nursing Facility Capacity, Financing and Ownership in the United
    States in 2011,” Fact Sheet (June).
_____ . 2014a. “A Closer Look at the Impact of State Decisions Not to Expand Medicaid on
    Coverage for Uninsured Adults.” (April).
    (https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2014/04/8585-a-closer-look-at-the-impact-
    of-state-decisions-not-to-expand-medicaid.pdf)
_____ . 2014b. “Medicaid Moving Forward.” (June).
    (https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/7235-07-medicaid-moving-
    forward2.pdf)
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2008. “Medicaid: A Timeline of Key Developments.”
    https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2008/04/5-02-13-medicaid-timeline.pdf.
Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas Staiger. 1996. "Teen Motherhood and Abortion Access." The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 467-506.
Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2009. "Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual
    Behavior." Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 137-51.
Kenney, Genevieve; Mike Huntress. 2012. “Affordable Care Act: Coverage Implications and
    Issues for Immigrant Families,” ASPE Issue Brief, (April)
Kenney, Genevieve; R. Andrew Allison; Julia F. Costich; James Marton and Joshua
    McFeeters. 2006. "Effects of Premium Increases on Enrollment in SCHIP: Findings from Three
    States." Inquiry, 43(4), 378-92.
Koch, Thomas G. 2013. "Using RD Design to Understand Heterogeneity in Health Insurance
    Crowd-Out." Journal of Health Economics, 32(3), 599-611.
Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. 2012. "The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital
    and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts," Journal of Public Economics, 96(11), 909-
    929.
Ku, Leighton and Teresa A. Coughlin. 1995. "Medicaid Disproportionate Share and Other Special
    Financing Programs." Health Care Financing Review, 16(3), 27-54.
_____ . 1999/2000. “Sliding Scale Premium Health Insurance Programs: Four States’
    Experiences.” Inquiry 36(4), 471-480.
Lakdawalla, Darius and Neeraj Sood. 2009. "Innovation and the Welfare Effects of Public Drug
    Insurance." Journal of Public Economics, 93(3–4), 541-48.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. "Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics."
    Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 281-355.
Levine, Phillip B.; Amy B. Trainor and David J. Zimmerman. 1996. "The Effect of Medicaid
    Abortion Funding Restrictions on Abortions, Pregnancies and Births." Journal of Health
    Economics, 15(5), 555-78.
Li, Minghua and Reagan Baughman. 2010. “Coverage, Utilization, and Health Outcomes of the
    State Children's Health Insurance Program,” Inquiry, 47(4), 296-314.
Lo Sasso, Anthony T. and Thomas C. Buchmueller. 2004. "The Effect of the State Children’s
    Health Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage." Journal of Health Economics, 23(5),
    1059-82.


                                                110
Long, Stephen; Settle and Bruce Stuart. 1986. “Reimbursement and Access to Physicians’
   Services Under Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics 5(3): 235- 251.
Long, Sharon K.; Karen Stockley and Heather Dahlen. 2012. "Massachusetts Health Reforms:
   Uninsurance Remains Low, Self-Reported Health Status Improves As State Prepares To Tackle
   Costs." Health Affairs, 31(2), 444-451.
Lurie, Ithai. 2009. “Differential Effect of the State Children's Health Insurance Program
   Expansions by Children's Age,” Health Services Research, 44(5), 1504-1520.
Marton, James. 2007. "The Impact of the Introduction of Premiums into a SCHIP Program."
   Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(2), 237-55.
Mazumder, Bhash and Sarah Miller. 2014. “The Effects of the Massachusetts Health Reform on
   Financial Distress,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper, No. 2014-01.
McGuire, Thomas. 2000. “Physician Agency,” in Culyer and Newhouse (eds), Handbook of
   Health Economics, North Holland.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC). 2012. Report to the
   Congress on Medicaid and CHIP (March), https://www.macpac.gov/wp-
   content/uploads/2015/01/2012-03-15_MACPAC_Report1.pdf
_____. 2013. Report to the Congress on Medicaid and CHIP (June), https://www.macpac.gov/wp-
   content/uploads/2015/01/2013-06-15_MACPAC_Report.pdf.
_____. 2014. Report to the Congress on Medicaid and CHIP (June), https://www.macpac.gov/wp-
   content/uploads/2015/01/2014-06-13_MACPAC_Report.pdf.
Meyer, Bruce D. 1995. "Natural and Quasi-Experiments in Economics." Journal of Business &
   Economic Statistics, 13(2), 151-61.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. "Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
   Labor Supply of Single Mothers." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 1063-114.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Laura R. Wherry. 2012. "Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to
   Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper Series, No. 18309.
Miller, Sarah. 2012. “The Effect of Insurance on Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis of the
   2006 Massachusetts Health Reform,” Journal of Public Economics, 96(11), 893–908.
Moffitt, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. 1992. "The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
   Participation and Labor Supply." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(4), 615-26.
Moore, Judith D. and David G. Smith. 2005. "Legislating Medicaid: Considering Medicaid and Its
   Origins." Health Care Financing Review, 27(2), 45-52.
National Association of State Budget Officers. 2013. “State Expenditure Report: Examining
   Fiscal 2011-2013 State Spending.” (https://www.nasbo.org/sites/default/files/State Expenditure
   Report %28Fiscal 2011-2013 Data%29.pdf)
Norton, Edward. 2000. “Long-Term Care,” in Handbook of Health Economics, Anthony Culyer
   and Joseph Newhouse Eds., Elsevier, 955-994
Nyman, John. 1985. “Prospective and ‘cost-plus’ Medicaid reimbursement, excess Medicaid
   demand, and the quality of nursing home care,” Journal of Health Economics, 4(3), 237-259.
_____. 1988. “Excess Demand, the Percentage of Medicaid Patients, and the Quality of Nursing
   Home Care,” Journal of Human Resources, 23(1), 76-92.
Office of the Legislative Counsel, US House of Representatives. 2010. Compilation of Patient
   Protection and Affordable Care Act. Washington, DC.
   (http://housedocs.house.gov/energycommerce/ppacacon.pdf)



                                                111
Polsky, Daniel; Michael Richards; Simon Basseyn; Douglas Wissoker; Genevieve Kenney;
   Stephen Zuckerman and Karin Rhodes. 2015. “Appointment Availability After Increases in
   Medicaid Payments for Primary Care,” New England Journal of Medicine, 372 (6), 537-545.
Rhodes, Karin; Genevieve Kenney; AB Friedman; Brendan Saloner; CC Lawrence; D
   Chearo; Douglas Wissoker and Daniel Polsky. 2014. “Primary care access for new patients
   on the eve of health care reform,” JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(6), 861-869
Rosenbach, Margo. 1989. “The Impact of Medicaid on Physician Use by Low-Income Children,”
   American Journal of Public Health, 79(9): 1220-1226.
Rudowitz, Robin; Samantha Artiga and MaryBeth Musumeci. 2014. "The ACA and Recent
   Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waivers." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the
   Uninsured Issue Brief.
Schneider, Andy. 1997. “Overview of Medicaid Provisions in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
   P.L. 105-33.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities report, September 8, 1997,
   http://www.cbpp.org/archives/908mcaid.htm.
Schneider, Andy; Risa Elias; Rachel Garfield; David Rousseau and Victoria Wachino. 2002.
   “The Medicaid Resource Book.” The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.
Selden, Thomas and Julie Hudson. 2006. “Access to Care and Utilization Among Children:
   Estimating the Effects of Public and Private Coverage,” Medical Care 44(5), 19-26.
Sen, Bisakha. 2003. "A Preliminary Investigation of the Effects of Restrictions on Medicaid
   Funding for Abortions on Female STD Rates." Health Economics, 12(6), 453-64.
Shen, Yu-Chu and Stephen Zuckerman. 2005. "The Effect of Medicaid Payment Generosity on
   Access and Use among Beneficiaries." Health Services Research, 40(3), 723-44.
Shore-Sheppard, Lara D. 2003. “Expanding Public Health Insurance for Children: Medicaid and
   the State Children's Health Insurance Program.” In Changing Welfare, Rachel A. Gordon and
   Herbert J. Walberg, eds., New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 95-118.
_____. 2008. "Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on Health
   Insurance Coverage." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 8(2).
Sloan, Frank, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell. 1978. “Physician Participation in State
   Medicaid Programs.” Journal of Human Resources, 13: 211-245.
Sommers, Benjamin D. 2006. "Insuring Children or Insuring Families: Do Parental and Sibling
   Coverage Lead to Improved Retention of Children in Medicaid and CHIP?" Journal of Health
   Economics, 25(6), 1154-69.
____. 2010. "Targeting in Medicaid: The Costs and Enrollment Effects of Medicaid's Citizenship
   Documentation Requirement." Journal of Public Economics, 94(1–2), 174-82.
Sommers, Benjamin D.; Katherine Baicker and Arnold M. Epstein. 2012. "Mortality and Access
   to Care among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions." New England Journal of Medicine,
   367(11), 1025-34.
Sommers, Benjamin D.; Genevieve M. Kenney and Arnold M. Epstein. 2014. "New Evidence
   on the Affordable Care Act: Coverage Impacts of Early Medicaid Expansions." Health Affairs
   33(1), 78-87.
Stephens, Jessica and Samantha Artiga. 2013. “Key Facts on Health Coverage for Low-Income
   Immigrants Today and Under the Affordable Care Act.” Washington, DC: Kaiser Commission
   on Medicaid and the Uninsured, March,
   https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/8279-02.pdf.




                                               112
Taubman, Sarah L.; Heidi L. Allen; Bill J. Wright; Katherine Baicker and Amy N.
   Finkelstein. 2014. "Medicaid Increases Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon's
   Health Insurance Experiment." Science, 343(6168), 263-68.
UC Berkeley Labor Center. 2014. “Modified Adjusted Gross Income Under the Affordable Care
   Act,” Fact Sheet. (http://laborcenter.berkeley.edu/pdf/2013/MAGI_summary13.pdf)
US General Accounting Office (US GAO). 2000. “Factors Contributing to Low Use of Dental
   Services by Low-Income Populations,” GAO/HEHS-00-149.
   (http://www.gao.gov/new.items/he00149.pdf)
US Social Security Administration Office of Retirement and Disability Policy. 2011. “Annual
   Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 2011.”
   (http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2011/supplement11.pdf)
Urban Institute. 2015. “Safety Net Almanac: Medicaid Legislative History.”
   (http://safetynet.urban.org/safety-net-almanac/Medicaid-CHIP/Medicaid-Legislative-
   History.cfm)
Watson, Tara. 2014. "Inside the Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling Effects in
   Medicaid Participation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3), 313-38.
Weikel, M. Keith and Nancy A. LeaMond. 1976. "A Decade of Medicaid." Public Health Reports,
   91(4), 303-08.
White, Chapin. 2012. “A Comparison of Two Approaches to Increasing Access to Care:
   Expanding Coverage versus Increasing Physician Fees,” Health Services Research, 47(3-1), 963-
   938.
Wolfe, Barbara; Thomas Kaplan; Robert Haveman and Yoonyoung Cho. 2006. "SCHIP
   Expansion and Parental Coverage: An Evaluation of Wisconsin's BadgerCare." Journal of
   Health Economics, 25(6), 1170-92.
Wolfe, Barbara and Scott Scrivner. 2005. "The Devil May Be in the Details: How the
   Characteristics of SCHIP Programs Affect Take-Up." Journal of Policy Analysis and
   Management, 24(3), 499-522.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. 1995. "The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence
   from Eligibility Expansions." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4), 909-39.
____. 1998. "Will Extending Medicaid to Two-Parent Families Encourage Marriage?" The Journal
   of Human Resources, 33(4), 833-65.
Zavodny, Madeline and Marianne P. Bitler. 2010. "The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility Expansions
   on Fertility." Social Science & Medicine, 71(5), 918-24.
Zuckerman, Stephen; Joshua McFeeters; Peter Cunningham and Len Nichols. 2004.
   “Changes in Medicaid Physician Fees, 1998–2003: Implications for Physician Participation.”
   Health Affairs, w374–w384.
Zuckerman, Stephen; Aimee Williams and Karen Stockley. 2009. “Trends In Medicaid
   Physician Fees, 2003–2008.” Health Affairs, 28(3), w510-w519.
Zuckerman, Stephen and Dana Goin. 2012. “How Much Will Medicaid Physician Fees for
   Primary Care Rise in 2013? Evidence from a 2012 Survey of Medicaid Physician Fees.” Kaiser
   Family Foundation Issue Brief (December).




                                                113
Figure 1




Notes: Updated version of Figure 1 from Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004). Data from Current
Population Survey Annual Demographic File.




                                           114
Figure 2. Medicaid Enrollment by Eligibility Category, Fiscal Years 1975 to 2010

  70,000



  60,000
                                                                        Elderly


  50,000

                                                                              Disabled
  40,000


                                                                                  Adult
  30,000



  20,000


                                                                                  Children
  10,000



      -
           1975    1980        1985       1990       1995        2000        2005            2010


Source: CMS (2012b, Table 13.4).

Notes: Data for other/unknown eligibility category not shown. This category represents 6.8
percent of total enrollment in 2010. Child category includes non-disabled children and foster
care children and excludes CHIP enrollment. Adult category includes non-elderly, non-disabled
adults. Medicaid-eligible persons who during the year received only coverage for managed care
benefits are included starting in fiscal year 1998.




                                             115
Figure 3. Nominal Dollar Medicaid Payments by Eligibility Group, Fiscal Years 1975 to
2010

$160,000


$140,000

                                                                     Disabled
$120,000


$100,000


 $80,000

                                                                        Aged
 $60,000


 $40,000                                                                 Children


                                                                          Adults
 $20,000


     $0
           1975    1980       1985      1990         1995     2000      2005        2010

Source: CMS (2012b, Table 13.10).

Notes: Beginning fiscal year 1998, expenditures capitated premiums for individuals enrolled in
managed care plans were included in this series. SCHIP payments are excluded. As part of a
2009 revision of the national accounts classification system, components of medical care were
changed, and the base year was updated to the year 2005. All personal consumption series were
restated for the entire historical period to reflect the new classification structure.




                                               116
Figure 4. Real Spending Per Beneficiary by Eligibility Group, Fiscal Year 1975 to 2010

 $20,000


 $18,000


 $16,000
                                                             Aged

 $14,000                                                                   Disabled


 $12,000


 $10,000


  $8,000


  $6,000


  $4,000                                                                    Adults

  $2,000
                                                                             Children
     $0
           1975     1980       1985       1990        1995          2000          2005   2010

Source: CMS (2012b, Table 13.11).

Notes: Beginning fiscal year 1998, expenditures capitated premiums for individuals enrolled in
managed care plans were included in this series. Beneficiaries covered under SCHIP and their
payments are excluded.
Dollar amounts are adjusted using a personal consumption expenditure index for health care
services (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis) expressed in fiscal year
2010 dollars. As part of a 2009 revision of the national accounts classification system,
components of medical care were changed, and the base year was updated to the year 2005. All
personal consumption series were restated for the entire historical period to reflect the new
classification structure.




                                             117
Figure 5. Distribution of Medicaid Benefit Spending by Eligibility Group and Service
Category, FY 2011


      4%                 2%           1%              3%
                         1%                                9%
                                            14%
     17%



                 46%          47%
     14%                                    22%
                                                           47%
                                                                       Medicare Premiums
                                                                       Institutional LTSS
     25%                                    17%                        Non-Institutional LTSS
                 4%           5%                                       Managed Care

                                             5%                        Drugs
      4%                      16%
                                                           18%         Non-Hospital Acute
                 26%
                                            15%                        Hospital (inpatient and outpatient)
     16%
                                                           10%
                              31%                                 1%
     20%         22%                        23%            9%

                                                           7%

     Total       Child        Adult        Disabled        Aged


Source: MACPAC analysis of Medicaid Statistical Information System data as reported in
MACPAC (2014).
Notes: LTSS is Long-term Services and Support. Includes Federal and state funds. Excludes
spending for administration, Disproportionate Share Hospital payments, the territories and
Medicaid-expansion CHIP enrollees. Children and adults under age 65 who qualify for
Medicaid on the basis of a disability are included in the disabled category. About 706,000
enrollees age 65 and older are identified in the data as disabled. See Figure 3 of MACPAC
(2014) for additional notes.




                                                  118
Figure 6. Federal and State Medicaid Expenditures, Fiscal Years 1966 to 2012

          $300,000
                                                                                          2011
                                                                                          Federal: $256,184
                                                                                          State: $163,280
          $250,000



                                                                                2001
          $200,000                                                              Federal: $135,201
                                                                                State: $93,201
  $000s




          $150,000
                                                                            Federal

                                                             1991
          $100,000                                           Federal: $56,847
                                                             State: $36,364                     States


           $50,000     1971                1981
                       Federal: $3,810     Federal $16,902
                       State: $2,886       State: $13,405

               $0
                     1966    1971        1976    1981        1986    1991       1996     2001       2006      2011

Source: National Health Expenditure Data, CMS (2014).




                                                             119
Figure 7. Percent of Medicaid Beneficiaries Enrolled in Managed Care Plans, 1991-2011.




                                          120
Table 1: Major Medicaid and CHIP Legislation, 1965 to 2010
Social Security Amendments of    -- Established Medicaid program
1965
Social Security Amendments of    --Enacted Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and
1967                             Treatment (EPSDT) benefit, required for Medicaid children
                                 younger than 21
                                 --Allowed states to extend Medicaid coverage to optional
                                 populations not receiving cash assistance, including
                                 “Ribicoff children”—individuals under 21 who would be
                                 eligible for AFDC if they met the definition of dependent
                                 child
                                 --Permitted Medicaid beneficiaries to use providers of their
                                 choice
                                 --Limited income eligibility standard for medically needy
Act of 14 December 1971          --Allowed states to cover services in intermediate care
                                 facilities for individuals with lower level care needs than
                                 skilled nursing facilities
Social Security Amendments of    --Enacted Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program for
1972                             elderly and disabled and required states to extend Medicaid
                                 to SSI recipients or to elderly and disabled meeting state
                                 1972 eligibility criteria (“209(b)” option)
                                 --Repealed the Medicaid “maintenance of effort”
                                 requirement for states
                                 --Allowed states to cover care for beneficiaries under age
                                 22 in psychiatric hospitals
Medicare-Medicaid Anti-Fraud     --Established Medicaid Fraud Control Units
and Abuse Amendments of 1977
Departments of Labor and Health, --Enacted the Hyde Amendment, which prohibited federal
Education, and Welfare           Medicaid payments for medically necessary abortions
Appropriations Act for FY 1977   except when the life of the mother would be endangered
Mental Health Systems Act, 1980  --Required most states to develop a computerized Medicaid
                                 Management Information System
Omnibus Reconciliation Act of    --Enacted the Boren amendment requiring states to pay
1980 (OBRA 80)                   “reasonable and adequate” rates for nursing home services
                                 instead of Medicare reimbursement rates
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation    --Enacted reduction in federal matching percentages
Act of 1981 (OBRA 81)            applicable from FY 1982–1984
                                 --Extended Boren amendment payment standard to
                                 inpatient hospital services
                                 --Required states to make payment adjustments to hospitals
                                 serving a disproportionate share of Medicaid and low-
                                 income patients (DSH hospitals)
                                 --Enacted section 1915(b) freedom-of-choice waiver for
                                 mandatory managed care
                                 --Enacted section 1915(c) home and community- based
                                 waiver

                                            121
                                 -- Eliminated special penalties for noncompliance with
                                 EPSDT requirements
                                 --Gave states with medically needy programs broader
                                 authority to limit coverage
Tax Equity and Fiscal            --Allowed states to impose nominal cost-sharing on certain
Responsibility Act of 1982       Medicaid beneficiaries and services
(TEFRA)
Deficit Reduction Act of 1984    --Required states to cover children born after September
(DEFRA)                          30, 1983, up to age 5, in families meeting state AFDC
                                 income and resource standards
                                 --Required states to cover first-time pregnant women, and
                                 pregnant women in 2-parent unemployed families meeting
                                 state AFDC income and resource standards
Consolidated Omnibus Budget      --Required states to cover pregnant women in 2-parent
Reconciliation Act of 1985       families (whether or not unemployed) meeting state AFDC
(COBRA)                          income and resource standards
Omnibus Reconciliation Act of    --Allowed states to cover pregnant women and young
1986 (OBRA 86)                   children up to age 5 in families with incomes at or below
                                 100 percent of federal poverty level
                                 --Allowed states to pay for Medicare premiums and cost-
                                 sharing for low-income Medicare beneficiaries (QMBs)
                                 with incomes at or below 100 percent of federal poverty
                                 level
                                 --Mandated coverage of emergency services for illegal
                                 immigrants who would otherwise be eligible for Medicaid
Medicare and Medicaid Patient    --Strengthened authorities to sanction and exclude
and Program Protection Act of    providers
1987
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation    --Allowed states to cover pregnant women and infants in
Act of 1987 (OBRA 87)            families with incomes at or below 185 percent of federal
                                 poverty level
                                 --Allowed states to cover children up to age 8 in families
                                 below 100 percent of poverty level
                                 --Enacted nursing home reform provisions that phased out
                                 distinction between skilled nursing facilities and
                                 intermediate care facilities, upgraded quality of care
                                 requirements, and revised monitoring and enforcement
                                 --Strengthened OBRA 1981 requirements that states
                                 provide additional payment to hospitals treating a
                                 disproportionate share of low-income patients
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage   --Required states to phase in coverage for pregnant women
Act of 1988 (MCCA)               and infants with incomes below 100 percent of federal
                                 poverty level
                                 --Required states to phase in coverage of Medicare
                                 premiums and cost-sharing for low- income Medicare
                                 beneficiaries (QMBs) with incomes below 100 percent of

                                         122
                                    poverty
                                    --Established minimum income and resource rules for
                                    nursing home residents whose spouses remain in the
                                    community to prevent “spousal impoverishment”
Family Support Act of 1988 (FSA)    --Required states to extend 12 months transitional
                                    Medicaid coverage to families leaving AFDC rolls due to
                                    earnings from work
                                    --Required states to cover 2-parent unemployed families
                                    meeting state AFDC income and resource standards
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation       --Required states to cover pregnant women and children
Act of 1989 (OBRA 89)               under age 6 in families with incomes at or below 133
                                    percent of federal poverty level
                                    --Expanded EPSDT benefit for children under 21 to
                                    include diagnostic and treatment services not covered
                                    under state Medicaid program for adult beneficiaries
                                    --Required states to cover services provided by federally-
                                    qualified health centers
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation       --Required states to phase in coverage of children ages 6
Act of 1990 (OBRA 90)               through 18 born after September 30, 1983 in families with
                                    incomes at or below 100 percent of federal poverty level
                                    --Required states to phase in coverage of Medicare
                                    premiums for low-income Medicare beneficiaries with
                                    incomes between 100 and 120 percent of poverty (SLMBs)
                                    --Required manufacturers to give “best price” rebates to
                                    states and federal government for outpatient prescription
                                    drugs covered under Medicaid program
Medicaid Voluntary Contribution     --Restricted use of provider donations and taxes as state
and Provider-Specific Tax           share of Medicaid spending
Amendments of 1991                  --Imposed ceiling on Medicaid payment adjustments to
                                    DSH hospitals (12 percent of national aggregate Medicaid
                                    spending)
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation       --Established standards for state use of formularies to limit
Act of 1993 (OBRA 93)               prescription drug coverage
                                    --Imposed facility-specific ceilings on the amount of
                                    payment adjustment to DSH hospitals
                                    --Tightened prohibitions against transfers of assets in order
                                    to qualify for Medicaid nursing home coverage; required
                                    recovery of nursing home payments from beneficiary
                                    estates
                                    --Established Vaccines for Children (VFC) program
                                    providing federally-purchased vaccines to states
Personal Responsibility and Work    --Replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for Needy
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of   Families (TANF) and severed the automatic link between
1996 (PRWORA)                       cash welfare and Medicaid.
                                    --Mandated coverage of families meeting AFDC eligibility
                                    standards as of July 16, 1996, while permitting coverage of

                                             123
                                  higher-income families.
                                  --Prohibited Medicaid coverage for legal immigrants
                                  entering the United States after August 21, 1996, and
                                  allowed states to cover these immigrants after they have
                                  been in the country for five years.
                                  --Narrowed the eligibility criteria for disabled children.
Balanced Budget Act of 1997       --Created the State Children's Health Insurance Program
(BBA 97)                          (SCHIP, later referred to as CHIP), allowing states to cover
                                  uninsured children in families with incomes below 200
                                  percent of FPL who were ineligible for Medicaid.
                                  --Allowed states to implement mandatory managed care
                                  enrollment for most Medicaid beneficiaries without
                                  obtaining section 1915(b) waivers.
                                  --Eliminated minimum payment standards for state-set
                                  reimbursement rates for hospitals, nursing homes, and
                                  community health centers, placed ceilings on DSH
                                  payment adjustments, and allowed states to shift the cost of
                                  Medicare deductibles and coinsurance requirements for
                                  low-income Medicare beneficiaries from their Medicaid
                                  programs to physicians and other providers.
                                  --Allowed partial coverage of Medicare premiums for
                                  beneficiaries with incomes between 120 and 135 percent of
                                  FPL (QIs), funded via a federal block grant.
                                  --Restored Medicaid eligibility for legal immigrants who
                                  entered the country on or before August 22, 1996 and
                                  became disabled and qualified for Supplemental Security
                                  Income (SSI) benefits thereafter.
                                  --Restored Medicaid coverage for certain disabled children
                                  who would lose their eligibility as a result of PRWORA.
                                  --Allowed states to provide up to 12 months of continuous
                                  eligibility for children. Allowed states to cover children
                                  presumptively until a formal determination of eligibility is
                                  made.
Ticket to Work and Work           --Allowed states to cover working disabled individuals
Incentives Improvement Act of     with incomes above 250 percent of federal poverty level
1999                              and impose income-related premiums on such individuals.
Emergency Supplemental            --Transferred federal share of settlement funds from
Appropriations for FY 1999        national tobacco litigation to states.
Breast and Cervical Cancer        --Allowed states to cover uninsured women with breast or
Treatment and Prevention Act of   cervical cancer regardless of their income and resources.
2000
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP     --Increased state-specific ceilings on DSH allotments
Benefits Improvement and          --Required the Secretary of Health and Human Services to
Protection Act of 2000 (BIPA)     issue a final regulation restricting the amount of Medicaid
                                  payments that states may make to facilities that are
                                  operated by local governments and thus curtail the use of

                                           124
                                    an accounting practice that allowed states to artificially
                                    inflate their reimbursable spending.
                                    --Postponed the expiration of funds appropriated for
                                    SCHIP in 1998 and 1999.
                                    --Allowed additional entities to determine presumptive
                                    eligibility.
The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief      --Raised all state Medicaid matching rates by 2.95
Reconciliation Act of 2003          percentage points for the period April 2003 through June
                                    2004 as temporary federal fiscal relief for the states due to
                                    the downturn in the economy.
Medicare Prescription Drug,         --Transferred drug coverage of individuals dually eligible
Improvement, and Modernization      for Medicare and Medicaid to Medicare starting in 2006.
Act of 2003                         Medicaid still to provide some prescription drug coverage
                                    for the dually eligible population for prescription drugs not
                                    covered under the newly created Medicare Part D.
Deficit Reduction Act of 2005       --Provided States with increased flexibility to make
(DRA)                               significant reforms to their Medicaid programs.
                                    --Refined eligibility requirements for Medicaid
                                    beneficiaries by tightening standards for citizenship and
                                    immigration documentation and by changing the rules
                                    concerning long-term care eligibility.
Medicare, Medicaid and SCHIP        --Reauthorized CHIP through April 2009 at then-current
Extension Act of 2007               funding levels.
Children’s Health Insurance         --Reauthorized CHIP through 2013 and expanded federal
Program Reauthorization Act of      funding for children’s coverage by $33 billion over the
2009 (CHIPRA)                       next four and half years.
                                    --Established an upper income limit of 300 percent of the
                                    FPL for states to receive the more generous federal CHIP
                                    matching rate, with an exception for states that already had
                                    permission to cover higher income children.
                                    --Allowed states the option to expand coverage to legal
                                    immigrant children and pregnant women during their first
                                    five years in the country.
                                    --Required states to cover dental services, and required
                                    parity of mental health services.
Patient Protection and Affordable   --Expanded Medicaid to include all individuals under age
Care Act of 2010 (PPACA) and        65 in families with income below 138 percent of the FPL
Health Care and Education           starting in 2014. (Technically, the income limit is 133
Reconciliation Act of 2010          percent of the FPL, but the Act also provided for a 5-
(HCERA)—together known as the       percent income disregard.) The Supreme Court ruling in
Affordable Care Act (ACA)           2012 made this coverage expansion optional for states.
                                    --Broadened availability of long-term care services and
                                    supports, starting as early as 2010 in some instances.
                                    --Extended the authorization of the federal CHIP program
                                    for an additional two years, through September 30, 2015.
                                    Required states to maintain current income eligibility levels

                                             125
                                    for CHIP through September 30, 2019. States prohibited
                                    from implementing eligibility standards, methodologies or
                                    procedures more restrictive than those in place as of March
                                    23, 2010, with the exception of waiting lists for enrolling
                                    children in CHIP.
Sources: Congressional Research Service (1993), Gruber (2003), Schneider et al. (2002),
Schneider (1997), Congressional Budget Office (2001), Urban Institute (2015), Kaiser Family
Foundation (2008), US Social Security Administration (2011), Office of the Legislative Counsel
(2010), Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2009), and
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2013).




                                             126
Table 2. States’ Decision on ACA and Year of Original Implementation of Medicaid

          Not Implementing ACA        Implementing ACA               Implementing a
          Medicaid Expansion          Medicaid Expansion             Modified ACA Medicaid
1966       ID, LA, ME, NE, OK,        CA, CT, DE, HI, IL, KY,        MI3, PA4
                 UT, WI1              MD, MA, MN, NH2, NM,
                                      ND, OH, RI, VT, WA, WV
1967      GA, KS, MO, SD, TX,         NV, NY, OR                     IA5, MT6
          WY
1968      SC                          DC
1969      TN, VA                      CO
1970      AL, FL, MS, NC              NJ                             AR7, IN8
1971
1972      AK
1982*                                 AZ

Sources: Kaiser Family Foundation State Health Facts (http://kff.org/medicaid/state-
indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-under-the-affordable-care-act/), Arizona
Health Care Cost Containment System Section 1115 waiver description
(http://www.azahcccs.gov/reporting/federal/waiver.aspx), and Gruber (2003); data current as of
June 2015.
Notes:
1
  Wisconsin amended its Medicaid state plan and existing Section 1115 waiver to cover childless
adults with incomes up to 100% FPL in Medicaid, but did not adopt the ACA Medicaid
expansion.
2
  New Hampshire implemented the Medicaid expansion as of July 1, 2014, but the state plans to
seek a waiver at a later date to operate a premium assistance model.
3
  Michigan is implementing the Healthy Michigan plan using a Section 1115 waiver, under
which monthly premiums and required copayments will be instituted. See
http://kff.org/medicaid/fact-sheet/medicaid-expansion-in-michigan/ for more details.
4
  Pennsylvania is implementing a Section 1115 waiver to expand Medicaid coverage to adults
under 138% FPL through private managed care plans, with premiums for newly eligible adults
100-138% FPL. See http://files.kff.org/attachment/medicaid-expansion-in-pennsylvania-fact-
sheet for more details.
5
  Iowa is using a Section 1115 waiver to charge monthly premiums for people with incomes
between 101-138% FPL and another Section 1115 waiver to cover newly eligible beneficiaries
with incomes at or below 100% FPL under Medicaid managed care. See
http://files.kff.org/attachment/medicaid-expansion-in-iowa-fact-sheet for more details.
6
  Montana has enacted legislation adopting a modified expansion that requires premiums and
copayments. The legislation requires federal waiver approval before it can go into effect.
7
  Arkansas is implementing a premium assistance model using a waiver. See
http://files.kff.org/attachment/medicaid-expansion-in-arkansas-fact-sheet for more details.
8
  Indiana has a pending waiver for an alternative Medicaid expansion plan.




                                             127
                                       Table 3: Changes in Eligibility Limits for Children1

State                                                                                                 Prior to ACA (2013)      After ACA (2014)3
                       Prior to expansions    Prior to CHIP (1997)          Under CHIP (2001)
                                                                                                     with CHIP (*=Medicaid   with CHIP (*=Medicaid
                             (1987)2         inf. / <6 / 6-14 / 15-19     infants / older children
                                                                                                          limits lower)           limits lower)
                                (1)                      (2)                         (3)
                                                                                                               (4)                      (5)
Alabama                        16             133 / 133 / 100 / 15               200 / 200                   300*                    317*
Alaska                         82             133 / 133 / 100 / 76               200 / 200                   175                     208
Arizona                        40             140 / 133 / 100 / 32               200 / 200                   200*                    205*
Arkansas                       26             200 / 200 / 200 / 200              200 / 200                   200                     216
California                     85             200 / 133 / 100 / 82               300 / 200                   250*                    266
Colorado                       48             133 / 133 / 100 / 39               185 / 185                   250*                    265*
Connecticut                    81             185 / 185 / 185 / 185              300 / 300                   300*                    323*
Delaware                       43             185 / 133 / 100 / 100              200 / 200                   200*                    218*
District of Columbia           50             185 / 133 / 100 / 37               200 / 200                   300                     324
Florida                        36             185 / 133 / 100 / 28               200 / 200                   200*                    215*
Georgia                        35             185 / 133 / 100 / 39               235 / 235                   235*                    252*
Hawaii                         56             185 / 133 / 100 / 100              200 / 200                   300                     313
Idaho                          42             133 / 133 / 100 / 29               150 / 150                   185*                    190*
Illinois                       47             133 / 133 / 100 / 46               200 / 185                   300*                    318*
Indiana                        35             150 / 133 / 100 / 100              200 / 200                   250*                    255*
Iowa                           52             185 / 133 / 100 / 39               200 / 200                   300*                    317*
Kansas                         55             150 / 133 / 100 / 100              200 / 200                   232*                    250*
Kentucky                       27             185 / 133 / 100 / 33               200 / 200                   200*                    218*
Louisiana                      26             133 / 133 / 100 / 100              150 / 150                   250*                    255*
Maine                          56             185 / 133 / 125 / 125              200 / 200                   200*                    213*
Maryland                       47             185 / 185 / 185 / 34              200 / 2004                   300                     322

Massachusetts                  67             185 / 133 / 133 / 133              200 / 200                   300*                    305*

                                                                        128
Michigan         65   185 / 150 / 150 / 150            200 / 200           200*               217*
Minnesota        73   275 / 275 / 275 / 275            280 / 275       280 (inf) / 275   288 (inf.) / 280
Mississippi      16   185 / 133 / 100 / 34             200 / 200           200*               214*
Missouri         38   185 / 133 / 100 / 100            300 / 300           300*               305*
Montana          49   133 / 133 / 100 / 41             150 / 150           250*               266*
Nebraska         48   150 / 133 / 100 / 34             185 / 185            200                218
Nevada           39   133 / 133 / 100 / 45             200 / 200           200*               205*
New Hampshire    55   185 / 185 / 185 / 185            300 / 300            300                323
New Jersey       55   185 / 133 / 100 / 41             350 / 350           350*               355*
New Mexico       35   185 / 185 / 185 / 185            235 / 235            235                305
New York         68   185 / 133 / 100 / 87             185 / 185           400*               405*
North Carolina   36   185 / 133 / 100 / 100            200 / 200           200*               216*
North Dakota     51   133 / 133 / 100 / 100            140 / 140           160*               175*
Ohio             41   133 / 133 / 100 / 32             200 / 200            200                211
Oklahoma         43   150 / 133 / 100 / 48             185 / 185            185                210
Oregon           55   133 / 133 / 100 / 100            170 / 170           300*               305*
Pennsylvania     52   185 / 133 / 100 / 100            235 / 235           300*               319*
Rhode Island     69   250 / 250 / 250 / 250            300 / 300            250                266
South Carolina   27   185 / 133 / 100 / 18             150 / 150            200                213
South Dakota     50   133 / 133 / 100 / 100            200 / 200           200*               209*
Tennessee        21   400 / 400 / 400 / 400         400 / 400 / 1005       250*               255*

Texas            25   185 / 133 / 100 / 17             200 / 200           200*               206*
Utah             52   133 / 133 / 100 / 100            200 / 200           200*               205*
Vermont          79   225 / 225 / 225 / 225            300 / 300            300                318
Virginia         49   133 / 133 / 100 / 100            200 / 200           200*               205*
Washington       68   200 / 200 / 200 / 200            250 / 250           300*               305*



                                              129
West Virginia                           34                 150 / 133 / 100 / 100              200 / 200                    300*                        305*
Wisconsin                               75                 185 / 185 / 100 / 100         185 / 185 (200 after              300*                        306*
                                                                                               enrlmt.)
Wyoming                                 49                 133 / 133 / 100 / 55               133 / 133                    200*                        205*

Sources: Shore-Sheppard (2003, Table 1), Heberlein, et al. (2013)
Kaiser Family Foundation. “Medicaid and CHIP Income Eligibility Limits for Children at Application, Effective January 1, 2014.” Available at
http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/medicaid-and-chip-income-eligibility-limits-for-children-at-application-effective-january-1-2014/. Accessed Nov 11,
2013.
Kaiser Family Foundation. “Medicaid and CHIP Income Eligibility Limits for Pregnant Women at Application, Effective January 1, 2014.” Available at
 http://kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-and-chip-income-eligibility-limits-for-pregnant-women-at-application-effective-january-1-2014/. Accessed Nov
11, 2013.

1 Eligibility limits are as a percent of the federal poverty threshold for that year. Note that until the ACA eligibility limits that are apparently equal may actually
differ through differences in the two states’ choices of what income and resources are counted.
2 Eligibility is through eligibility for AFDC; limits are for a family of 3.
3 Difference from prior column may solely be a result of different methods of counting income. See text.
4 Maryland also had premium assistance eligibility to 300% of the poverty threshold
5 Tennessee had a 1115 waiver to operate TennCare. Its CHIP expansion covered children <19 born before October 1, 1983, who could not have enrolled in
Medicaid before.




                                                                                   130
Table 4: Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment by Age, Data Source and Enrollment Period,
2011
                                  Ever       Point in        NHIS      CPS
                                  Enrolled Time
All Ages
Total Medicaid/CHIP Enrollment    75.8       60.4            50.5      50.8
Population                        312.3      311             305.9     308.8
Enrollment as a Percentage of     24.3%      19.3%           16.5%     16.5%
Population

Children Under Age 191
Total Medicaid/CHIP Enrollment          40.3        32.4             29.5        26.32
Population                              78.5        78.4             78.7        74.1
Enrollment as a Percentage of           51.3%       41.3%            37.5%       35.6%
Population

Adults 19-64
Total Medicaid/CHIP Enrollment          29.0        22.4             17.8        20.6
Population                              192.1       191.4            187.4       193.2
Enrollment as a Percentage of           15.1%       11.7%            9.5%        10.7%
Population

Adults 65 and Older
Total Medicaid/CHIP Enrollment          6.5         5.6              3.1         3.9
Population                              41.7        41.1             39.7        41.5
Enrollment as a Percentage of           15.5%       13.7%            7.9%        9.4%
Population

Sources: Columns 1-3 are drawn from tables 16-19 from MACPAC (2014). MACPAC report
data is drawn from Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) as of February 2014; CHIP
Statistical Enrollment Data System data as of May 2014; the National Health Interview survey
(NHIS); and U.S. Census Bureau vintage 2012 data on the monthly postcensal resident
population by single year of age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. Column 4 is based on “Income,
Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2011” (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor,
and Smith 2012, Table C-3).
Note:
1
  The CPS data are for children under 18 years of age.




                                              131
Table 5. Ratio of Medicaid Physician Fees to Medicare Fees, Composite Fee Index for
Selected Years



                                                 2003          2008             2012
National Average
All Services                                        0.69        0.72          0.66
Primary Care                                        0.62        0.66          0.59
Obstetric Care                                      0.84        0.93          0.78
Other Services                                      0.73        0.72          0.70

Distribution of Ratio for All Services by
State
Minimum                                            0.35          0.37          0.37
Median                                             0.80          0.88          0.77
Maximum                                            1.37          1.43          1.34
States with Medicaid/Medicare Ratios:
     Less than 0.501                                  3             3             2
     0.50 to .75                                     18            14            19
     0.75 to 1.0                                     26            23            27
     Greater than 1.0                                 4            11             3
Source: Zuckerman et al. (2004); Zuckerman, Williams and Stockley (2009); Zuckerman and
Goin (2012).
Notes: Data represent the national average of Medicaid-Medicare fee indexes within given
categories. Underlying source data is from the Urban Institute Medicaid Physician Fee surveys.
1
  : Categories are inclusive of lower boundary.




                                              132
Table 6: Studies of Eligibility, Take-Up, and Crowd-Out
Study            Data                  Population       Design                               Results
Cutler and       1988-1993 March Children,              IV using simulated eligibility       For marginal eligible children: take-
Gruber (1996) CPS                      women of         instrument. Dependent variables:     up 23.5% (1.6), private decline 7.4%
                                       childbearing     private coverage, public coverage,   (2.1), implies ratio of private decline
                                       age              and uninsured.                       to take-up 31.5% (s.e. not
                                                        Main independent variable:           calculated), uninsured 11.9% (1.8)
                                                        imputed eligibility. Variation       Women: no statistically significant
                                                        exploited: Medicaid expansions.      changes in coverage.
Card and         Separately use        Children at ages Use a RD design to compare           Find the 1990 expansion increased
Shore-           1990–1993 panels around the 1989 children above and below the age           both Medicaid and overall coverage
Sheppard         of SIPP, 1990–        OBRA             limits set by the 1989 OBRA. Use     for children just inside the eligibility
(2004)           1996 March CPS, expansion and          the same strategy for the 1990       limits by 8%. Find no effect of the
                 and the 1992-1996 the 1990 OBRA OBRA.                                       OBRA 1989. Find little or no
                 Health Interview      expansion.                                            significant crowd-out effects.
                 Survey (HIS).
                 SIPP and the          Individuals in   Use administrative data to           The probability of correctly reporting
Card, Hildreth Medi-Cal                California       determine measurement error in       coverage for those actually covered
and Shore-       Eligibility Data      eligible for     SIPP reporting of Medicaid           by Medicaid is around 0.85. The
Sheppard         system                Medicaid         coverage.                            probability that people who are not
(2004)                                 (children &                                           covered by Medicaid incorrectly
                                       adults)                                               report that they are covered is about
                                                                                             0.013 for the population as a whole.




                                                                133
LoSasso and   CPS 1996-2000       Children less   Allow children’s Medicaid             Find take-up of eligibility due to the
Buchmueller                       than 18         eligibility from the expansions to    expansions is equal to take-up due to
(2004)                                            have a different effect than those    SCHIP (of about 7%) when they do
                                                  eligible due to SCHIP on private      not use state*time dummies, but only
                                                  coverage, public coverage, and        take-up of SCHIP eligibility is
                                                  uninsured. Test whether the           significant (11%) when they allow
                                                  waiting period for SCHIP in many      for state*time dummies. Find waiting
                                                  states affects the effect of SCHIP    period significantly reduces
                                                  eligibility on the dependent          Medicaid coverage and increases
                                                  variables.                            private coverage.
Ham and       SIPP 1986, 1987,    Children        IV using simulated eligibility        Within baseline specification:
Shore-        1988, 1990, 1991,                   instrument. Dependent variables:      Eligibility leads to take-up of 11.8%
Sheppard      1992, and 1993                      private coverage, public coverage.    (1.0), private insurance rises by
(2005a)       panels                              Main independent variable:            .0.6% (1.4). Estimate both short-run
                                                  imputed eligibility. Allow for        and long-run effects of eligibility and
                                                  dynamics.                             find that long-term is considerably
                                                                                        bigger.
Hudson,       Medical             Children        Use simulated eligibility IV and      Diff in Diff: Medicaid insurance
Selden, and   Expenditure                         DD approach. Provide standard         increased by 8.9% (0.02). Private
Banthin       Panel Survey                        error for ratio crowd-out rate.       insurance decreased by 5.0 %
(2005)        (MEPS) 1996-                                                              (0.023). IV: take-up 26.5% (2.7),
              2002                                                                      private insurance decline 14.0%
                                                                                        (3.1); ratio crowd-out 52.7% (10.0).


Shore-        CPS March           Children (age   Uses simulated eligibility IV, adds   Finds Cutler and Gruber results
Sheppard      supplements,        18 and under)   state*time, time*age and age*time     stable except when adds age*time
(2008)        1988-1996                           dummies separately and together.      dummies to the specification. Take-
                                                                                        up coefficient falls by half to 14.5%
                                                                                        (2.5)%, private coefficient falls to
                                                                                        0.5% (3.1), ratio crowd-out falls to
                                                                                        3.4%


                                                          134
Gruber and       1996-2002 SIPP     Children 0-18    IV using two specifications, each      Baseline: The probability of having
Simon (2008)                        years old,       with its simulated eligibility         only Medicaid increases when
                                    Parents 19-64    instrument.                            eligible by 10.9% (3.6); probability
                                    years old        Dependent variables: only private      of having only private insurance
                                                     coverage, only public coverage,        decreases by 0.066 (0.03).
                                                     both types, uninsured. Main            Significant crowd out estimates.
                                                     independent variable: eligibility or
                                                     fraction of children in the family
                                                     eligible.
Ham, Li, and     SIPP 1986-1996     Children 0-18    Estimate transitions between           Find that higher eligibility limits
Shore-           panels.            years old        public insurance, private              increase the transitions into, and out
Sheppard                                             insurance, and no insurance            of, public coverage.
(2009)                                               coverage as a function of Medicaid
                                                     income limits
de la Mata       PSID – CDS 1997,   Children who     Dependent variables: public            Medicaid eligibility increases take up
(2012)           2002, 2007 waves   were between 5   coverage, preventative health care,    by 10-13 % overall and 24-29 % for
                                    and 18 years     and health outcomes. Regression        the lower income eligibility
                                    old.             discontinuity design around            thresholds.
                                                     income thresholds.                     Medicaid eligibility increases the use
                                                                                            of preventive health care by 11–14
                                                                                            percentage points but only at low
                                                                                            income thresholds. No significant
                                                                                            effects on health outcomes in the
                                                                                            short and medium run.
Gresenz et al.   2002–2009 Annual Children           IV using simulated eligibility         For every 100 children, the CHIP
(2012)           Social and                          instrument.                            expansions lead to 4.21 more
                 Economic                            Dependent variables: private           children on public insurance, 0.14
                 Supplements                         coverage, public coverage,             fewer children on private insurance
                 (ASEC) of the                       uninsured.                             and 2.26 fewer children with no
                 (CPS).                              Main independent variable:             insurance
                                                     imputed eligibility.




                                                             135
Ham,             SIPP 1986, 1987,    Children          Derive a theoretical model of take-   Heterogeneity in terms of take-up
Ozbeklik, and    1988, 1990, 1991,   younger than 16   up and crowd-out that implies one     across families, with take-up falling
Shore-           1992, and 1993      the first time    should use a switching probit         with family material well-being.
Sheppard         panels              they are          model to estimate the joint           Estimates private coverage decline
(2014)                               observed.         probability of eligibility, public    for currently eligible children at
                                                       insurance, and private insurance.     0.0486 (0.0127) and take-up and
                                                       Allows take-up and crowd-out to       crowd-out at 0.256(0.0067) and
                                                       depend on observable and              0.080 (0.0176), for children made
                                                       unobservable family                   newly eligible via a counterfactual
                                                       characteristics                       nonmarginal increase in the Medicaid
                                                                                             income limits.
Busch and        1995–2002           Household         IV using simulated eligibility        Public insurance increases by 0.148
Duchovny         Behavioral Risk     heads with        instrument.                           (0.034). Private insurance decreases
(2005)           Factor              children (men     Dependent variables: private          by 0.035 (0.027). No insurance
                 Surveillance        are included)     coverage, public coverage,            decreases by 0.113 (0.032).
                 System; CPS                           uninsured, health care utilization.   Crowd-out is 23.6%.
                 1996-2002 March                       Main independent variable:
                 Supplement.                           imputed eligibility.
Wolfe et al.     Administrative      Single mother     Probit regression of probability of   BadgerCare increased the public
(2006)           data from           welfare leavers   coverage for cohorts of welfare       health care coverage of all adult
                 Wisconsin                             leavers before and after              leavers by about 17.3% (0.009)–
                                                       BadgerCare was implemented in         23.4% (0.007) points in the diff in
                                                       Wisconsin. They also do a DD          diff; 6% (0.005) – 8% (0.006) with
                                                       using fact that some cohorts were     the probit.
                                                       always eligible upon leaving and
                                                       others became eligible later.
Finkelstein et   Oregon’s Center of Nonelderly         Analyzes Oregon Medicaid              People selected by lottery have a
al. (2012)       Health Statistics; adults             lottery, looks at how lottery         0.0076 (0.0053) decrease in private
                 Survey conducted                      affected Medicaid and private         insurance, 0.197 (0.0063) increase in
                 by the researchers                    insurance coverage.                   public insurance.




                                                               136
Hamersma       1996, 2001, and      Parents      Estimates coverage as a quadratic       The linear term and quadratic terms
and Kim        2004 panels of the                function of the Medicaid                are: i) in the public insurance 0.163
(2013)         SIPP data                         thresholds.                             (0.034) and -0.05 (0.017)
                                                 Dependent variables: private            respectively; for private insurance,
                                                 coverage, public coverage,              0.061 (0.049) and -0.026 (0.023)
                                                 uninsured.                              respectively and for no insurance,
                                                                                         0.191 (0.045) and −0.066 (0.022)
                                                                                         respectively. Thus nonlinearities are
                                                                                         important in Medicaid take-up and
                                                                                         reducing the fraction without
                                                                                         insurance.
Garthwaite,    CPS March            Childless    Use DD and triple differences to        For the DD the take-up and crowd-
Gross, and     Supplement 2000-     nonelderly   examine the effect of a large           out estimates are 0.046 (0.010) and
Notowidigdo    2007.                adults       number of Tennessee childless           0.017 (0.012) respectively; the ratio
(2014)                                           adults being excluded from              crowd-out measure is 0.362 (0.268).
                                                 Medicaid coverage in 2005. In the       Their triple differences estimates are
                                                 DD they compare Tennessee               take-up = 0.071 (0.017), crowd-out=
                                                 relative to other Southern states; in   0.043 (0.024) and ratio crowd-out =
                                                 the triple differences they compare     0.595 (384).
                                                 childless adults to adults with
                                                 children in Tennessee.
Dague (2014)   Administrative       Nonelderly   Uses an RD design to study the          Finds introducing a premium of $10
               data from            adults in    introduction of premiums in             decreases participation 12–15
               Wisconsin            Wisconsin    Wisconsin’s Medicaid program.           percentage points but finds no effect
                                                 Premiums increase with income,          of changes in premiums of a similar
                                                 with sharp breaks in the premium        size.
                                                 at various income levels. Uses
                                                 income as reported in
                                                 administrative data so
                                                 measurement error is not a
                                                 problem.




                                                         137
Table 7: Studies of Access, Utilization, and Health
Study                      Data                       Population           Design                       Results
Currie and Gruber          NHIS; March CPS,           Children             IV using simulated           Medicaid eligibility
(1996b)                    1985-1993; Vital                                eligibility instrument       reduces prob. of a child
                           Statistics                                      Dependent variables:         going without a doctor’s
                                                                           doctor visits, state-level   visit in past year by ½;
                                                                           infant mortality             raises prob. of child
                                                                           Main independent             seeing doctor within past
                                                                           variable: imputed            two weeks by 2/3;
                                                                           eligibility                  reduction in state-level
                                                                                                        child mortality.
Currie and Gruber          March CPS, 1979-1992;      Pregnant women and   IV using simulated           Medicaid eligibility
(1996a)                    Vital Statistics; HCFA;    infants              eligibility instrument       changes from 1979-1992
                           NSLY                                            Dependent variables:         increased the fraction of
                                                                           incidence of low birth       women eligible for
                                                                           weight; infant mortality     Medicaid in case of
                                                                           Main independent             pregnancy by 30.9 pp; a
                                                                           variable: imputed            30 pp increase in
                                                                           eligibility                  Medicaid eligibility of
                                                                                                        pregnant women leads to
                                                                                                        an 8.5% decline in infant
                                                                                                        mortality; targeted
                                                                                                        eligibility changes are
                                                                                                        more effective than
                                                                                                        broad eligibility changes




                                                               138
Currie and Grogger        Vital Statistics Detailed   Universe of pregnant   Repeated cross-section        Higher Medicaid income
(2002)                    Natality Files, 1990-       women                  Dependent variables:          eligibility cutoffs and
                          1996                                               utilization of prenatal       higher welfare caseloads
                                                                             care, low birth weight,       increase use of prenatal
                                                                             and infant mortality          care and reduces fetal
                                                                             Main independent              deaths; no consistent
                                                                             variables: Medicaid           effect of administrative
                                                                             income cutoffs;               reforms
                                                                             administrative reforms;
                                                                             welfare caseload
Currie, Decker, and Lin   NHIS, 1986-2005             Older children         Repeated cross-section        The importance of
(2008)                                                                       Dependent variables:          income for predicting
                                                                             utilization of care; health   health for older children
                                                                             status                        has fallen over time;
                                                                             Main independent              eligibility for public
                                                                             variables: household          health insurance
                                                                             income, public insurance      increases utilization of
                                                                             eligibility                   preventative care, no
                                                                                                           effect on current health
                                                                                                           status
Card and Shore-           SIPP, 1990-1993; HIS,       Children               Regression discontinuity      Takeup rates for newly
Sheppard (2004)           1992-1996; March CPS,                              Dependent variable:           available Medicaid
                          1990-1996                                          Health insurance status       coverage are 5 – 11%;
                                                                             Main independent              small (negative) effects
                                                                             variable: age                 of Medicaid eligibility
                                                                                                           on private insurance use




                                                                 139
de la Mata (2012)   PSID 1997, 2002, 2007     Children         Regression discontinuity     Public insurance
                                                               Dependent variables:         eligibility increases
                                                               Public insurance takeup,     public coverage by 10-
                                                               private health insurance     13 pp; 10-16 pp crowd-
                                                               status, healthcare           out; increases utilization
                                                               utilization, health status   of preventative care at
                                                               Main independent             low income levels; no
                                                               variable: family income      short- or medium-run
                                                                                            effects on health status
Dafny and Gruber    National Hospital         Children         IV using simulated           A 10 pp rise in Medicaid
(2005)              Discharge Survey, 1983-                    eligibility instrument       eligibility is associated
                    1996                                       Dependent variable:          with an 8.1% increase in
                                                               child hospitalizations       the unavoidable
                                                               Main independent             hospitalization rate, and
                                                               variable: imputed            statistically insignificant
                                                               Medicaid eligibility by      3.2% in avoidable
                                                               age group, state, and        hospitalization rate
                                                               year
Aizer (2007)        Medicaid enrollment and Children           Zip Code-Race-Month-         Proximity to an
                    administrative data,                       Year panel and IV            additional bilingual
                    1996-2000                                  Dependent variables:         application assistant
                                                               Medicaid enrollment,         increases new monthly
                    Dataset of locations of                    avoidable                    Medicaid enrollment
                    community based                            hospitalizations             among Hispanics by 7-
                    application assistant                      Main independent             9%, and among Asians
                    locations                                  variable: number of          by 27-36%; increasing
                                                               community based              the number of children
                                                               application assistants in    with Medicaid by 10%
                                                               the ZIP code                 results in 2-3% decline
                                                                                            in avoidable
                                                                                            hospitalizations




                                                         140
Aizer, Lleras-Muney,   Linked birth and death   Insured pregnant women   Differences in              Increasing access to care
and Stabile (2005)     certificates from CA,                             differences                 has small impact on
                       1989-1995                                         Dependent variable:         neonatal mortality for
                                                                         neonatal mortality          entire sample; for
                                                                         Main independent            blacks, the average
                                                                         variables: public/private   decline in segregation
                                                                         insurance status; index     over the sample period
                                                                         of hospital segregation     results in a 7% reduction
                                                                                                     in neonatal mortality; for
                                                                                                     twins, 12.5% decline; for
                                                                                                     black twins, 42%
Gray (2001)            National Maternal and    Pregnant women           Cohort difference in        An increase in Medicaid
                       Infant Health Survey                              difference                  physician fees of 10%
                       1988                                              Dependent variables:        relative to the mean
                                                                         low birth weight,           results in .074%
                                                                         premature birth, infant     reduction in risk of low
                                                                         mortality                   birth weight, .035%
                                                                         Main independent            reduction in risk of very
                                                                         variables: Medicaid         low birth weight for
                                                                         physician fees, Medicaid    Medicaid-insured
                                                                         coverage                    women
Currie, Gruber, and    Vital Statistics 1979-   Infants and pregnant     State-year panel with       Raising the fee ratio by
Fischer (1995)         1992; March CPS          women                    lagged dependent            10% lowers infant
                                                                         variable                    mortality by .5 - .9%;
                                                                         Dependent variables:        eligibility expansions
                                                                         infant mortality,           reduced infant mortality
                                                                         Medicaid expenditures       rate but increase
                                                                         Main independent            Medicaid expenditures,
                                                                         variables: ratio of         particularly for hospitals
                                                                         Medicaid to private fees
                                                                         for ob/gyns, imputed
                                                                         Medicaid eligibility



                                                          141
Joyce (1999)                Linked Medicaid             Infants and pregnant   Stratified cross section;   Participation in PCAP is
                            administrative data and     women                  IV                          associated with a 20%
                            New York State birth                               Dependent variables: use    increase in the likelihood
                            certificates, 1989-1991                            of prenatal services,       or enrollment in WIC, a
                                                                               infant birth weight         35 g increase in mean
                                                                               Main independent            birth weight, and 1.3 pp
                                                                               variable: Prenatal Care     in rate of low birth
                                                                               Assistance Program          weight
                                                                               (PCAP) participation
Finkelstein et al. (2012)   Survey; administrative      Adults                 Experimental                Being selected by the
                            data from hospital                                 Dependent variables:        lottery results in a 25 pp
                            discharge records, credit                          self-reported health,       increase in the prob. of
                            reports, and mortality                             financial strain, and       having insurance after
                            records 2008-2009                                  wellbeing; health care      one year; having
                                                                               utilization; health         insurance coverage is
                                                                               insurance status            associated with a 2.1 pp
                                                                               Main independent            increase in prob. of
                                                                               variable: randomly          hospital admission, 20
                                                                               assigned Medicaid           pp decline in having any
                                                                               applicant status            out of pocket medical
                                                                                                           expenditure, .2 SD
                                                                                                           improvement in self-
                                                                                                           reported physical and
                                                                                                           mental health




                                                                  142
Baicker et al. (2013)   Survey                    Adults                Experimental               Medicaid coverage
                                                                        Dependent variables:       significantly increases
                                                                        clinical outcomes (e.g.    the prob. of diagnosis of
                                                                        blood pressure), health    diabetes, decreases the
                                                                        status, health care use,   probability of positive
                                                                        out of pocket medical      screening for depression
                                                                        spending                   by 9.15 pp, increases use
                                                                        Main independent           of preventative health
                                                                        variable: randomly         services, nearly
                                                                        assigned Medicaid          eliminates catastrophic
                                                                        applicant status           out of pocket medical
                                                                                                   spending
Taubman et al. (2014)   Emergency Room            Adults                Experimental               Medicaid coverage
                        records from 12                                 Dependent variable:        significantly increases
                        Portland, OR hospitals,                         Emergency department       overall emergency
                        2007-2009                                       visits                     department use by .41
                                                                        Main independent           visits per person, a 40%
                        Survey                                          variable: randomly         increase relative to
                                                                        assigned Medicaid          average; no decline in
                                                                        applicant status           emergency department
                                                                                                   use for any sub-groups
DeLeire et al. (2013)   Wisconsin’s               Childless uninsured   Case-crossover design      In 12 months following
                        administrative Medicaid   adults                Dependent variables:       enrollment in public
                        claims and enrollment                           outpatient visits, ED      insurance program,
                        databases                                       visits, inpatient          outpatient visits increase
                                                                        hospitalizations,          29%, ED visits increase
                                                                        preventable                46%, inpatient
                                                                        hospitalizations           hospitalizations fall by
                                                                        Main independent           59%, preventable
                                                                        variable: automatic        hospitalizations fall by
                                                                        enrollment status in       48%
                                                                        “BadgerCare Plus Core
                                                                        Plan”

                                                            143
Sommers, Baicker, and   CDC Compressed           Adults                   Difference in difference Medicaid expansions are
Epstein (2012)          Mortality File, 1997-                             Dependent variables: all-associated with a
                        2007; CPS 1997-2007;                              cause county-level       significant 6.1%
                        BRFSS 1997-2007                                   mortality; insurance     reduction in all-cause
                                                                          coverage; incidence of   mortality, with greatest
                                                                          delayed care due to cost;increases among the
                                                                          self-reported health     nonwhite, elderly, and
                                                                          status                   residents of lower-
                                                                          Main independent         income counties; 14.7%
                                                                          variables: post-         decrease in rate of
                                                                          expansion indicator,     uninsurance; 21.3%
                                                                          expansion state indicatordecrease in delay of care
                                                                                                   due to cost; and
                                                                                                   improvement in self-
                                                                                                   reported health status
Miller (2012)           Acute Hospital Case      Counties in MA           Difference in difference MA healthcare reform
                        Mix Databases, from the                           Dependent variables: ED reduced ED usage by 5-
                        MA Division of Health                             use per capita           8%, with decline
                        Care Finance and Policy,                          Main independent         concentrated for event
                        2002-2008                                         variables: 2005          that can be treated in a
                                                                          uninsurance rate;        physician’s office; no
                                                                          expansion indicator      effect on ED use for
                                                                                                   non-preventable
                                                                                                   emergencies
Kolstad and Kowalski    CPS, HCUP National       Hospital discharges in   Difference in difference Healthcare reform in
(2012)                  Inpatient Sample 2004-   MA                       Dependent variables:     MA decreased
                        2008, BRFSS                                       insurance status, length uninsurance by 36%
                                                                          of hospitalization,      relative to initial level;
                                                                          hospital costs           reduced length of
                                                                          Main independent         hospitalizations; no
                                                                          variables: post-         effect on hospital cost
                                                                          expansion indicator, MA growth
                                                                          indicator

                                                           144
Table 8: Studies of Effects on Providers
Study                       Data                   Population           Design                      Results
Baker and Royalty           Surveys of Young       Private and public   IV using simulated          Positive effect of fees on
(2000)                      Physicians, 1987 and   physicians           eligibility instrument      the number of poor and
                            1991                                        Dependent variables:        Medicaid patients seen
                                                                        percentage of patients      by young, private,
                                                                        who are poor,               office-based primary
                                                                        percentage of patients      care physicians; negative
                                                                        covered by Medicaid         effect of fees on the
                                                                        Main independent            number of poor patients
                                                                        variables: imputed          seen in a public setting;
                                                                        Medicaid eligibility,       expanding eligibility
                                                                        ratio of Medicaid to        increases physician
                                                                        private fees for total      services to the poor, esp.
                                                                        obstetrical care for        in public settings
                                                                        vaginal delivery
Garthwaite (2012)          Community Tracking      Physicians           Difference in difference    SCHIP decreased the
                           Survey, 1996/1997,                           Dependent variables:        number of hours spent
                           1997/1998, 2000/2001                         number of hours spent       on patient care;
                                                                        on patient care; duration   increased the percentage
                           NAMCS, 1993-2002                             of patient visits           of pediatricians that
                                                                        Main independent            reported seeing or
                                                                        variables: simulated        accepting any Medicaid
                                                                        SCHIP eligibility,          patients; increased
                                                                        pediatric specialty         revenues from Medicaid;
                                                                        indicator                   and led to shorter visit
                                                                                                    lengths for Medicaid
                                                                                                    patients




                                                             145
Buchmueller, Miller,   American Dental          Dental practices       Repeated cross section      When a state adds adults
and Vujicic (2014)     Association Survey of                           with state and year fixed   dental benefits, dentists
                       Dental Practice                                 effects                     participate more in
                       1999-2011                                       Dependent variables:        Medicaid; see more
                                                                       publicly insured patient    publicly insured patients
                                                                       load; overall patient       without reducing the
                                                                       load; participation in      privately insured patient
                                                                       Medicaid; wait times        load; and make greater
                                                                       Main independent            use of dental hygienists.
                                                                       variable: location in       Wait times increase
                                                                       Medicaid state providing    modestly.
                                                                       adult dental benefits
Currie, Gruber, and    Vital Statistics 1979-   Infants and pregnant   State-year panel with       Raising the fee ratio by
Fischer (1995)         1992; March CPS          women                  lagged dependent            10% lowers infant
                                                                       variable                    mortality by .5 - .9%;
                                                                       Dependent variables:        eligibility expansions
                                                                       infant mortality,           reduced infant mortality
                                                                       Medicaid expenditures       rate but increase
                                                                       Main independent            Medicaid expenditures,
                                                                       variables: ratio of         particularly for hospitals
                                                                       Medicaid to private fees
                                                                       for ob/gyns, imputed
                                                                       Medicaid eligibility




                                                          146
Gruber, Adams, and     Administrative Medicaid Nonelderly Medicaid            Difference in difference   After TN increased its
Newhouse (1997)        data for Tennessee and  recipients                     using two states (TN and   Medicaid primary care
                       Georgia, 1985-1987                                     GA)                        reimbursements, site of
                                                                              Dependent variables:       care shifted toward
                                                                              site of care; total        physicians’ offices and
                                                                              Medicaid costs             away from free-standing
                                                                              Main independent           clinics; overall Medicaid
                                                                              variables:                 program costs fell 8%
                                                                              Residence in TN
                                                                              indicator; post-
                                                                              expansion indicator
Gruber et al. (1999)   HCUP hospital               Medicaid discharges        Dependent variables: use   Larger Medicaid fee
                       discharges from 9 states,   admitted to the hospital   of cesarean section        differentials between
                       1988-1992                   with a diagnosis of        delivery                   cesarean and natural
                                                   childbirth                 Main independent           childbirth lead to higher
                                                                              variable:                  cesarean section rates in
                                                                                                         the Medicaid population;
                                                                                                         the fee differential of
                                                                                                         Medicaid compared to
                                                                                                         private insurance can
                                                                                                         explain ½-3/4 of the
                                                                                                         difference in Medicaid
                                                                                                         and private cesarean
                                                                                                         section rates




                                                             147
Baker and Royalty   Surveys of Young        Private and public   IV using simulated         Positive effect of fees on
(2000)              Physicians, 1987 and    physicians           eligibility instrument     the number of poor and
                    1991                                         Dependent variables:       Medicaid patients seen
                                                                 percentage of patients     by young, private,
                                                                 who are poor,              office-based primary
                                                                 percentage of patients     care physicians; negative
                                                                 covered by Medicaid        effect of fees on the
                                                                 Main independent           number of poor patients
                                                                 variables: imputed         seen in a public setting;
                                                                 Medicaid eligibility,      expanding eligibility
                                                                 ratio of Medicaid to       increases physician
                                                                 private fees for total     services to the poor, esp.
                                                                 obstetrical care for       in public settings
                                                                 vaginal delivery
Gray (2001)         National Maternal and   Pregnant women       Cohort difference in       An increase in Medicaid
                    Infant Health Survey                         difference                 physician fees of 10%
                    1988                                         Dependent variables:       relative to the mean
                                                                 low birth weight,          results in .074%
                                                                 premature birth, infant    reduction in risk of low
                                                                 mortality                  birth weight, .035%
                                                                 Main independent           reduction in risk of very
                                                                 variables: Medicaid        low birth weight for
                                                                 physician fees, Medicaid   Medicaid-insured
                                                                 coverage                   women




                                                      148
Shen and Zuckerman   National Surveys of       Urban residents            Difference in difference     Higher Medicaid
(2005)               America’s Families,                                  with propensity score        payment rates increase
                     1997, 1999, 2002                                     weighting                    access and use of care
                                                                          Dependent variables:         for Medicaid
                     ARF, AHA survey files,                               continuity of care, use of   beneficiaries; little effect
                     Urban Institute                                      preventative care,           on likelihood of
                     capitation rate surveys                              frequency of care,           receiving preventative
                                                                          perception of quality        care; significant results
                                                                          Main independent             are sensitive to choice of
                                                                          variable: Medicaid           control group (uninsured
                                                                          payment generosity           or privately insured)
                                                                          index
Decker (2007)        NCHS National             Office-based physicians,   Repeated cross section       Higher Medicaid
                     Ambulatory Medical        nonelderly Medicaid        with state and year fixed    physician fees increase
                     Care Surveys, 1989,       recipients                 effects                      the number of private
                     1993, 1998, 2003; ARF                                Dependent variables:         physicians, esp. in
                                                                          physician participation      medical and surgical
                                                                          in Medicaid; visit           specialties, who see
                                                                          duration                     Medicaid patients;
                                                                          Main independent             higher fees reduce the
                                                                          variable: Medicaid-to-       difference in visit wait
                                                                          Medicare fee ratio           times between Medicaid
                                                                                                       and privately paying
                                                                                                       patients




                                                         149
Decker (2009)        NHIS 1993-2004;         Population under 65 and    Difference in difference   Reductions in Medicaid
                     NAMCS and NHAMCS        not on Medicare            Dependent variables:       physician fees lead to a
                     1993/1994, 1998/1999,                              volume and site of         reduction in the number
                     2993/2004                                          ambulatory care            of physician visits for
                                                                        Main independent           Medicaid recipients
                                                                        variables: Medicaid-to-    relative to the privately
                                                                        Medicare fee ratio,        insured and a shift away
                                                                        insurance status           from physician offices
                                                                                                   and toward hospital
                                                                                                   emergency departments
                                                                                                   for site of care
Decker (2011)        NHIS 2000/2001,         Children and adolescents Difference in difference     Increases in Medicaid
                     2008/2009                                        Dependent variable:          dental reimbursement
                                                                      indicator for dental visit   fees are associated with
                                                                      in the past six months       a greater use of dental
                                                                      Main independent             care among youths
                                                                      variable: Medicaid           covered by Medicaid:
                                                                      dental reimbursement         increasing from $20 to
                                                                      fee                          $30 leads to a 3.92 pp
                                                                                                   increase in prob. of a
                                                                                                   Medicaid child seeing a
                                                                                                   dentist in past six
                                                                                                   months
Freedman, Lin, and   AHA Annual Survey of    Hospitals                  Hospital-County-State-     Medicaid expansions
Simon (2015)         Hospitals, 1985-1996;                              Year panel                 had no stat. sig effect on
                     ARF; March CPS                                     Dependent variable:        NICU adoption by
                                                                        indicator for whether a    hospitals; in areas where
                                                                        hospital offers a NICU     more new Medicaid
                                                                        Main independent           patients were likely to
                                                                        variable: Simulated        have previously been
                                                                        Medicaid eligibility of    privately insured,
                                                                        pregnant women at the      Medicaid expansions
                                                                        state-year level           slowed NICU adoption

                                                         150
Buchmueller, Orzol, and   SIPP combined with        Children up to age 15      Effect of fees identified   Higher Medicaid fees
Shore-Sheppard (2015)     data on Medicaid dental   Private dental practices   from changes in fees        increase dental visits; the
                          fees                                                 conditional on state and    probability a child has
                                                    Dental practices           year fixed effects          dental sealants; the
                          ADA Survey of Dental                                                             probability that a dental
                          Practice combined with                                                           practice treats publicly
                          data on Medicaid dental                                                          insured patients.
                          fees

Duggan (2000)             Administrative data       Acute care hospitals in    Panel of hospitals          Private hospitals are
                          from CA Office of         CA                         Dependent variables:        more responsive to DSH
                          Statewide Health                                     volume of Medicaid          incentives than public
                          Planning and                                         patients, hospital          hospitals; private
                          Development, 1988-                                   revenue                     hospitals used DSH
                          1995                                                 Main independent            payments to increase
                                                                               variable: DSH payments      their holdings of
                                                                                                           financial assets, rather
                                                                                                           than improve medical
                                                                                                           care quality for the poor
Baicker and Staiger       Survey of Government      Births and heart attack    Repeated cross section      Patients in public
(2005)                    Finances, AHA, ARF        patients                   of counties                 hospitals in states where
                          1988-2000, Medicare                                  Dependent variables:        DSH funds were
                          Claims 1989-2000                                     infant mortality, post      diverted experienced no
                                                                               heart attack mortality      mortality declines;
                                                                               Main independent            patients in hospitals in
                                                                               variable: effective and     states in which DSH
                                                                               ineffective DSH             funds were not
                                                                               payments per capita         expropriated
                                                                                                           experienced significant
                                                                                                           declines in mortality




                                                              151
Duggan (2004)            Administrative           Medicaid beneficiaries   Instrumental variable       The switch from FFS to
                         expenditure data from                             Dependent variable:         managed care for
                         CA Department of                                  government spending         Medicaid recipients in
                         Health Services                                   and health outcomes         CA was associated with
                                                                           Main independent            a large increase in
                                                                           variables: county           government spending
                                                                           managed care mandate        but no improvement in
                                                                           indicator                   infant health outcomes
Duggan and Hayford       State-level Medicaid     States                   State-year panel, with      Shifting Medicaid
(2013)                   enrollment, Medicaid                              state and year fixed        recipients from FFS into
                         managed care                                      effects                     managed care did not on
                         enrollment, and state                             Dependent variables:        average reduce Medicaid
                         Medicaid expenditures,                            Medicaid expenditure        spending; this effect
                         1991-2009                                         Main independent            varied substantially
                                                                           variable: fraction of a     across states as a
                                                                           state’s Medicaid            function of the state’s
                                                                           recipients in managed       baseline Medicaid
                                                                           care plan                   provider reimbursement
                                                                                                       rates
Currie and Fahr (2005)   HCFA; NHIS 1989,         Low income children      Instrumental variables      Black children are less
                         1992, 1993, 1994                                  Dependent variables:        likely to be covered
                                                                           probability that a child    where Medicaid
                                                                           has Medicaid; utilization   managed care
                                                                           of care                     organizations are more
                                                                           Main independent            prevalent; among those
                                                                           variables: Medicaid         enrolled in Medicaid,
                                                                           managed care                higher managed care
                                                                           organization penetration    penetration is associated
                                                                           rate                        with an increase in
                                                                           Instrument: presence of     number of black children
                                                                           a 1915b waiver              who go without doctor
                                                                                                       visits



                                                            152
Kaestner, Dubay, and   National Natality files    Women likely to be   Repeated cross section       Among white, non-
Kenney (2005)          1990-1996                  Medicaid eligible    with county and year         Hispanic women,
                                                                       fixed effects, state-        Medicaid managed care
                                                                       specific linear trends       was associated with a
                                                                       Dependent variables:         2% decrease in the
                                                                       prenatal care utilization,   number of prenatal care
                                                                       infant birth weight, pre-    visits, 3-5% increase in
                                                                       term birth, use of           incidence of inadequate
                                                                       cesarean section             prenatal care; significant
                                                                       Main independent             increase in incidence of
                                                                       variable: presence of        pre-term birth (not
                                                                       voluntary or mandatory       causal), no effect on
                                                                       Medicaid managed care        Cesarean sections
                                                                       plans
Aizer, Currie, and     California Birth           Births               Repeated cross section       The prob. a woman
Moretti (2007)         Statistical Master File,                        with county or mother        started prenatal care in
                       and Birth Cohort File,                          and year fixed effects       first trimester falls 4 – 8
                       1990-2000                                       Dependent variables:         pp when required to
                                                                       insurance coverage, use      enroll in Medicaid
                                                                       of prenatal care, infant     managed care; Medicaid
                                                                       health outcomes              managed care plans are
                                                                       Main independent             associated with increases
                                                                       variable: indicator for      in the prob. of low birth
                                                                       location in Medicaid         weight, prematurity, and
                                                                       managed care county          neonatal death relative to
                                                                                                    FFS Medicaid




                                                           153
