                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES DEVELOPMENT AID UNDERMINE POLITICAL ACCOUNTABILITY?
   LEADER AND CONSTITUENT RESPONSES TO A LARGE-SCALE INTERVENTION

                                      Raymond P. Guiteras
                                     Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak

                                        Working Paper 21434
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21434


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21434.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Raymond P. Guiteras and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Development Aid Undermine Political Accountability? Leader and Constituent Responses
to a Large-Scale Intervention
Raymond P. Guiteras and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
NBER Working Paper No. 21434
July 2015
JEL No. O1,O43,P16,Q56

                                             ABSTRACT

Comprehensive evaluation requires tracking indirect effects of interventions, such as politicians and
constituents reacting to the arrival of a development program. We study political economy responses
to a large scale intervention in Bangladesh, where 346 communities consisting of 16,600 households
were randomly assigned to control, information or subsidy treatments to encourage investments in
improved sanitation. In one intervention where the leaders’ role in program allocation was not clear
to constituents, leaders react by spending more time in treatment areas, and treated constituents appear
to attribute credit to their local leader for a randomly assigned program. In contrast, in another lottery
where subsidy assignment is clearly and transparently random, the lottery winners do not attribute
any extra credit to the politician relative to lottery losers. These reactions are consistent with a model
in which constituents have imperfect information about leader ability. A third intervention returns
to a random subset of treated households to inform them that the program was externally funded and
randomly assigned. This simple, scalable information treatment eliminates the excess credit that leaders
received in villages that received subsidies. These results suggest that while politicians may respond
to try to take credit for development programs, it is not easy for them do so. Political accountability
is not easily undermined by development aid.


Raymond P. Guiteras
Department of Economics
3114 Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
guiteras@econ.umd.edu

Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu
1     Introduction

Evaluation of training, health, education, and anti-poverty programs is a fast-growing sub-
field of applied economics. To evaluate welfare effects of such programs fully, it is important
to move beyond the direct effects on the treated population, and study spillovers and other
general-equilibrium changes, especially when we are interested in assessing possible effects
when the program is scaled up (Heckman, 1991; Rodrik, 2008; Acemoglu, 2010). One im-
portant potential change when programs are run at scale is the response of politicians and
policymakers, who may react to the external funds by endogenously adjusting their own
effort in ways that either enhance or diminish the direct effects of the externally funded pro-
gram. These reactions may not be apparent even in well-designed program evaluations using
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), but nonetheless constitute an important component of
full program effects.
    We track the reactions of politicians and their constituents to a large-scale intervention
promoting investment in sanitation that was randomized across 97 villages (16,600 house-
holds) in four districts in rural Bangladesh. The large scale of our project induced reactions
from leaders, which allows us to report on political economy responses. Our empirical anal-
ysis is informed by a model of leader and constituent behavior which shows that to fully un-
derstand the political economy consequences of this program, we must track both politicians’
actions and constituents’ beliefs and reactions. This is because leaders may endogenously
respond to the program, and constituents then react not only to the arrival of the program,
but also to the endogenous politician response.
    We find that following program implementation, leaders are on average more likely to
spend time in villages randomly assigned to receive latrine subsidies. Constituents in subsidy
villages express greater satisfaction with leader performance after observing these actions.
This reduced-form relationship in which voters “inappropriately” give credit to leaders for
an externally-financed program is not necessarily evidence of irrationality: since villagers did
not know that the program was allocated purely randomly without the leader’s input, it is

                                               1
fully rational for them to assign some probability to the leader having been at least in part
responsible, and to give him some credit on this basis. We interpret these reactions using a
model in which constituents have imperfect information about leader ability, and show that
the co-movement of constituent opinion and politician time in the village is consistent with
politicians acting to signal their quality, and constituents updating their beliefs. We use
the model to provide an example of why rational constituents and leaders would react to
large-scale development programs, and that credit mis-attribution is not necessarily evidence
of irrationality in an imperfect infomation setting. Other models with imperfect information
will generate similar insights.
   To further test the importance of the information environment, we contrast this limited-
information result against behavior observed under full information, using the fact that
a second, public lottery was conducted within subsidy villages to allocate the vouchers to
individual households. The model predicts that constituents will not give credit to politicians
for the outcome of a transparently public lottery, and that there is no signaling value to the
politician of responding to an event that is known to be random. As predicted, voucher
lottery winners do not give any extra credit to the leader for the sanitation program relative
to voucher lottery losers, and accordingly, the leaders do not pay any more attention to
lottery winners relative to losers.
   Finally, we conduct a third experiment where we return to inform a random subset of
village residents that the village-level subsidy assignment (where the assignment rule had
been opaque to villagers) was not influenced by the leader. Once informed, households no
longer give their local leader credit for the sanitation program. This information also appears
to flow quickly and freely within clusters, as the neighbors of the informed households also
cease to attribute any credit to their leader. These information effects are large enough to
overturn the seemingly irrational misattribution of credit that we document from the village-
level subsidy assignment. Furthermore, we show that providing information in an implicit
and indirect way (simply affirming the NGO’s responsibility for the program without directly


                                              2
antagonizing the leader) is just as effective as a more heavy-handed approach that explicitly
states that the program was randomly allocated without the leader’s input. To summarize,
constituents (rationally) misattribute only when there is uncertainty about the source of the
program, and this appears to be a relatively easy problem to solve.
      A small literature in economics and political science (Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito,
2011; De La O, 2013; de Janvry, Gonzalez-Navarro, and Sadoulet, 2014) has studied voter
reactions to development programs, while a separate literature (e.g., McIntosh et al., 2014)
has examined how such programs crowd out public sector investment. In this paper, we
show that both perspectives and both types of data are required to understand the mecha-
nisms underlying the changes in political actions and attitudes, as well as their full welfare
implications.
      Our results shed light on a passionate debate in the development aid industry regarding
whether foreign aid is beneficial or harmful for poor countries. Many prominent voices, in-
cluding Sachs (2006) and Gates (2011), regularly make stirring calls for more aid to address
global poverty. Critics of foreign aid such as Easterly (2006) are equally vocal, noting that
countries have remained just as poor, and disease prevalence just as high after $2.3 trillion
of aid money was spent.1 An even more troubling assertion is that aid money damages
development prospects, if aid extends the tenure of corrupt, incapable leaders who use the
external funds to distract attention and placate constituents. Moyo (2009) writes, “A con-
stant stream of ‘free’ money is a perfect way to keep an inefficient or simply bad government
in power.” This mechanism presumes that citizens of developing countries have trouble sep-
arating the effects of external funds (or “luck”, from the leader’s perspective) from the role
of fixed leadership attributes that directly affect their well-being. An implicit assumption
is that constitutents are systematically and consistently fooled: that they give undeserved
credit to local leaders for external development aid. Our research design provides a test of
  1
    The relationships between aid, governance and development has been examined using macro data by
Burnside and Dollar (2000), Easterly, Levine, and Roodman (2004), Clemens et al. (2012), and Ahmed
(2012), among others.



                                                3
this assumption.
       Several well-identified empirical papers use natural experiments to test whether agents
can separate luck from leadership skill. Cole, Healy, and Werker (2012) show that voters
in India reward incumbents for good rainfall. Wolfers (2007) shows that governors of oil-
producing states in the U.S. are more likely to be re-elected when the world market price of
oil is higher, and Gasper and Reeves (2011) show that electorates punish both presidents and
governors for severe weather damage. Even shareholders at major U.S. corporations appear
to reward CEOs for national economic booms unrelated to that company’s performance
(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001). However, these agents’ reactions to economic shocks
beyond the leaders’ control could be rationalized by the leader displaying skill in providing
disaster relief, or the profiles of political challengers changing in response to shocks, or CEOs
soliciting outside offers during economic booms. Authors of those papers already recognize
these possibilities: for example, Cole, Healy, and Werker (2012) and Gasper and Reeves
(2011) find that politicians can avoid being punished for bad weather if they respond with
relief funds. Besley and Burgess (2002) show that disasters allow leaders to reveal their skill
by taking actions to mitigate the effects of the disaster, a mechanism commonly believed
to have played a role in U.S. voters’ reactions to Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy during the
2008 and 2012 U.S. Presidential elections (e.g., Frankovic, 2008; Cassidy, 2012).2,3
       Leaders in rural Bangladesh also appear to try to take advantage of an incomplete-
information environment to claim credit for an externally financed program, but our data
suggest that their constituents’ reactions to the events were quite sophisticated. Further-
more, an inexpensive and scalable information treatment helps constituents overcome any
misattribution arising from incomplete information. We show that in our setting, such infor-
   2
    See Hart (2014) for a contrary view.
   3
    Yet other papers present puzzling empirical evidence that voters react to seemingly “irrelevant” or
“unrelated” events such as games, lotteries, disasters and terrorist attacks (Leigh, 2009; Healy and Malhotra,
2010; Healy, Malhotra, and Mo, 2010; Montalvo, 2010; Bagues and Esteve-Volart, 2013), which are difficult
to explain using economic models. For purely random events such as lotteries or football games, it is quite
possible that voters make attribution errors at least partly due to cognitive dissonance, limited attention
or other psychological factors (Mullainathan and Washington, 2009; Ross and Nisbett, 1991; Weber et al.,
2001).


                                                      4
mation can be effectively presented in a non-confrontational way to minimize risk to project
implementation in a delicate political environment, and only a subset of households in each
neighborhood need to be treated for the information to become widely dispersed.
    This paper is related to research that examines the effects of providing information to
constituents about leader attributes and performance (Banerjee et al., 2011; Björkman and
Svensson, 2009). The political science literature on contested credit claiming (Shepsle et
al., 2009) is also related to the mechanisms we explore. Snyder and Strömberg (2010) and
Eisensee and Strömberg (2007) have studied how the media affect the allocation of politician
time and effort. Also related is literature on the effects of development programs on changes
in political attitudes and ideology (e.g., Di Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky, 2007; Pop-
Eleches and Pop-Eleches, 2012; Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov, 2012). While a few studies
have examined general equilibrium labor market effects of randomized interventions (Crépon
et al., 2013; Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2014), this paper is the first, to our knowledge, to
analyze an RCT through the lens of an equilibrium political economy model.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model of politi-
cian behavior and voter beliefs in a limited information environment. Section 3 describes
the three stages of our experimental design: shrouded assignment of subsidies at the village
level; the household-level, transparent randomized allocation of subsidies within subsidy vil-
lages; and the follow-up information treatments. Section 4 describes the data collected on
politician behavior and voter beliefs. Section 5 presents our empirical analysis, and Section
6 concludes.



2     Theory

In this section, we present a simple model of the behavior of a single leader in one village,
where constituents are unsure about the relative contributions of the leader and a random
shock (like an externally financed development program) to the utility they experience. We



                                               5
model the basic features of the experimental environment we are studying using minimal
assumptions, and establish that in equilibrium, leaders may respond to the arrival of the
random shock, and that constituents’ opinions will in turn respond to the leader’s action.
The purpose of the model is to show that analyzing the equilibrium political economy re-
sponses to a randomized intervention requires modeling and estimating both how leaders
respond to events and how constituents update their beliefs about the leader based on the
leader’s response. There are other models with different sets of assumptions that will gener-
ate similar insights. For example, Besley and Burgess (2002) show that when leader actions
are complementary to the random shock, such as in the case of relief efforts in response
to disasters, the shock allows voters to learn about their leaders. Our model shows that
the basic insight survives even without this complementarity between the random shock
and the leader’s action. External shocks like development aid may muddle the information
environment and make it harder for constituents to learn about their leader’s ability, and
leaders may respond to random events simply to signal their ability. This focus on informa-
tion asymmetries motivates three sets of empirical tests related to the three stages of our
experimental design: one in a limited-information environment, one in a full information
environment, and one from manipulating the information environment.


2.1    Model Setup

We model the behavior of one leader in one village with one representative villager. The
villager obtains utility from (1) an external shock of size v, uniformly distributed on [0, 1]
(such as an externally funded sanitation program) and (2) the time that the leader spends
in the village, x ∈ [0, 1]. The leader can be one of two types, indexed by θ: those whose
time spent in village results in positive utility for villagers (0 < θ < 1), and those whose
effort does not result in any utility for villagers (θ = 0). The ex-post payoff of a villager is
u = θx + v, as shown in Figure 1a. Villagers know their own utility, u, and they can observe
the amount of time the leader spends in the village, x, but they do not know the politician’s


                                               6
type θ, nor do they know the magnitude of the shock v. The leader knows his own type and
the magnitude of the shock.4
      We do not model voting (we do not have any election data), and simply assume that the
leader likes being the leader, and the villagers prefer productive leaders, i.e. with θ > 0. The
villager’s prior belief that the leader has positive θ is µ = Pr (θ > 0). If a villager observes
(x, u), she updates her prior by Bayes’ Rule, leading to a posterior belief


                                               Pr(x, u|θ > 0)µ
                       µ(x, u) =                                           .
                                   Pr(x, u|θ > 0)µ + Pr(x, u|θ = 0)(1 − µ)

We normalize the payoff to the leader of continuing to be the leader as 1, and assume that
he is returned to office with probability equal to the posterior belief µ(x, u). Spending time
in the village is costly for the leader because he has to give up leisure. The leader’s payoff is
therefore is µ(x, u) + β(1 − x), where β > 1 denotes the marginal utility of leisure.
      We restrict attention to pure strategy Perfect Bayesian Equilibria. Therefore, we only
need to compute the politician’s strategy and the posterior belief of the villager. The strategy
of the politician is a function that maps his type and the external shock into x ∈ [0, 1], the
time he spends in the village.


2.2      Equilibrium

The equilibrium is a cutoff strategy in v. There exists a cutoff value v ∗ such that for relatively
small external shocks v < v ∗ , low (θ = 0) and high (θ > 0) type leaders pool and neither
type spends any time in the village. In this range (v < v ∗ ), the range of possible utilities
experienced by the villagers is u ∈ [0, v ∗ ]. If a villager observes utility in this range, he
expects to observe x = 0. Any other x > 0 is off path. On such histories, the villagers
believe the leader is a θ= 0 type. For u ∈ [0, v ∗ ], µ(x = 0, u) = µ and µ(x > 0, u) = 0. Thus,
the best a leader can do irrespective of type is to not spend time in the village, resulting in
  4
    In our experimental setting, the leader knows that the sanitation program was externally funded, and
that he was not responsible for its allocation.


                                                   7
a unique pooling equilibrium.
   When v ≥ v ∗ , the two types separate: the high-θ type spends xH (v) time in the village
and the low-θ type spends zero time. The fact that the high type can generate higher utility
for villagers than the low type yields a single crossing property. The incentive conditions
are: (i) it is not feasible for a low type to mimic the high type; (ii) it is not profitable for a
high type to mimic the low type.
   To satisfy the first incentive condition, the high-type leader needs to exert just enough
effort so that the villagers experience utility larger than one. This is because the θ = 0 leader
does not have the ability to take villagers’ utility beyond 1. Let uH ≥ 1 be the utility that
a voter gets and separates a high type from a low type. It must hold that uH = θxH (v) + v,
or rearranging, xH (v) = (uH − v)/θ. Since xH (v) is a decreasing function, the largest xH
observed in equilibrium occurs at v ∗ . For the second incentive condition to be satisfied, the
high type at this xH (and therefore with the lowest leader payoff) must still prefer to exert
the effort in order to separate himself from the low type. That is, it is always feasible for
the high type to separate from the low type by exerting effort x ≥ (1 − v) /θ, so that u ≥ 1.
However, the high type will only choose to separate when the benefit to him exceeds the
effort cost, i.e. when 1 + β(1 − xH (v ∗ )) ≥ µ + β. This provides a lower bound v ∗ above which
the separating equilibrium will be observed: v ∗ ≥ uH − (1 − µ)θ/β.
   We can restrict attention to the least cost separating equilibrium, that is uH = 1 and
v ∗ = 1 − (1 − µ)θ/β. Villagers’ beliefs are such that on the range of utilities (v ∗ , 1), the
leader is believed to be the low θ type, regardless of the time he spends. For any utility of
at least 1, the villagers will believe that the leader is the high type. The high-type leader
spends time x = (1 − v) /θ after observing v ≥ v ∗ . For utilities less than v ∗ , villagers do
not update their prior belief µ, and neither leader type exerts effort. See Figure 1b for a
graphical exposition.




                                                8
2.3    Implications

This model implies that if there is a large enough external shock to villagers’ utility (such as a
large-scale externally funded intervention), and there is uncertainty about the source of that
shock, then leaders in the village may react to the program in order to signal their type. We
may observe such leader actions even if the program is allocated randomly, and constituents
and leaders are all rational. Furthermore, constituents will respond to the leader’s actions
by updating their beliefs about the leader. The leader’s time allocation in the village and
the village residents’ evaluation of that leader will move in the same direction.
   These results are derived based on an environment of uncertainty - where constituents are
unsure about the true source of the positive shock to their utility. If the uncertainty about
v is removed, then the leader’s signaling motivation disappears, and constituents should
not update beliefs about the leader as a result of such a shock. We have a contrast in our
experimental design between a random shock whose source was unknown to the villagers (a
village-level randomization of subsidies, information and control areas), and the individual-
level lottery where the randomness is common knowledge. We will use this contrast to test
these differing predictions of the model: (1) villagers should update their beliefs about their
leader on the basis of the first (village-level) experiment, but not the second (within-village
voucher allocation via public lottery); (2) leader actions in response to the village-level
experiment should move in the same direction as villagers’ beliefs, but leaders should not
respond to the household lottery outcomes.
   All these predictions also require that the external shock be large, and the unusually
large scale of our intervention and experiment (involving 100% of the population of four
sub-districts) is therefore relevant for testing the political economy implications of this de-
velopment program.




                                                9
3         Experimental Design

This section presents the context and design of the experiment. We focus on the elements
of the intervention relevant to the questions we study in this paper. Detailed discussion
of the experiment, which was designed to study the market for sanitation, is provided in
Guiteras, Levinsohn, and Mobarak (2015).5 In Section 3.1, we describe the context of
the study. In Section 3.2, we describe the set of treatments designed to motivate rural
Bangladeshi households to invest in sanitation. In Section 3.3, we describe the two-level
randomization of these treatments: (1) a set of community-level treatments, for which the
randomization was not public; (2) within communities assigned to a subsidy treatment, a
public, household-level randomization to allocate the subsidies. Finally, in Section 3.4, we
describe a later randomized treatment that provided communities with information on the
source of the sanitation program.


3.1        Context

This intervention was conducted in rural areas of Tanore district in north-west Bangladesh.
Although sanitation coverage has increased dramatically in rual Bangladesh in recent decades
(WHO and UNICEF, 2013), Tanore has lagged behind significantly. At baseline, 31% of
households reported that their primary defecation site was either no latrine (open defecation,
or “OD”) or an unimproved latrine, and only 34% owned or had regular access to a hygienic
latrine. The study focused on understanding household decisionmaking with respect to
investing in hygienic latrines.6
        The intervention was conducted in 4 of 7 sub-districts (“unions”) of Tanore, and covered
all communities in these four unions. The highest level local leader in each union is a Union
    5
     See especially the online Supplemental Materials. Open access to the paper and supplementary materials
are provided at http://faculty.som.yale.edu/mushfiqmobarak/research.html.
   6
     We classify a latrine as hygienic if it safely confines feces. For pour-flush latrines (the relevant type in
our context), this typically requires a water seal to block flies and other insects, and a sealed pit to store
fecal matter for safe disposal (Hanchett et al., 2011). In our survey data, we define an unimproved latrine
as a bucket, a simple pit with no slab or cover, or a hanging latrine (a platform over open land or water),
and a hygienic latrine as having a functional, non-broken water seal leading to a sealed pit.


                                                       10
Parishad (UP) Chairman. Each union consists of about 25-27 villages, with villages typically
comprised of 150-200 households. The Union Parishad is composed of one Chairman and nine
“Ward Members” working with him who represent “wards” (usually two or three neighboring
villages) within an union. The UP chair and Ward Members are chosen by direct election
every five years. Our program was intensely focused in these four unions and covered all
villages in this area. This makes it easier to track leader reactions than if the program was
more thinly dispersed over a broader geographic range.
       The sample included 97 villages, 346 neighborhoods (locally known as “paras”) and
16,603 households. Treatments were randomized at the village level and implemented at
the neighborhood level. Neighborhoods are not an official designation, but definitions were
usually common knowledge in the community, and in these cases we followed local convention.
If there were not well-defined neighborhoods in a village, or if a neighborhood needed to
be divided because of its size, we used natural divisions such as rivers or roads where such
existed, and grouped households into simple, contiguous clusters if such pre-existing divisions
did not exist or were not practical.


3.2       Sanitation Intervention: Treatments

The 97 villages in the sample were randomly assigned to one of three treatments: (1) a
community motivation campaign, called the Latrine Promotion Program (LPP); (2) subsidies
for the purchase of hygienic latrines, in addition to LPP; or (3) control. These treatments
were assigned at the village level, and implemented at the neighborhood level.7
   7
    See Guiteras, Levinsohn, and Mobarak (2015) for further details on these treatments, including sub-
treatments within the LPP + Subsidy category. In addition, 10 villages, consisting of 1,650 households in
34 neighborhoods, were assigned to a supply side sanitation marketing treatment. We exclude these villages
from analysis in this paper because the Supply treatment was much less relevant to the questions studied
here – there was no effort to make villagers aware of a common problem, nor were any subsidies provided.




                                                   11
3.2.1    Latrine Promotion Program

The Latrine Promotion Program (LPP) was designed in collaboration with Wateraid and
VERC, and implemented at the neighborhood level. VERC’s Health Monitors led the com-
munity through a multi-day exercise designed to raise awareness of the problems caused
by open defecation (OD) and non-hygienic latrines. LPP was based on the principles of
Community-Lead Total Sanitation (CLTS), which VERC helped pioneer in Bangladesh, but
with some adaptations for our program. In particular, CLTS places heavy emphasis on
ending open defectation, with the particular type of latrine usually not specified. LPP also
targeted ending OD, but urged households to adopt hygienic latrines rather than simply
any latrine. Like CLTS, LPP emphasized that sanitation was a community-level problem,
because open defecation and un-hygienic latrines cause negative public health externalities.


3.2.2    Subsidies

The subsidy villages received the LPP treatment, and in addition, landless and nearly-
landless households in these villages were deemed “eligible” for sanitation subsidies, and had
the opportunity to win vouchers that would partially cover the cost of purchasing hygienic
latrine parts. We classified households owning less than 50 decimals of land as eligible for
subsidies. We used a simple landholdings-based threshold because land is the most important
asset in rural Bangladesh, and landholdings is easily observable and verifiable. About 75% of
all households in our sample area were deemed eligible by this definition. Among these poor
households, a randomly selected subset received vouchers for roughly 75% of the cost of the
parts to install any one of three models of hygienic latrine.8 Given the average delivery and
installation costs that we observe in our data (for which the households were responsible),
the 75% parts subsidy represents roughly 50% of the total cost of an installed latrine. This
   8
     All models included a ceramic pan, lid and water seal, and, if properly installed, met the standard
criteria for hygienic. The models were: single pit, 3 ring, US$ 22 unsubsidized / US$ 5.5 subsidized; single
pit, 5 ring, US$ 26 / US$ 6.5; dual pit, 5 rings, US$ 48 / US$ 12. These prices do not include delivery and
installation, which varied but typically were US$ 7–10.




                                                    12
lottery was conducted in public, approximately 2 weeks after the LPP campaign.
       Immediately after the latrine voucher lottery, there was an independent public lottery for
tin (corrugated iron sheets) required to build a roof for a latrine.9 The tin was provided free
to winners of the tin lottery, regardless of whether they won or lost the latrine voucher lottery,
although to collect the tin, winners either had to have a latrine installed or demonstrate to
the satisfaction of VERC staff that they had taken steps to install any type of latrine (e.g.
purchase the components or dig a pit). Household compliance with these conditions was
evaluated approximately 8 weeks after the lottery, and the tin was distributed to all winning
households in the neighborhood at a single event shortly thereafter.
       The distribution method for the latrine subsidies differed from tin distribution in several
important ways. Winners of latrine subsidies were given vouchers. These vouchers had to
be redeemed at a local mason, and the household needed to pay approximately 25% of the
cost of materials, plus the cost of delivery and installation. These households visited the
masons independently over a 6-week voucher redemption period. In contrast, if households
won the tin lottery, there was no co-pay involved in collecting the tin. Winning households
collected their tin at a single, village-wide distribution ceremony approximately 6-8 weeks
after the lottery. Attending this distribution ceremony was an efficient way for local leaders
to be seen by many constituents at once. The process for redeeming latrine vouchers did
not provide the leaders with a similar opportunity to interact with many consituents at low
cost.


3.3       Sanitation Intervention: Randomization

The sample of 97 villages was allocated to the three treatments in the following propor-
tions: 0.227 to Control (N = 22); 0.124 to LPP Only (N = 12); 0.649 to LPP + Subsidy
   9
     Specifically, winners received 2 six-foot sheets for the roof, worth roughly US$ 15. The additional
financial cost to households interested in building walls to complete a privacy shield for the latrine ranged
from close to zero for a simple, self-made bamboo structure if the household gathered and cut bamboo on
its own, to US$ 20 for a bamboo structure made with purchased bamboo and built by a skilled artisan, to
as much as US$ 85 for a structure with corrugated iron sheets for walls and reinforced by treated wood.


                                                     13
(N = 63). LPP + Subsidy was over-weighted because it contained several sub-treatments
of interest to the demand study reported in Guiteras, Levinsohn, and Mobarak (2015). To
avoid imbalance in the number of neighborhoods, villages were stratified by the number of
neighborhoods, below median (1-2 neighborhoods) vs. above median (3 or more neighbor-
hoods). As noted above, subjects did not know that their community’s treatment had been
assigned randomly. In contrast, the household-level allocation of subsidy vouchers within
LPP + Subsidy communities was conducted by public lottery.
   Figure 2 summarizes the randomization. Figure 2a shows the three village-level treat-
ments, with the number of observations allocated to each. Figure 2b shows the results of the
public, household-level lotteries for tin and latrine subsidies conducted in LPP + Subsidy
communities. Households are divided into four categories – won both the latrine voucher
and the tin, won the latrine voucher only, won the tin only, and lost both – with the share of
households in each category proportional to the area. Further details on the outcomes of the
randomizations are provided in Table A1 in the Appendix, with balancing tests presented in
Tables A2 and A3.


3.4     Information treatments

3.4.1   Treatments

In order to test whether households update their beliefs based on new information, we imple-
mented an Information Treatment between Round 2 and Round 3 of the ongoing monitoring
surveys, which informed randomly selected households about the source of the sanitation
intervention. Figure A1 in the Appendix provides the timeline for these information treat-
ments relative to our data collection activities, and the sanitation information and subsidy
treatments implemented earlier. We designed two scripts. The first, which we call the “im-
plicit” script, informed households that the intervention had been part of a research project
and mentions the name of the NGO involved, but did not explicitly say anything about the
role of local leaders. The second, which we call the “explicit” script, explicitly stated that

                                             14
villages had received benefits on the basis of a lottery and that the government had not
played any role in funding the intervention nor in selecting villages. The full text (English
translation) of the scripts for both the implicit and explicit treatments is provided in the
Appendix. Both scripts were read by Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) enumerators
to household members at an unscheduled visit, the stated purpose of which was to inform
households that a third round of the monitoring survey would begin in 2-4 weeks and to
thank them for their cooperation with past survey rounds.


3.4.2   Randomization

The randomization of the Information Treatments was conducted at two levels, first at the
neighborhood level and then, within neighborhood, at the household level. At the neighbor-
hood level, we allocated 60% of first-round Treatment neighborhoods (in LPP Only and LPP
+ Subsidy treatments) to Explicit Information, 20% to Implicit Information and 20% to No
Visit.. This randomization was stratified by aggregated first-round treatment. For LPP +
Subsidy neighborhoods, which represent the majority of the villages, we further stratified by
union. For LPP Only neighborhoods, the cell size was too small, and it was not feasible to
stratify by union within this treatment category. First-round Control neighborhoods were
allocated 50% to No Visit and 50% to Implicit Information, stratified by union. We did not
assign any first-round Control neighborhoods to Explicit Information because it would been
awkward to explicitly discuss with these households about the leader’s lack of involvement
in a treatment they did not receive.
   The second stage of the IT randomization occurred at the household level. In Explicit
Information neighborhoods, one-third of households were assigned to Explicit Information,
one-third to Implicit Information, and one-third to No Visit. In Implicit Information neigh-
borhoods, half of households were assigned to Implicit Information, and half to No Visit.
In No Visit neighborhoods, all households were assigned to No Visit. This design permits
estimation of information spillovers by comparing the responses of non-treated households


                                             15
in treatment neighborhoods to households in control neighborhoods. Detailed tabulations of
the results of this randomization are provided in Table A4 in the Appendix, with balancing
tests presented in Tables A5 and A6.



4        Data

To test the implications of the model presented in Section 2, we collected data on leaders’
actions and constituents’ assessment of their leaders. These data were collected during
Rounds 2 and 3 of a follow-up monitoring survey primarily designed to track investment
in and use of improved latrines.10 Measures of leader actions are constructed using survey
questions that ask all households about their recent interactions with leaders. For constituent
assessment of leader actions and performance, we use subjective measures collected from
those households.
       The first set of outcome variables measure interactions between politicians and their
constituents. We consider two groups of local politicians, Union Parishad chairmen and Ward
Members, whose roles are described in Section 3.1 above. In Round 2, we asked all survey
respondents whether they had seen or interacted with their UP Chair or Ward Member in the
previous three months, and whether they had asked for or received any sanitation-related help
or any non-sanitation benefits from the UP in the previous six months. Based on information
gathered in Round 2, and other qualitative (focus-group) activities on leader responsibilities
and activities in this region, for Round 3 we refined several of the questions to increase
clarity, and added a few questions. For example, the Round 2 survey asked constituents
a combined question about whether they had “seen or interacted with the leader”, but we
learned that in at least one sub-district almost all village residents see the leader regularly
due to proximity, but this does not necessarily imply any meaningful interaction. During
  10
    The survey dates for each round were as follows: Round 1 conducted December 2011 - February 2012;
Round 2 conducted June 2012 - July 2012; Round 3 conducted December 2012 - January 2013. Round 1 was
conducted very early, before the voucher validity period expired. We asked survey questions about politician
behaviors and constituent reactions in Rounds 2 and 3. The information treatment was conducted between
rounds 2 and 3, and our analysis therefore focuses on outcomes measured during these two surveys.


                                                    16
Round 3 surveys, we therefore split this question into two: one asking whether the household
had seen the leader, the second asking if they had had any substantive interaction with the
leader. Measuring interactions separately also helps us differentiate changes in leader effort
in response to the interventions from their mere presence in the village.
   The second set of outcome variables measure the respondent’s subjective attitudes about
the UP leadership. Specifically, we asked respondents (i) their stated satisfaction (on a
1-10 scale) with the UP’s performance in providing sanitation, and the UP’s performance
in providing other goods and services, and (ii) their overall satisfaction with their access
to those goods and services on that same scale, without reference to the UP leadership.
In the Round 3 surveys, we added questions to measure respondents’ perceptions of the
effectiveness of the UP leaders overall, and – to more directly measure the effects of the
third infomation intervention described above – an indicator for whether the respondent
believes the UP chair played an important role in bringing the sanitation intervention to the
respondent’s community.
   We rely on subjective measures of constituent attitudes and perceptions because direct
voting data are not available. There was no major election during the period of study, and
nation-wide elections scheduled for 2013 were postponed, and later boycotted by the main
opposition, marred by widespread violence and extremely low turnout nationally (Barry,
2014). To ensure that these subjective responses are meaningful, we used questions similar
to those found in widely-used and widely-cited international surveys that measure public
opinion about politicians and government institutions, including the World Values Survey
(WVS), the Afrobarometer and the American National Election Studies (ANES). Subjective
assessments from these surveys have been used as outcome variables in several published
papers in economics and political science. Snyder and Strömberg (2010) uses a subjective
ranking of the incumbent (on a 1-100 scale) from the ANES as an outcome variable in their
study about the relationship between press coverage and political accountability. Bratton
(2007), Bratton and Mattes (2007) and Bratton (2012) use Afrobarometer data that measure


                                             17
respondents’ stated satisfaction with government services in their analyses of experience with
government in Africa. Tolbert and Mossberger (2006) estimate the effect of e-government on
subjective measurements of trust in government; Algan, Cahuc, and Shleifer (2011) examine
the effects of teaching practices on students attitudes and trust towards the government;
Bonnet et al. (2012) use data on the perceived effectiveness of market reforms to study how
people form beliefs about privatization; Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov (2012) use sur-
vey questions on villagers’ perceptions of politicians’ motivations and effectiveness to study
the effect of Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program (NSP) on, among other outcomes,
constituents’ attitudes towards government; and Yap (2013) uses respondents satisfaction
with government to investigate the effect of economic performance on democratic support.
Outside of subjective evaluations of politician performance, there is wider use of similar sub-
jective perceptions-based questions in political economy. Di Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky
(2012) uses 1-10 scale measures to analyze the effects of market reforms and privatization.
In another influential paper, Di Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky (2007) relies on a series of
respondent normative judgements to evaluate the effects of a privatization experiment.



5     Empirical Results

    We begin by examining how the random assignment of villages to Control, LPP Only
or LPP + Subsidy treatments affected voter evaluation of their access to sanitation, their
attitudes towards their leaders, and how leaders allocate time between treatment and control
areas. We estimate equations of the form


            yivu = α0 + α1 · LPP Onlyvu + α2 · LPP + Subsidyvu + Xivu
                                                                  0
                                                                      γ + εivu ,           (1)


where yivu is an outcome measuring either a leader action or a constituent reaction, as
reported by household i residing in village v in union u. LPP Onlyvu and LPP + Subsidyvu
denote the random assignment of the village v in union u to the information only treatment

                                              18
and the information and subsidy treatment, respectively. The omitted category consists of
villages assigned to the control group, so α1 and α2 provide estimates of leader action and
constituent reactions in treatment villages relative to control villages. We also report the
estimated difference in coefficients, α2 − α1 , which reflects the marginal effect of providing
subsidies, holding the provision of LPP constant. Xivu represents a set of controls that can
vary at the household, village or union level, such as union fixed effects. εivu is an individual-
specific error term, and standard errors are clustered at the level of randomization (which
is the village, unless otherwise noted). We use the sample of all households who satisfy the
eligibility criteria for latrine subsidies (i.e. are poor, and near-landless) in the control, LPP
Only and LPP + Subsidy treatments to estimate these models.11
       We first verify that the sanitation programs we implemented acted as (and were perceived
as) positive shocks in our intervention areas. In regressions where y takes the form of either
people’s subjective satisfaction with their overall sanitation situation, or their propensity to
invest in sanitary latrines, α1 is typically not statistically significant, while and α2 is posi-
tive and statistically and economically significant. Providing subsidies results in statistically
significant increases in sanitation investments, as documented in Guiteras, Levinsohn, and
Mobarak (2015), and statistically greater satisfaction with the household’s sanitation situa-
tion (see Table 1). Although these outcomes are not directly related to the political economy
model, it is important to first establish that the sanitation program is (and is perceived to
be) useful for the constituents, because the v shock has to be positive for all other empirical
results to be interpretable within the context of our model.

5.1       Village-Level (Obfuscated Lottery) Results

In Table 2, we report estimates of equation (1), where the dependent variable is the respon-
dent’s stated satisfaction, on a 1-10 scale, with the local leader’s contributions to sanitation
in the community. Table 2 shows that villagers receiving just the information (LPP Only)
  11
     The results are similar if we expand the sample to include ineligible households. We report results
with eligibles-only for comparability with individual-level regressions based on lottery outcomes, where only
eligibles participate.


                                                     19
treatment become significantly less happy with their UP’s performance in providing sani-
tation compared to the control group. The LPP activities, modeled after Community-Led
Total Sanitation (CLTS) programs, were designed to highlight a community level problem –
the negative health externalities associated with open defecation – that had not previously
been salient to villagers. Moreover, the program and script highlights the importance of
complementarities in sanitation investments and the need for a joint commitment, effec-
tively framing it as a community-level rather than a household-specific issue. Armed with
this information, the village residents start expressing greater dissatisfaction with their com-
munity leader’s performance in providing sanitation. This information treatment appears
to lead to greater political accountability, not less: satisfaction with leaders falls 0.6 points
(p < 0.01), or roughly one-third of a standard deviation.
   The marginal effect of subsidies on perceptions of leaders, estimated here as the difference
between LPP + Subsidy and LPP Only, is the parameter most closely related to our model’s
prediction. The third row of Column 1 shows that the randomly-assigned subsidies had a
significant and large (about a third of a standard deviation) positive impact on satisfaction
with the UP chairman’s contribution to sanitation, even though the Chairman in reality did
not have anything to do with either the generation or the assignment of these subsidies. This
effect persists into Round 3 (Columns 2 and 3), although slightly smaller in magnitude and
significant only at the 10% level.
   This reduced-form result – the improvement in constituents’ rating of their leaders in
response to a random shock for which the leader was not responsible – makes it tempting
to conclude that constituents irrationally give credit to their leaders, who may then benefit
from this misattribution. However, this need not be irrational: villagers did not know that
treatments were allocated randomly, so there is legitimate room for uncertainty in villagers’
minds about the leaders’ contribution. Our model suggests that in this situation, certain
types of leaders (high-θ in our model) may endogenously respond and allocate more time to
villages that received the subsidies, and this in turn will affect constituent perceptions about


                                               20
leadership quality. To distinguish between these hypotheses, we turn to our data on leader
allocation of time.
   In Table 3, we examine leaders’ allocation of time across villages in response to the random
assignment to control, LPP Only or LPP + Subsidy. We measure each UP chairman’s time
allocation by asking every household in the sample about their interactions with the chairman
over the three months prior to each survey. Again, the subsidy effect is the comparison
between the LPP Only and LPP + Subsidy arms in the third row. Leaders spend more time
in subsidy villages after the sanitation program is implemented. Residents of LPP + Subsidy
villages are 9.9 percentage points more likely to have seen or interacted with the leader prior
to the Round 2 follow-up survey, as compared to residents of LPP Only villages, where
no subsidies were given. However, this coefficient is not precisely estimated: merely seeing
the chairman was a relatively more common occurrence than actual interaction, and thus
may not be as meaningful an outcome. To account for this in Round 3, we asked separate
questions about “seeing” the chairman versus “interacting with the chairman beyond merely
exchanging greetings.” Relative to LPP Only villages, residents of LPP + Subsidy villages are
9.7-9.8 percentage points more likely to also have seen the chairman and 9.5 percentage points
more likely to have interacted with him. Leaders do appear to reallocate their time in favor
of subsidy villages, even though the villages were chosen purely randomly and were identical
to other villages at baseline. The 9.5 percentage point increase in interactions represents
nearly a 50% increase in interactions, so the time allocation effect is quite substantial. Even
though the effect size (in terms of percentage points) remains very similar between Rounds
2 and 3, splitting “interacted with” from simply “seen” improves precision, as the difference
is now significant at the 0.01 level. Leaders are therefore showing up more in villages were
subsidies are given, and also interacting more deeply with residents once they show up.




                                              21
5.2    Household-Level (Transparent Lottery) Results

The results in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that in an environment of uncertainty about a leader’s
contribution to program placement, leaders react by spending more time in areas that were
randomly allocated the program, and constituents update their opinions about their leaders
accordingly. Our model provides a parsimonious explanation for this set of findings, and
other similar models in which constituents are unsure about the leader’s role in program
allocation will also generate these predictions. Our model further predicts that these results
are a function of uncertainty in constituents’ minds about the source of the program. To test
this prediction, we next examine the effects of variation in subsidy allocation when there is
no uncertainty about the source of the variation. Within subsidy villages, only a random
subset of households were provided subsidy vouchers, and these vouchers were allocated by
public lotteries. All village residents were encouraged to attend the lotteries, and village
children made the random draws that determined which households won. Given the public
nature of the lotteries, there is no room for confusion about the lack of leader involvement in
the allocation of vouchers within subsidy villages, unlike the allocation of villages to LPP +
Subsidy, LPP Only or control. This gives us an opportunity to study leader and constituent
reactions to the household-level (transparently random) allocation of vouchers using the
sample of households participating in the lotteries in subsidy villages.
   To do so, we estimate


   yivu = β0 + β1 · WonLatrineivu + β2 · WonTinivu + β3 · WonBothivu + Xivu
                                                                        0
                                                                            δ + νivu ,     (2)


where yivu is, as in Equation (1), an outcome measuring either a leader action or a con-
stituent reaction, as reported by household i residing in village v in union u, WonLatrineivu ,
WonTinivu and WonBothivu are mutually exclusive indicator variables for household i’s lot-
tery outcome, and Xivu represents a set of controls that can vary at the household, village or
union level. Since the lottery outcome variables vary at the household level and are random-


                                              22
ized, it is not necessary to cluster standard errors when estimating Equation (2), increasing
precision relative to estimates of Equation (1). The omitted category consists of households
that lost both the latrine and tin lotteries, so the β coefficients identify the effects of lottery
wins relative to other households in the same village who lose in both lotteries. The key
conceptual difference between Equation (1) and the estimates in Tables 2 and 3 is that the
underlying reason for variation in the right-hand-side variable (lottery-based voucher wins
versus losses) is publicly observed.
   The first column of Table 4 shows that within subsidy villages, lottery winners are no more
likely to give credit to the leader for his contribution to meeting their own sanitation needs
compared to lottery losers. Not only are all coefficients statistically indistiguishable from
zero, but the effect sizes (-0.006 to +0.063) are an order of magnitude or two smaller than
the effect of being in a subsidy village (of about 0.5-0.6 points) that we documented in Table
2, and we can reject effects of 0.2 points or approximately 1/10th of a standard deviation.
Constituents appear to understand that allocation is due to random chance when the lottery
is conducted in front of them. The contrast in this result relative to Table 2 also make it
less likely that the constituent reactions about their leaders that we are documenting do not
simply arise from a warm glow of happiness that pervades when sanitation subsidies arrive
at a village. If receiving a subsidy simply makes people happier about everything (including
their leaders), then we might expect subsidy winners to express greater satisfaction than the
subsidy losers.
   In the next two columns of Table 4, we study leader reactions to this household-level
variation. Our signaling model suggests that if constituents understand that the vouchers
were allocated randomly, then leaders will have no greater incentive to spend time with
lottery winners than with anyone else in that community. Indeed, we see that households
that won only the latrine voucher are no more likely to have seen their UP Chairman or Ward
Member than lottery losers. Winners of the tin (superstructure) voucher are significantly
more likely to have seen their local leaders (an increase of 3.8 percentage points – from 49%


                                                23
to 53% – for UP chairs and 4.0 percentage points - from 79% to 83% for Ward Members), but
this is explained by the fact that the tin was distributed to all winners in the village in one
joint ceremony, which was a cheap opportunity for leaders to be seen by a large number of
villagers. That is, the positive estimates for tin winners are more likely the result of reduced
cost of effort to the leaders of being present in the subsidy village, and tin winners were
disproportionately more likely to report seeing him, because they also happen to attend the
ceremony to collect their tin.


5.3    Heterogeneity across Unions

While the results in Tables 2, 3 and 4 are consistent with our model, they are also consistent
with a simpler view that the arrival of subsidies makes all constituents of a village happier,
makes them generally more receptive to political messages, and leaders therefore find it more
profitable to spend time in those villages. The political economy model of signaling yields
an additional prediction that allows us to differentiate between this simpler story and the
model. In particular, the model suggests that leaders’ reactions to the arrival of subsidies
will vary by leader type: only high-θ type leaders will choose to spend more time in subsidy
villages, since low-θ types are not able to signal anything valuable to constituents by putting
in more effort. The model further suggests that constituent evaluations of leaders will move
in the same direction as leader effort. High-θ leaders will put in more effort to signal; their
constituents will learn their type and update their beliefs positively. Low-θ leaders will stay
away; their constituents will update their beliefs negatively. The four different sub-districts
in our sample with four sets of leaders gives us the opportunity to explore whether all leader
and constituent reactions across the four locations are uniform (consistent with the simpler
story), or whether there is some informative heterogeneity. If there happens to be variation
in “types” (θ) between these four leaders, then we might observe patterns that help identify
the model.
   We explore these heterogeneity predictions in Table 5 by examining the reactions of


                                              24
leaders and constituents to the sanitation interventions in each of the four unions separately.
This table re-runs the regressions presented in Tables 2 and 3, but splits the samples by
union in order to isolate the behaviors of each of the four UP chairmen (and the ratings each
receives from his own constituents). To preserve confidentiality, we label the unions 1, 2, 3
and 4 in arbitrary order rather than identify them by name. The leaders of unions 2 and 3
appear to behave like the high-θ types from our model. The UP chairman in union 3 spends
more time in subsidy villages, relative to both control and LPP Only villages. Constituents
are accordingly more satisfied with his performance. The union 2 chairman was already very
visible (over 95% of all respondents report seeing or interacting with him over the previous
3 months), and he is 5.9 percentage points more likely to be seen by households in LPP +
Subsidy villages than LPP Only villages. His constituents in the subsidy villages express
greater satisfaction in response.
   In contrast, the UP chairman in Union 1 behaves like a low-θ type leader in our model.
This chairman reduces the time he spends in both LPP Only and subsidy villages, and
the constituents in these treatment villages become dissatisfied with his performance. Con-
stituents generally appear to perceive this leader as a low-quality: in addition to the lower
relative satisfaction in program villages, the rating for this leader across the entire sample is
a full standard deviation below the ratings for the other three leaders.
   Across all estimated coefficients (subsidy and LPP village relative to control and relative
to each other) in these three unions, we see that the leader presence in the village and
constituent satisfaction ratings move in the same direction. In unions 2 and 3, the leaders
choose to spend more time in subsidy villages and constituents reward this behavior. In
union 1, the leader spends less time in program villages and the constituents become more
dissatisfied. The heterogeneity embodied in this set of results is in accordance with our
model, and helps to distinguish the interpretation favored by the model from other simpler
stories. Other plausible stories cannot easily explain why some leaders would show up less
in subsidy villages. Table 5 also highlights the fact that our model does not do a good job


                                               25
explaining the behavior of the leader in union 4, or the reactions of his constituents. In this
union, the LPP treatment, which provided information on the community-level sanitation
problem, makes constituents much more dissatisfied with their leader. The dissatisfaction
disappears when subsidies are added (this is consistent with our model and the results we
have already shown), but the leader reacts by allocating much more time to LPP Only
villages.
   With only four cases, it is difficult to untangle why the model predicts behavior well
in three cases but not in the fourth. However, there is some evidence that the sanitation
program spurs the UP chairman in union 4 to redistribute more, especially towards villages
and households that did not receive subsidies. This leader not only spends more time in LPP
villages, but he is also 38 percentage points more likely to compensate LPP village residents
with some form of non-sanitation related benefits. Furthermore, within subsidy villages, this
leader is 7-10 percentage points more likely to provide non-sanitation benefits to “unlucky”
households who failed to win a latrine voucher relative to households who received a voucher
from the sanitation program. These unlucky households also report requesting more help
from the chairman relative to the lucky households, so the compensation reflects demand
conditions. In summary, informed constituents in union 4 demand more services from their
leader, and chairman responds by distributing some services to those who did not receive
sanitation program benefits. Our model was not designed to capture this type of behavior.


5.4     Effects of Information Treatments

The contrasting results in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 suggest that constituents give their leaders
credit for subsidies only when they do not have clear information about their source. To
examine whether information on the true source of the sanitation program helps undo the
misattribution of credit observed in the uncertain environment, we implemented some simple
information treatments (described in Section 3.4) before the third round of data collection.
In Table 6, we estimate the effect of these treatments on constituents beliefs about their


                                              26
leaders.
    The first column of Table 6 estimates the effect of introducing information to a neigh-
borhood about the true source of sanitation program on constituent satisfaction with their
leader’s performance in providing sanitation services. As discussed in Section 3.4, informa-
tion was presented in two forms: “explicit,” directly and clearly stating that the subsidies
were allocated on the basis of lottery, without any input from the leader; and “implicit,”
emphasizing the role played by NGOs in bringing the sanitation program to this area, but
making no direct mention of the leader. The results suggest that informing villagers about
the true source of the subsidies largely eliminates the excess credit that constituents had given
to leaders in the uncertain environment. In the experiments with the obfuscated village-level
lottery (Table 2), residents of subsidy villages had rated their leaders 0.6 points higher than
residents of LPP Only villages. The implicit information treatment reduces satisfaction with
leader performance in providing sanitation by 0.52 points, and the explicit information treat-
ment reduces it by 0.33 points.12 In other words, when villagers are informed and uncertainty
removed, the misattribution of credit is greatly reduced.
    The fact that the initial credit mis-attribution is negated by a simple information treat-
ment suggests that constituents were not learning about some fixed attribute of the leader
(labeled θ in our model) by observing their time allocation post-intervention. Instead, the
time spent in treatment villages appears to be a variable attribute, where the leaders were
simply trying associate themselves with the program in an environment of uncertainty, and
resulting “rational” misattribution is effectively countered when the uncertainty is removed.
    The second column of Table 6 studies the within-neighborhood spillover effects of the
information treatments. In addition to randomly assigning certain neighborhoods to the
information treatments, we randomly chose households within those neighborhoods to receive
the information visits, allowing us to study spillovers by comparing non-visited households
in the information treatment neighborhoods to “pure control” households (where neither the
  12
     It is somewhat surprising that the point estimate of the effect of the implicit treatment is greater than
that of the explicit treatment, although the difference between the two is not statistically significant.


                                                     27
household nor any of its neighbors received any information treatment). The estimates in
Column (1) are based on the treatment status of the neighborhood; in Column (2) we examine
whether this effect varies depending on whether or not a particular household within the
neighborhood was visited. We find that, conditional on the information treatment assigned
to the neighborhood, the particular treatment received by a household is largely unimportant,
suggesting that information spreads quickly within the neighborhood.
    These results suggest that to eliminate the misattribution of credit to leaders arising in
an uncertain environment, it is not necessary to take a very direct, heavy-handed approach
that risks antagonizing local leaders. Simply branding the program with the organizations
involved and emphasizing their identity (while avoiding any mention of the leader) is sufficient
to clarify the important pieces of information for constituents, such that misattribution does
not occur. Donor projects around the developing world are often prominently labeled with
the source of the program (e.g. “From the American People” for USAID projects), and our
results suggest that there may be some value to such labeling.



6     Conclusion

This paper reports on leader and constituent reactions to a large-scale sanitation program
implemented in rural Bangladesh. We take advantage of two unusual features of the research
design in order to track political economy effects: (1) the scale of the program and the data
collection activities – covering all 16,600 households in 97 villages – was large enough to affect
leader behaviors in ways that might be expected to occur when such development programs
are taken to scale; and (2) we collect large-sample data on leaders’ actions, in order to derive
statistically precise measures of their activities.
    The large scale of the program and the RCT allow us to measure general equilibrium po-
litical economy effects of an RCT, which to our knowledge has not previously been done in the
fast-growing program evaluation literature. This is useful because comprehensive evaluation



                                                28
requires us to understand how a development program may change political relationships,
leader actions and constituent attitudes, especially if we are interested in evaluating the
likely effects if a policymaker implements the program at scale. Several papers in economics
and political science have studied changes in beneficiaries’ political attitudes in response to
development programs, and a few others have looked at government responses. Our model
and empirical analysis suggest that combining the two types of data can generate further
insights. We contribute to the political economy literature that has previously modeled the
joint responses of politicians and voters to external events (e.g., Besley and Burgess, 2002)
by providing novel evidence from a large-scale field experiment.
   We structure the empirical analysis of leader and constituent reactions using an equi-
librium political economy model. The model highlights the fact that data on both leader
actions and constituent reactions are required to understand changes in the political economy
sphere. The results we derive shed light on an important and vigorous academic and public
debate on aid effectiveness. A plausible argument made in the popular press – that aid un-
dermines political accountability by making it difficult for voters to distinguish between bad
and good leaders – has gained currency in policy circles (e.g., Eberstadt, 1996). This argu-
ment implicitly assumes that constituents have difficulty distinguishing between the effects
of leadership skill and externally-financed development aid, and are prone to systematically
misattributing credit, which politicians can then exploit. We rigorously examine this propo-
sition using variation in the information environment created in a randomized-controlled
trial. We find that constituents update positively about their leaders after the arrival of
an externally-financed development program, but only when the source of the program and
its allocation rules are uncertain. Furthermore, our experiments show that this problem is
not present when uncertainty is removed, and that the uncertainty can be addressed using
a simple and scalable information treatment.




                                              29
References
Acemoglu, Daron (2010). “Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Develop-
   ment Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24.3, pp. 17–32. doi: 10.1257/jep.
   24.3.17.
Ahmed, Faisal Z. (2012). “Remittances Deteriorate Governance.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics 95.4, pp. 1166–1182. doi: 10.1162/REST_a_00336.
Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer (2011). “Teaching Practices and Social
   Capital.” Working Paper 17527. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.
   nber.org/papers/w17527.
Bagues, Manuel and Berta Esteve-Volart (2013). “Politicians’ Luck of the Draw: Evidence
   from the Spanish Christmas Lottery.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1738906. Rochester, NY:
   Social Science Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1738906.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su (2011). “Do Informed Voters
   Make Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India.” Working Paper. http:
   //scholar.harvard.edu/files/rpande/files/do_informed_voters_make_better_
   choices.pdf.
Barry, Ellen (2014). “Low Turnout in Bangladesh Elections Amid Boycott and Violence.”
   New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/06/world/asia/boycott-and-
   violence-mar-elections-in-bangladesh.html.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov (2012). “Winning Hearts and Minds
   through Development? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan.” Policy Re-
   search Working Paper 6129. The World Bank. http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/1813-
   9450-6129.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001). “Are CEOS Rewarded for Luck? The
   Ones without Principals Are.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116.3, pp. 901–932.
   http://www.jstor.org/stable/2696421.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess (2002). “The Political Economy of Government Respon-
   siveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117.4,
   pp. 1415–1451. doi: 10.1162/003355302320935061.
Björkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson (2009). “Power to the People: Evidence from a Ran-
   domized Field Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda.” The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 124.2, pp. 735–769. doi: 10.1162/qjec.2009.124.2.735.
Bonnet, Céline, Pierre Dubois, David Martimort, and Stéphane Straub (2012). “Empirical
   Evidence on Satisfaction with Privatization in Latin America.” The World Bank Economic
   Review 26.1, pp. 1–33. doi: 10.1093/wber/lhr037.
Bratton, Michael (2007). “Are You Being Served?: Popular Satisfaction with Health and
   Education Services in Africa.” In: Democratic Deficits Addressing Challenges to Sustain-
   ability and Consolidation Around the World. Afrobarometer.


                                            30
Bratton, Michael (2012). “Citizen Perceptions of Local Government Responsiveness in Sub-
   Saharan Africa.” World Development 40.3, pp. 516–527. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . worlddev .
   2011.07.003.
Bratton, Michael and Robert Mattes (2007). “Learning about Democracy in Africa: Aware-
   ness, Performance, and Experience.” American Journal of Political Science 51.1, pp. 192–
   217. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4122914.
Burnside, Craig and David Dollar (2000). “Aid, Policies, and Growth.” The American Eco-
   nomic Review 90.4, pp. 847–868. doi: 10.1257/aer.90.4.847.
Cassidy, John (2012). “How Much Did Hurricane Sandy Help Obama?” The New Yorker.
   http://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/how-much-did-hurricane-sandy-
   help-obama.
Clemens, Michael A., Steven Radelet, Rikhil R. Bhavnani, and Samuel Bazzi (2012). “Count-
   ing Chickens When They Hatch: Timing and the Effects of Aid on Growth.” The Economic
   Journal 122.561, pp. 590–617. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0297.2011.02482.x.
Cole, Shawn, Andrew J. Healy, and Eric Werker (2012). “Do Voters Demand Responsive
   Governments? Evidence from Indian Disaster Relief.” Journal of Development Economics
   97.2, pp. 167–181. doi: 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2011.05.005.
Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora (2013).
   “Do Labor Market Policies have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Ran-
   domized Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128.2, pp. 531–580. doi:
   10.1093/qje/qjt001.
De La O, Ana L. (2013). “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Affect Electoral Behavior? Evidence
   from a Randomized Experiment in Mexico.” American Journal of Political Science 57.1,
   pp. 1–14. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2012.00617.x.
De Janvry, Alain, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Elisabeth Sadoulet (2014). “Are Land Re-
   forms Granting Complete Property Rights Politically Risky? Electoral Outcomes of Mex-
   ico’s Certification Program.” Journal of Development Economics 110, pp. 216–225. doi:
   10.1016/j.jdeveco.2013.04.003.
Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiani, and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2007). “The Formation of
   Beliefs: Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters.” The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 122.1, pp. 209–241. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25098841.
— (2012). “Reality Versus Propaganda in the Formation of Beliefs About Privatization.”
  Journal of Public Economics 96.5–6, pp. 553–567. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.11.
  006.
Easterly, William (2006). The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Efforts to Aid the Rest
   Have Done so Much Ill and so Little Good. Penguin.




                                            31
Easterly, William, Ross Levine, and David Roodman (2004). “Aid, Policies, and Growth:
   Comment.” The American Economic Review 94.3, pp. 774–780. http : / / www . jstor .
   org/stable/3592954.
Eberstadt, Nicholas (1996). “Development Assistance and Economic Freedom.” Congres-
   sional Testimony. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Senate Committe on Foreign Relations. http:
   //www.aei.org/publication/development-assistance-and-economic-freedom/.
Eisensee, Thomas and David Strömberg (2007). “News Droughts, News Floods, and U.S.
   Disaster Relief.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122.2, pp. 693–728. http://www.
   jstor.org/stable/25098856.
Frankovic, Kathy (2008). The Politics Of Hurricanes. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/the-
   politics-of-hurricanes/.
Gasper, John T. and Andrew Reeves (2011). “Make It Rain? Retrospection and the Attentive
   Electorate in the Context of Natural Disasters.” American Journal of Political Science
   55.2, pp. 340–355. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23025055.
Gates, Bill (2011). “World Health Assembly: Keynote Address.” Press Release. Bill and
   Melinda Gates Foundation. http : / / www . gatesfoundation . org / media - center /
   speeches/2011/05/world-health-assembly.
Guiteras, Raymond, James Levinsohn, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak (2015). “Encouraging
   Sanitation Investment in the Developing World: A Cluster-Randomized Trial.” Science
   348.6237, pp. 903–906. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa0491.
Hanchett, Suzanne, Laurie Krieger, Mohidul Hoque Kahn, Craig Kullmann, and Rokeya
  Ahmed (2011). “Long-Term Sustainability of Improved Sanitation in Rural Bangladesh.”
  Technical Paper. World Bank Water and Sanitation Program. http://hdl.handle.net/
  10986/17347.
Hart, Joshua (2014). “Did Hurricane Sandy influence the 2012 US presidential election?”
   Social Science Research 46, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2014.02.005.
Healy, Andrew J. and Neil Malhotra (2010). “Random Events, Economic Losses, and Retro-
   spective Voting: Implications for Democratic Competence.” Quarterly Journal of Political
   Science 5.2, pp. 193–208. doi: 10.1561/100.00009057.
Healy, Andrew J., Neil Malhotra, and Cecilia Hyunjung Mo (2010). “Irrelevant Events Affect
   Voters’ Evaluations of Government Performance.” Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences 107.29, pp. 12804–12809. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1007420107.
Heckman, James J. (1991). “Randomization and Social Policy Evaluation.” Technical Work-
   ing Paper 107. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/
   t0107.
Imbens, Guido W and Jeffrey M Wooldridge (2009). “Recent Developments in the Econo-
   metrics of Program Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Literature 47.1, pp. 5–86. doi:
   10.1257/jel.47.1.5.


                                            32
Leigh, Andrew (2009). “Does the World Economy Swing National Elections?” Oxford Bul-
   letin of Economics and Statistics 71.2, pp. 163–181. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0084.2008.
   00545.x.
Manacorda, Marco, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito (2011). “Government Transfers
  and Political Support.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3.3, pp. 1–28.
  doi: 10.1257/app.3.3.1.
McIntosh, Craig, Tito Alegria, Gerardo Ordoñez, and René Zenteno (2014). “Slum Infrastruc-
  ture Upgrading and Budgeting Spillovers: The Case of Mexico’s Hábitat Program.” Work-
  ing Paper. http://gps.ucsd.edu/_files/faculty/mcintosh/mcintosh_research_
  infrastructure.pdf.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq and Mark Rosenzweig (2014). “Risk, Insurance and Wages in
  General Equilibrium.” Working Paper 19811. National Bureau of Economic Research.
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19811.
Montalvo, José G. (2010). “Voting After the Bombings: A Natural Experiment on the Effect
  of Terrorist Attacks on Democratic Elections.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93.4,
  pp. 1146–1154. doi: 10.1162/REST_a_00115.
Moyo, Dambisa (2009). Dead Aid: Why Aid Is Not Working and How There Is a Better Way
  for Africa. Macmillan.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Ebonya Washington (2009). “Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive
  Dissonance and Political Attitudes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  1.1, pp. 86–111. doi: 10.1257/app.1.1.86.
Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Grigore Pop-Eleches (2012). “Targeted Government Spending and
   Political Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 7.3, pp. 285–320. doi: 10.
   1561/100.00011017.
Rodrik, Dani (2008). “The New Development Economics: We Shall Experiment, but How
  Shall We Learn?” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1296115. Rochester, NY: Social Science
  Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1296115.
Ross, Lee and Richard E Nisbett (1991). The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social
   Psychology. Mcgraw-Hill Book Company.
Sachs, Jeffrey (2006). The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. Penguin.
Shepsle, Kenneth A., Robert P. Van Houweling, Samuel J. Abrams, and Peter C. Hanson
   (2009). “The Senate Electoral Cycle and Bicameral Appropriations Politics.” American
   Journal of Political Science 53.2, pp. 343–359. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2009.00374.
   x.
Snyder, James M. and David Strömberg (2010). “Press Coverage and Political Accountabil-
   ity.” Journal of Political Economy 118.2, pp. 355–408. http://www.jstor.org/stable/
   10.1086/652903.



                                            33
Tolbert, Caroline J. and Karen Mossberger (2006). “The Effects of E-Government on Trust
   and Confidence in Government.” Public Administration Review 66.3, pp. 354–369. doi:
   10.1111/j.1540-6210.2006.00594.x.
Weber, Roberto, Colin Camerer, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Marc Knez (2001). “The Illusion
  of Leadership: Misattribution of Cause in Coordination Games.” Organization Science
  12.5, pp. 582–598. doi: 10.1287/orsc.12.5.582.10090.
WHO and UNICEF (2013). “Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-Water – 2013 Update.”
  Tech. rep. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2013/
  jmp_report/en/.
Wolfers, Justin (2007). “Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections.” The
  Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. http : / / users . nber . org / ~jwolfers /
  papers/Voterrationality(latest).pdf.
Yap, O. Fiona (2013). “Economic Performance and Democratic Support in Asia’s Emer-
   gent Democracies.” Comparative Political Studies 46.4, pp. 486–512. doi: 10 . 1177 /
   0010414012453711.




                                           34
                                                Figure 1: Model
                                                       (a) Setup


                                          High-𝜃𝜃 leader 𝜃𝜃 > 0 :
                   𝑢𝑢                               𝑢𝑢 = 𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃 + 𝑣𝑣


                        1




                                                                Low-𝜃𝜃 leader
                                                                  𝜃𝜃 = 0 : 𝑢𝑢 = 𝑣𝑣

                                                                                     1         𝑣𝑣

                                                (b) Equilibrium



                        𝑢𝑢
                                                                 High-𝜃𝜃 leader
                             1




                                                                    Low-𝜃𝜃 leader
                        𝑣𝑣 ∗

                                 Both leaders




                                                         𝑣𝑣 ∗                             𝑣𝑣
                                       𝑣𝑣 < 𝑣𝑣 ∗                        𝑣𝑣 > 𝑣𝑣 ∗
                                 Pooling equilibrium             Separating equilibrium



Notes: Fig. 1a shows that a villager who experiences a shock v and has a leader of type θ ≥ 0 who exerts
effort x will experience utility u = θx + v. The low-θ leader cannot increase utility above 1. Fig. 1b shows the
cutoff v ∗ = 1 − (1 − µ) θ/β such that the high-θ leader will choose to separate for any shock v > v ∗ and pool
for any shock v < v ∗ . If the shock is smaller than v ∗ , the villager will experience u = v ∗ and observe leader
effort x = 0 regardless of the leader’s type, and will not update her prior belief µ. If the shock is greater than
v ∗ and the leader is the high-θ type, the villager will experience u = 1, observe leader effort x = (1 − v ∗ ) /θ,
and believe that the leader is the high-θ type. If the shock is greater than v ∗ and the leader is the low-θ type,
the villager will experience u = v ∗ , observe leader effort x = 0, and believe that the leader is the low-θ type.



                                                          35
                                           Figure 2: Experimental Design
                    (a) Stage 1: Non-public, Village-level Randomization of
                                         Treatments
                       Control                         LPP Only                             LPP + Subsidy




                 22 villages, 66 paras,           12 villages, 50 paras,                 63 villages, 230 paras,
               2,419 eligible households        1,895 eligible households               8,146 eligible households



                     (b) Stage 2: Public, Household-level Randomization of
                                           Subsidies
                             Within LPP + Subsidy Communities
                                                                             Superstructure (“tin”)
                                                                            Won                      Lost




                                                                   Won both:                Won latrine only:
                                               Won
                                                                2,669 households            2,539 households


                Latrine subsidy voucher




                                               Lost              Won tin only:                 Lost both:
                                                                1,431 households            1,527 households




Notes: Figure 2a shows the allocation of the sample across treatments. The areas of the rectangles
are proportional to the share allocated to each treatment. Treatments were assigned in a non-public
randomization and subjects did not know why their community was assigned to a particular group.
Totals: 97 villages, 346 neighborhoods (“paras”), 16,603 households, 12,460 eligible households.
Figure 2b shows the outcome of the two independent public lotteries in the LPP + Subsidy paras:
one for a voucher for a subsidized latrine; the second for sheets of corrugated iron (“tin”) to
build a superstructure for a latrine. The areas of the rectangles are proportional to the share of
households in each category. Total: 8,146 eligible households in subsidy villages (63 villages, 230
neighborhoods).




                                                                  36
              Table 1: Satisfaction with household’s sanitation situation

                                               Round 2           Round 3
                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)
                 LPP Only                       0.085       -0.329      -0.271
                                               (0.280)     (0.297)     (0.296)
                 LPP + Subsidy                 0.551∗      1.020∗∗∗    1.076∗∗∗
                                               (0.306)     (0.266)     (0.272)
                 Estimated difference          0.465∗∗∗    1.348∗∗∗    1.347∗∗∗
                                               (0.157)     (0.207)     (0.209)
                 IT assignment FE                                         Yes
                 Mean of dep. var.              4.571        6.263       6.263
                 Std. dev. of dep. var.        (2.881)      (2.022)     (2.022)
                 Number of villages               97           97          97
                 Number of households          12,168       12,024      12,024
Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients and estimated differences from OLS regressions
of the household’s stated satisfaction with its sanitation situation (on a scale of 1-10, collected
in Rounds 2 and 3 of the monitoring survey) on indicators for village-level treatments. Co-
efficient estimates are presented in the first two rows, with estimated differences in the third
row. All regressions include fixed effects for the treatment stratification variable (an indica-
tor for whether the village had more than the median (by union) number of households) and
union. Where indicated, the regressions include fixed effects for the cluster-level information
treatment assignment (Control, Implicit, Explicit). The sample is restricted to eligible house-
holds in Control, LPP Only, and LPP + Subsidy villages. Control villages are the omitted cat-
egory. Standard errors clustered at the village level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                37
                   Table 2: Satisfaction with UP providing sanitation

                                                Round 2           Round 3
                                                      (1)       (2)        (3)
                   LPP Only                     -0.617∗∗∗      -0.339     -0.324
                                                 (0.158)      (0.361)    (0.367)
                   LPP + Subsidy                  -0.010       0.151       0.164
                                                 (0.145)      (0.285)    (0.284)
                   Estimated difference          0.608∗∗∗     0.490∗     0.488∗
                                                 (0.122)      (0.284)    (0.285)
                   IT assignment FE                                        Yes
                   Mean of dep. var.              4.095        4.817      4.817
                   Std. dev. of dep. var.        (1.797)      (1.875)    (1.875)
                   Number of villages               97           97         97
                   Number of households          12,167       11,943     11,943
Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients and estimated differences from OLS regressions
of the household’s stated satisfaction with the UP’s performance in providing sanitation (on a
scale of 1-10, collected in Rounds 2 and 3 of the monitoring survey) on indicators for village-level
treatments. Coefficient estimates are presented in the first two rows, with estimated differences
in the third row. All regressions include fixed effects for the treatment stratification variable (an
indicator for whether the village had more than the median (by union) number of households)
and union. Where indicated, the regressions include fixed effects for the cluster-level information
treatment assignment (Control, Implicit, Explicit). The sample is restricted to eligible house-
holds in Control, LPP Only, and LPP + Subsidy villages. Control villages are the omitted cat-
egory. Standard errors clustered at the village level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 38
                             Table 3: Interactions with UP chair

                                     R2 Seen          R3 Interact              R3 Seen
                                        (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
       LPP Only                        -0.038      -0.034      -0.032      -0.081      -0.100
                                      (0.077)     (0.030)     (0.033)     (0.068)     (0.070)
       LPP + Subsidy                    0.061      0.061        0.063      0.017       -0.002
                                      (0.069)     (0.037)     (0.040)     (0.067)     (0.070)
       Estimated difference            0.099      0.095∗∗∗    0.095∗∗∗    0.098∗      0.097∗
                                      (0.060)     (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.051)     (0.049)
       IT assignment FE                                         Yes                     Yes
       Mean of dep. var.               0.471       0.192       0.192       0.546       0.546
       Std. dev. of dep. var.         (0.499)     (0.394)     (0.394)     (0.498)     (0.498)
       Number of villages                97          97          97          97         97
       Number of households           12,173      12,041      12,041      12,056      12,056
Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients and estimated differences from OLS regressions
of outcome variables on indicators for village-level treatments. Coefficient estimates are presented
in the first two rows, with estimated differences in the third row. The outcome variables are: an
indicator for whether the respondent has seen or interacted with the UP chair in three months prior
to Round 2 of the monitoring survey (column 1); an indicator for whether the respondent has inter-
acted with the UP chair in three months prior to Round 3 of the monitoring survey (columns 2-3);
an indicator for whether the respondent has seen the UP chair in three months prior to Round 3 of
the monitoring survey (columns 4-5). All regressions include fixed effects for the treatment stratifi-
cation variable (an indicator for whether the village had more than the median (by union) number
of households) and union. Where indicated, the regressions include fixed effects for the cluster-level
information treatment assignment (Control, Implicit, Explicit). The sample is restricted to eligible
households in Control, LPP Only, and LPP + Subsidy villages. Control villages are the omitted
category. Standard errors clustered at the village level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 39
 Table 4: Citizen satisfaction and politician response by lottery outcome, Round 2

                                              (1)                 (2)         (3)
                                    Satisfaction with UP       Seen UP     Seen Ward
       Latrine only                          0.043               0.000        0.014
                                            (0.056)             (0.014)      (0.012)
       Tin only                              -0.006             0.038∗∗      0.040∗∗∗
                                            (0.064)             (0.016)      (0.014)
       Won both                               0.063             0.025∗       0.025∗∗
                                            (0.055)             (0.014)      (0.012)
       Omitted category mean                 4.219               0.492        0.789
       Omitted category s.d.                (1.801)             (0.500)      (0.408)
       Num. observations                     7,824               7,827        7,827
Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of outcome variables on
indicators for the household’s lottery outcome. The outcome variables are: the household’s
stated satisfaction (1-10) with the UP’s performance in providing sanitation (column 1); an
indicator for whether the respondent has seen or interacted with the UP chair in the previ-
ous three months (column 2); an indicator for whether the respondent has seen or interacted
with the local Ward member in the previous three months (column 3). All measures were col-
lected in Round 2 of the monitoring survey. All regressions include fixed effects for treatment
strata (an indicator for whether the village had more than the median (by union) number of
households) and for the union. The sample is restricted to eligible households in subsidy clus-
ters (LPP + Subsidy). The omitted category consists of households that lost in both lotteries.
Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                              40
               Table 5: Heterogeneity in Leaders’ and Citizens’ Responses
                            by Union (Subdistrict), Round 2

    Union                               3                        2                       1                         4
                               (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)
                              Seen          Satisf.     Seen         Satisf.    Seen         Satisf.     Seen           Satisf.
    LPP Only                  -0.030        -0.290∗∗    -0.039        -0.171   -0.235∗ -0.998∗∗∗        0.324∗∗∗       -0.943∗∗∗
                             (0.082)        (0.117)    (0.028)       (0.193)   (0.135) (0.318)          (0.055)         (0.276)
    LPP + Subsidy            0.211∗          0.089       0.019       0.453∗∗    -0.102  -0.536           0.060           0.167
                             (0.110)        (0.176)    (0.021)       (0.197)   (0.136) (0.335)          (0.103)         (0.322)
    Estimated difference     0.241∗∗∗       0.380∗∗∗   0.059∗∗ 0.624∗∗∗        0.133∗        0.463∗∗∗   -0.264∗∗       1.110∗∗∗
                             (0.077)        (0.131)    (0.025) (0.140)         (0.078)       (0.146)    (0.095)        (0.295)
    Mean of dep. var.         0.464          4.105      0.951         4.554     0.270         3.183      0.248          4.997
    Std. dev. of dep. var.   (0.499)        (1.759)    (0.216)       (1.801)   (0.444)       (1.413)    (0.432)        (1.779)
    Number of villages          23             23         27            27        26           26          21             21
    Number of households      5,101          5,100      2,197         2,196     3,010         3,007      1,865          1,864

Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of outcome variables
on indicators for village-level treatments. Each union is calculated separately (supercolumns).
The outcome variables are: an indicator for whether the respondent has seen or interacted
with the UP chair in the previous three months (columns 1, 3, 5, 7); and the household’s
stated satisfaction (1-10) with the UP’s performance in providing sanitation (columns 2, 4, 6,
8). All measures were collected in Round 2 of the monitoring survey. All regressions in-
clude fixed effects for treatment strata (an indicator for whether the village had more than
the median (by union) number of households). The sample is restricted to eligible households.
Standard errors clustered at the village level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                            41
    Table 6: Impact of information treatment on perception of local politicians

                                                    (1)                   (2)
                                          Neighborhood assignment Household assignment
    Neighborhood: Implicit Information             -0.522∗∗∗
                                                    (0.174)
       Household: No Visit                                                  -0.521∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.175)
       Household: Implicit Treatment                                        -0.523∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.182)
    Neighborhood: Explicit Information             -0.327∗∗
                                                   (0.160)
       Household: No Visit                                                  -0.368∗∗
                                                                            (0.164)
       Household: Implicit Treatment                                        -0.341∗∗
                                                                            (0.166)
       Household: Explicit Treatment                                         -0.271∗
                                                                            (0.162)
    Mean of dep. var.                               4.921                     4.921
    Std. dev. of dep. var.                         (1.851)                   (1.851)
    Number of neighborhoods                          230                       230
    Number of households                            7,797                     7,797
Notes: This table presents estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of the dependent vari-
able on (Column 1) neighborhood-level information treatment assignment indicators (No Visit;
Implicit Information; Explicit Information) or (Column 2) neighborhood-level information treat-
ment assignments interacted with household-level treatment assignments. The design was tri-
angular in the sense that all households in No Visit neighborhoods were assigned to No Visit,
households in Implicit neighborhoods were assigned either to No Visit or Implicit, and house-
holds in Explicit neighborhoods were assigned to No Visit, Implicit or Explicit. The dependent
variable is the respondent’s stated satisfaction (1-10) with the UP’s performance in providing
sanitation, collected in Round 3 of the monitoring survey (i.e. after the information treatments
were implemented). All regressions include fixed effects for union and for the household’s lot-
tery outcome. The omitted category consists of subsidy-eligible households in LPP + Subsidy
neighborhoods assigned to the (neighborhood-level) No Visit treatment. The sample consists
of subsidy-eligible households in LPP + Subsidy neighborhoods. Standard errors clustered at
the neighborhood (sub-village) level in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                              42
A     Appendix
Information     Treatment
Information Treatment Scripts Script

Explicit Message

Good day. My name is ________________ and I have come from the Dhaka IPA office. I have come
today to investigate the current status of the sanitation project that is being carried out in Tanore and
observe if people in your Upazila are using hygienic latrines.

Between February – August 2012, a program to promote hygienic sanitation was conducted in four
unions of Tanore – Badhair, Chanduria, Saranjai and Pachandar. This program was designed and
implemented by local NGO VERC. Villages that received program benefits were selected on the basis of
a lottery, where village names were randomly drawn. Therefore, the fact that you received some program
benefits was based purely on luck and we, VERC, Union Parishad, Thana Parishad, Upazila Parishad or
the central government did not influence your selection into this program. In order to gather data about
this project, we have conducted several rounds of surveys in your area. You have been very helpful and
supportive to us as we collected information about our research project. We appreciate your involvement
and hope that you will continue to support us. We will soon begin our third round of monitoring to
examine the current state of latrines used in Tanore. We look forward to your continued involvement.
Thank You.

Implicit Treatment

Good day. My name is ________________ and I have come from the Dhaka IPA office. I have come
today to investigate the current status of the sanitation project that is being carried out in Tanore and
observe if people in your Upazila are using hygienic latrines.

Between February – August 2012, a program to raise awareness about hygienic sanitation was conducted
in four unions of Tanore – Badhair, Chanduria, Saranjai and Pachandar. In order to gather data about this
project, we have conducted several rounds of surveys in your area. You have been very helpful and
supportive to us as we collected information about our research project. We appreciate your involvement
and hope that you will continue to support us. We will soon begin our third round of monitoring to
examine the current state of latrines used in Tanore. We look forward to your continued involvement.
Thank You.




                                                 A1
                    Figure A1: Timeline for Typical Village


    Interventions                                 Survey Activities

                                       Aug     Census (Two parts)
Lottery for                                    Census – August and October 2011
                                                August and October 2011
                                       Sep     (Two parts). 18,254 households; 380
Latrine and Tin                                 18,254 households;   380
                                               neighborhoods;  107 villages



                                2011
Subsidies – April                      Oct     neighborhoods; 107 villages.
2012
                                       Nov

Latrine                                Dec
                                               Baseline
Promotion                              Jan     Baseline
                                               Jan 2012.– January2012
                                                           8,398 households.
Program – April
2012.                                  Feb
                                       Mar
                                               Round 1 Follow-up
Vouchers for                           Apr     Round 1 Follow-up
                                               April 2012. 18,269–households
                                                                   April 2012
Latrine and                            May
Superstructure –                               Round 2 Follow-up
Valid May 2012 to                      Jun     Round 2 Follow-up
                                               June 2012. 18,436 –households.
                                                                   June 2012
                                2012




June 2012                              Jul
                                       Aug
                                       Sep
Information                            Oct
Treatment – Jan
                                       Nov
2013.
                                       Dec
                                               Round 3 Follow-up
                                       Jan     January
                                               Round   2013. 18,252
                                                     3 Follow-up – January2013
Latrine                                        households.
Promotion                              Feb
                                2013




Program – Final                        Mar
Follow-up –
February 2013.                         Apr




                                       A2
                    Table A1: Sanitation Intervention – Sample Allocation

    Number of:                      Villages   Neighborhoods   Households    Eligible Households
    Control:                          22             66            3,186             2,419
    LPP Only:                         12             50            2,529             1,895
    LPP + Subsidy:                    63            230           10,888             8,146
       Lost both:                                                                    1,527
       Won latrine voucher only:                                                     2,539
       Won tin only:                                                                 1,431
       Won both:                                                                     2,669
    Total:                            97            346           16,603            12,460

Notes: This table shows the allocation of the sample to sanitation treatments. Control, LPP Only and
LPP + Subsidy were assigned at the village level, with the LPP and Subsidy treatments implemented at
the neighborhood level. Within LPP + Subsidy communities, latrine subsidy vouchers and corrugated iron
sheets for latrine superstructures (“tin”) were awarded in separate, independent public lotteries.




                                                 A3
        Table A2: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Across Village-Level Treatments

    Village treatment:                         All     Control            LPP Only             LPP + Subsidy           Joint
                                             Mean      Mean      Mean       Diff     ∆x    Mean      Diff      ∆x      p-val.
                                             (S.D.)    (S.D.)    (S.D.)    [S.E.]          (S.D.)   [S.E.]
                                               (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)       (8)       (9)
    Village characteristics:
    Share with access to latrine              0.812     0.799     0.795 −0.004 −0.018 0.820     0.022  0.095           0.792
                                             (0.161)   (0.154)   (0.161) [0.056]       (0.165) [0.039]
    Share w. access to hygienic latrine       0.342     0.348     0.315 −0.033 −0.126 0.345 −0.002 −0.008              0.806
                                             (0.171)   (0.208)   (0.153) [0.062]       (0.163) [0.049]
    Share open defecation                     0.246     0.262     0.264   0.002  0.011  0.238 −0.024 −0.101            0.774
                                             (0.171)   (0.160)   (0.160) [0.056]       (0.179) [0.041]
    Share landless                            0.347     0.305     0.338   0.033  0.150  0.363   0.058  0.263           0.338
                                             (0.147)   (0.172)   (0.133) [0.052]       (0.139) [0.040]
    Number of households                      171.2     144.8     210.8   65.9   0.283  172.8   28.0   0.100           0.510
                                             (147.7)   (138.1)   (187.7) [60.3]        (143.2) [34.4]
    Number of eligible h.h.                   128.5     110.0     157.9   48.0   0.278  129.3   19.3   0.100           0.534
                                             (109.8)   (104.2)   (137.8) [44.5]        (106.5) [25.9]
    Household characteristics (among subsidy-eligible households):
    HH head female                            0.104     0.111     0.099 −0.011 −0.026 0.103         −0.008    −0.018   0.462
                                             (0.305)   (0.314)   (0.299) [0.010]       (0.304)      [0.007]
    HH head age                                40.4      40.7      39.8   −0.9 −0.048    40.5        −0.2     0.000    0.250
                                              (13.2)    (13.6)    (13.3)   [0.6]        (13.1)       [0.5]
    HH head schooling yrs                       5.3       4.9       5.8   0.8∗∗∗ 0.123    5.4         0.4     0.100    0.020∗∗
                                               (4.8)     (4.5)     (4.9)   [0.3]         (4.9)       [0.2]
    Muslim                                    0.834     0.831     0.858   0.027  0.053  0.829       −0.002    −0.004   0.883
                                             (0.372)   (0.375)   (0.349) [0.067]       (0.377)      [0.046]
    Bengali                                   0.878     0.862     0.915   0.053  0.119  0.874        0.012    0.025    0.451
                                             (0.328)   (0.345)   (0.279) [0.046]       (0.332)      [0.041]
    HH head work:agriculture                  0.702     0.701     0.711   0.010  0.015  0.700       −0.001    −0.002   0.865
                                             (0.457)   (0.458)   (0.453) [0.030]       (0.458)      [0.029]
    HH decimals land owned                      7.4       7.1       7.2     0.1  0.005    7.6         0.5     0.000    0.689
                                              (14.2)    (11.9)    (14.2)   [0.7]        (14.9)       [0.6]
    Proper meals during Monga                 0.526     0.544     0.608   0.063  0.090  0.502       −0.043    −0.060   0.065∗
                                             (0.499)   (0.498)   (0.488) [0.051]       (0.500)      [0.040]
    HH member w/diarrhea last week            0.042     0.040     0.043   0.003  0.009  0.042        0.002    0.007    0.972
                                             (0.201)   (0.197)   (0.203) [0.012]       (0.201)      [0.009]
    Has access to tube well or piped water    0.891     0.912     0.899 −0.014 −0.033 0.883         −0.030    −0.070   0.602
                                             (0.312)   (0.283)   (0.302) [0.031]       (0.322)      [0.030]
    Observation counts:
    Number    of   villages                    97         22                 12                        63
    Number    of   neighborhoods              346         66                50                        230
    Number    of   households                16,603     3,186              2,529                    10,888
    Number    of   eligible households       12,460     2,419              1,895                     8,146



Notes: This table presents summary statistics (means and standard deviations) of key baseline variables
for all villages (Column 1) and villages assigned to the Control (Column 2), LPP Only (Column 3) and
LPP + Subsidy (Column 6) treatments. For LPP Only and LPP + Subsidy, we present the estimated
difference with Control
                    p in Columns 4 and 7 and the Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) normalized difference
∆x = X 1 − X 0 / S02 + S12 in Columns 5 and 8. Column 9 shows the p-value from an F-test of the
joint significance of both treatment indicators (LPP Only and LPP + Subsidy). Standard deviations in
parentheses; estimated standard errors in brackets. Standard errors for household-level regressions clustered
at the village level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                 A4
                Table A3: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Across Lottery Outcomes
                       Subsidy-Eligible Households in LPP + Subsidy Villages
   Household lottery outcome:                 All     Lost Both        Won latrine only               Won tin only                    Won both             Joint
                                            Mean       Mean       Mean       Diff         ∆x    Mean       Diff       ∆x     Mean       Diff      ∆x       p-val.
                                            (S.D.)     (S.D.)     (S.D.)    [S.E.]              (S.D.)    [S.E.]             (S.D.)    [S.E.]
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)      (7)        (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)     (12)
   Household characteristics:
   Share with access to latrine              0.780      0.799      0.789  −0.010     −0.017      0.773    −0.025    −0.044    0.764  −0.035∗     −0.059    0.277
                                            (0.414)    (0.401)    (0.408)  [0.020]              (0.419)   [0.020]            (0.425)  [0.020]
   Share w. access to hygienic latrine       0.270      0.284      0.253  −0.031     −0.050      0.287     0.002     0.004    0.268  −0.016      −0.025    0.341
                                            (0.444)    (0.451)    (0.435)  [0.022]              (0.453)   [0.022]            (0.443)  [0.022]
   Share open defecation                     0.297      0.275      0.301    0.026     0.040      0.311     0.036     0.055    0.297    0.022     0.034     0.525
                                            (0.457)    (0.447)    (0.459)  [0.022]              (0.463)   [0.022]            (0.457)  [0.022]
   Landless                                  0.460      0.431      0.475  0.044∗∗∗    0.063      0.473    0.043∗∗    0.061    0.456    0.025     0.036    0.032∗∗
                                            (0.498)    (0.495)    (0.499)  [0.016]              (0.499)   [0.016]            (0.498)  [0.016]
   HH head female                            0.103      0.125      0.085 −0.040∗∗∗   −0.092      0.133     0.008     0.018    0.091 −0.033∗∗∗    −0.076   0.000∗∗∗
                                            (0.304)    (0.330)    (0.279)  [0.010]              (0.340)   [0.010]            (0.288)  [0.010]
   HH head age                                40.5       41.2       40.4    −0.8∗    −0.042       41.0     −0.1      0.000     39.9  −1.2∗∗∗     −0.100   0.009∗∗∗
                                             (13.1)     (13.5)     (13.1)   [0.4]                (13.5)    [0.4]              (12.6)   [0.4]
   HH head schooling yrs                       5.4        5.3        5.4     0.1      0.011        5.3     −0.1      0.000      5.3    −0.0      0.000     0.843
                                              (4.9)      (5.0)      (4.8)   [0.2]                 (5.0)    [0.2]               (4.8)   [0.2]
   Muslim                                    0.829      0.847      0.835  −0.012     −0.023      0.825    −0.022    −0.042    0.817  −0.030∗∗    −0.057   0.071∗
                                            (0.376)    (0.360)    (0.372)  [0.012]              (0.380)   [0.012]            (0.387)  [0.012]
   Bengali                                   0.874      0.882      0.879  −0.003     −0.007      0.865    −0.018    −0.038    0.869  −0.013      −0.028    0.356
                                            (0.332)    (0.322)    (0.326)  [0.011]              (0.342)   [0.011]            (0.337)  [0.011]
   HH head work:agriculture                  0.700      0.676      0.714  0.038∗∗     0.059      0.655    −0.021    −0.031    0.726  0.050∗∗∗    0.077    0.000∗∗∗
                                            (0.458)    (0.468)    (0.452)  [0.015]              (0.476)   [0.015]            (0.446)  [0.015]
   HH decimals land owned                      7.5        8.2        6.9   −1.3∗∗    −0.055        7.2     −1.0      0.000      7.9    −0.3      0.000    0.014∗∗
                                             (14.8)     (19.5)     (11.6)   [0.6]                (15.2)    [0.6]              (14.3)   [0.6]
   Proper meals during Monga                 0.501      0.495      0.504    0.009     0.013      0.471    −0.023    −0.033    0.516    0.022     0.031    0.050∗
                                            (0.500)    (0.500)    (0.500)  [0.016]              (0.499)   [0.016]            (0.500)  [0.016]
   HH member w/diarrhea last week            0.042      0.038      0.043    0.005     0.018      0.044     0.006     0.022    0.044    0.006     0.021     0.783
                                            (0.201)    (0.190)    (0.202)  [0.006]              (0.204)   [0.006]            (0.204)  [0.006]
   Has access to tube well or piped water    0.883      0.862      0.898  0.037∗∗∗    0.080      0.871     0.010     0.021    0.886   0.024∗∗    0.052    0.003∗∗∗
                                            (0.322)    (0.345)    (0.302)  [0.011]              (0.335)   [0.011]            (0.318)  [0.011]
   Observation counts:
   Number of households                     8,146       1,507               2,539                         1,431                        2,669




Notes: This table presents summary statistics (means and standard deviations) of key baseline variables for
all households participating in the subsidy lotteries (Column 1) and households that lost in both lotteries
(Column 2), won the latrine subsidy voucher only (Column 3), won the “tin” (superstructure materials) only
(Column 6), and won both (Column 9). For the latter three categories, we present the estimated difference
with the Lost Both category (the omitted category in regressions)
                                                            p in Columns 4, 7, and 10 and the Imbens and
Wooldridge (2009) normalized difference ∆x = X 1 − X 0 / S02 + S12 in Columns 5, 8 and 11. Column 12
shows the p-value from an F-test of the joint significance of all treatment indicators. Standard deviations in
parentheses; estimated standard errors in brackets. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                               A5
                     Table A4: Information Treatment – Sample Allocation
                                 LPP + Subsidy Communities

    Number of:                                 Neighborhoods      Households     Eligible Households
    Neighborhood: No visit                            48              2,307              1,758
       Household: No visit                                           2,307               1,758
    Neighborhood: Implicit Information                46             2,015               1,540
       Household: No visit                                           1,015                770
       Household: Implicit                                            1,000               770
    Neighborhood: Explicit Information               136              6,566              4,848
       Household: No visit                                           2,187               1,609
       Household: Implicit                                            2,184              1,614
       Household: Explicit                                            2,195              1,625
    Total                                            230             10,888              8,146


Notes: This table shows the allocation of the sample to information treatments in LPP + Subsidy commu-
nities. First, neighborhoods were assigned to No Visit, Implicit Information or Explicit Information. Then,
households within these neighborhoods were assigned to household-level treatments: again, No Visit, Implicit
Information or Explicit Information. The design was triangular in the sense that all households in No Visit
neighborhoods were assigned to No Visit, households in Implicit neighborhoods were assigned either to No
Visit or Implicit, and households in Explicit neighborhoods were assigned to No Visit, Implicit or Explicit.




                                                    A6
                                     Table A5: Information Treatment:
                          Descriptive Statistics and Balance Across Neighborhoods

    Neighborhood IT assignment:                All     No Visit             Implicit                      Explicit             Joint
                                             Mean       Mean      Mean        Diff      ∆x      Mean        Diff      ∆x       p-val.
                                             (S.D.)     (S.D.)    (S.D.)     [S.E.]             (S.D.)     [S.E.]
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
    Neighborhood characteristics:
    Share with access to latrine              0.773     0.732      0.775     0.043     0.106     0.789   0.057       0.155     0.398
                                             (0.259)   (0.278)    (0.290)   [0.054]             (0.239) [0.042]
    Share w. access to hygienic latrine       0.259     0.244      0.220    −0.023     −0.077    0.279   0.035       0.120     0.199
                                             (0.212)   (0.205)    (0.223)   [0.041]             (0.209) [0.032]
    Share open defecation                     0.301     0.331      0.312    −0.019     −0.045    0.285 −0.046        −0.120    0.535
                                             (0.276)   (0.286)    (0.312)   [0.057]             (0.257) [0.043]
    Share landless                            0.464     0.476      0.523     0.047     0.123     0.436 −0.039        −0.118   0.081∗
                                             (0.239)   (0.260)    (0.283)   [0.049]             (0.206) [0.037]
    Number of households                       39.4      36.6       33.0     −3.6      −0.113     43.2   06.6∗       0.200    0.004∗∗∗
                                              (21.8)    (23.3)     (21.5)    [04.0]              (20.7)  [03.4]
    Number of eligible h.h.                    29.5      27.9       25.2     −2.7      −0.106     31.9    04.0       0.200    0.021∗∗
                                              (16.9)    (18.7)     (16.6)    [03.2]              (15.9)  [02.7]
    Household characteristics (among subsidy-eligible households):
    HH head female                            0.103     0.113      0.091 −0.021∗       −0.050    0.103    −0.010     −0.022    0.164
                                             (0.304)   (0.316)    (0.288) [0.011]               (0.304)   [0.010]
    HH head age                                40.5      40.7       40.1   −0.6        −0.031     40.6     −0.1      0.000     0.455
                                              (13.1)    (13.4)     (13.0)  [0.5]                 (13.1)    [0.4]
    HH head schooling yrs                       5.4       5.2        5.0   −0.3        −0.038      5.5      0.3      0.000    0.061∗
                                               (4.9)     (4.8)      (4.7)  [0.3]                  (5.0)    [0.2]
    Muslim                                    0.829     0.853      0.814  −0.039       −0.074    0.825    −0.028     −0.054    0.819
                                             (0.377)   (0.354)    (0.389) [0.068]               (0.380)   [0.052]
    Bengali                                   0.874     0.908      0.843  −0.065       −0.140    0.871    −0.037     −0.084    0.542
                                             (0.332)   (0.289)    (0.364) [0.062]               (0.335)   [0.045]
    HH head work:agriculture                  0.700     0.711      0.720   0.009       0.014     0.689    −0.022     −0.033    0.345
                                             (0.458)   (0.453)    (0.449) [0.025]               (0.463)   [0.020]
    HH decimals land owned                      7.6       7.5        6.7   −0.7        −0.042      7.9      0.4      0.000     0.107
                                              (14.9)    (13.5)     (11.9)  [0.6]                 (16.1)    [0.6]
    Proper meals during Monga                 0.502     0.514      0.472  −0.042       −0.060    0.507    −0.007     −0.010    0.606
                                             (0.500)   (0.500)    (0.499) [0.047]               (0.500)   [0.037]
    HH member w/diarrhea last week            0.042     0.042      0.046   0.004       0.014     0.041    −0.001     −0.004    0.769
                                             (0.201)   (0.201)    (0.210) [0.009]               (0.199)   [0.008]
    Has access to tube well or piped water    0.883     0.899      0.882  −0.017       −0.038    0.877    −0.022     −0.049    0.757
                                             (0.322)   (0.302)    (0.323) [0.040]               (0.329)   [0.029]
    Observation counts:
    Number of neighborhoods                    230        48                  46                            136
    Number of households                     10,888     2,307                2,015                         6,566
    Number of eligible households             8,146     1,758                1,540                         4,848



Notes: This table presents summary statistics (means and standard deviations) of key baseline variables for
all neighborhoods in LPP + Subsidy communities (Column 1), and for neighborhoods assigned to the No
Visit (Column 2), Implicit Information (Column 3) and Explicit Information (Column 6) treatments. For
Implicit and Explicit, we present the estimated difference with NopVisit in Columns 4 and 7 and the Imbens
and Wooldridge (2009) normalized difference ∆x = X 1 − X 0 / S02 + S12 in Columns 5 and 8. Column 9
shows the p-value from an F-test of the joint significance of both treatment indicators (LPP Only and LPP
+ Subsidy). Standard deviations in parentheses; estimated standard errors in brackets. Standard errors for
household-level regressions clustered at the neighborhood level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                                                                  A7
                                  Table A6: Information Treatment:
                     Descriptive Statistics and Balance by Household Assignment

    Household IT assignment                    All     No Visit            Implicit                     Explicit            Joint
                                             Mean       Mean      Mean       Diff      ∆x      Mean       Diff      ∆x      p-val.
                                             (S.D.)     (S.D.)    (S.D.)    [S.E.]             (S.D.)    [S.E.]
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)
    Household characteristics:
    Share with access to latrine              0.780     0.772      0.788   0.017      0.029     0.789   0.017      0.030    0.464
                                             (0.414)   (0.420)    (0.409) [0.016]              (0.408) [0.018]
    Share w. access to hygienic latrine       0.270     0.275      0.249  −0.026      −0.042    0.287   0.012      0.019    0.155
                                             (0.444)   (0.446)    (0.432) [0.017]              (0.453) [0.020]
    Share open defecation                     0.297     0.307      0.293  −0.014      −0.021    0.276  −0.031      −0.048   0.279
                                             (0.457)   (0.461)    (0.455) [0.018]              (0.447) [0.020]
    Landless                                  0.460     0.460      0.473   0.013      0.019     0.441  −0.018      −0.026   0.141
                                             (0.498)   (0.498)    (0.499) [0.013]              (0.497) [0.015]
    HH head female                            0.103     0.108      0.092 −0.017∗∗     −0.039    0.106  −0.002      −0.005   0.081∗
                                             (0.304)   (0.311)    (0.289) [0.008]              (0.308) [0.009]
    HH head age                                40.5      40.6       40.5   −0.1       −0.004     40.3   −0.3       0.000    0.671
                                              (13.1)    (13.2)     (13.1)  [0.3]                (13.0)  [0.4]
    HH head schooling yrs                       5.4       5.3        5.4    0.1       0.009       5.4    0.1       0.000    0.740
                                               (4.9)     (4.9)      (4.9)  [0.1]                 (4.9)  [0.1]
    Muslim                                    0.829     0.836      0.820  −0.016∗     −0.030    0.824  −0.012      −0.022   0.217
                                             (0.377)   (0.370)    (0.384) [0.010]              (0.381) [0.011]
    Bengali                                   0.874     0.882      0.862 −0.020∗∗     −0.042    0.871  −0.011      −0.024 0.066∗
                                             (0.332)   (0.323)    (0.345) [0.009]              (0.336) [0.010]
    HH head work:agriculture                  0.700     0.701      0.705   0.003      0.005     0.689  −0.012      −0.019   0.555
                                             (0.458)   (0.458)    (0.456) [0.012]              (0.463) [0.014]
    HH decimals land owned                      7.6       7.6        7.2   −0.3       −0.018      8.1    0.5       0.000    0.220
                                              (14.9)    (15.0)     (12.6)  [0.3]                (17.3)  [0.5]
    Proper meals during Monga                 0.502     0.504      0.487  −0.017      −0.024    0.520   0.016      0.023    0.120
                                             (0.500)   (0.500)    (0.500) [0.013]              (0.500) [0.015]
    HH member w/diarrhea last week            0.042     0.041      0.043   0.002      0.006     0.044   0.003      0.010    0.879
                                             (0.201)   (0.199)    (0.203) [0.005]              (0.205) [0.006]
    Has access to tube well or piped water    0.883     0.886      0.886  −0.000      −0.001    0.870 −0.016∗      −0.035   0.224
                                             (0.322)   (0.318)    (0.318) [0.008]              (0.337) [0.010]
    Observation counts:
    Number of households                     8,146      4,137               2,384                        1,625



Notes: This table presents summary statistics (means and standard deviations) of key baseline variables for
all eligible households in LPP + Subsidy communities (Column 1) and households assigned to the No Visit
(Column 2), Implicit Information (Column 3), and Explicit Information (Column 6). For the latter two cate-
gories, we present the estimated difference with the No Visit category (the omitted category in regressions)
                                                                                                  p         in
Columns 4 and 7, and the Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) normalized difference ∆x = X 1 − X 0 / S02 + S12
in Columns 5 and 8. Column 9 shows the p-value from an F-test of the joint significance of all treatment in-
dicators. Standard deviations in parentheses; estimated standard errors in brackets. Standard errors robust
to heteroskedasticity. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                  A8
