                                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                                          PEOPLE AND MACHINES:
$/22.$77+((92/9,1*5(/$7,216+,3%(7:((1&$3,7$/$1'6.,//,1
 MANUFACTURING 1860-1930 USING IMMIGRATION SHOCKS

                                                        Jeanne Lafortune
                                                          José Tessada
                                                          Ethan Lewis

                                                      Working Paper 21435
                                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21435


                                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                    July 2015




              We thank Richard Hornbeck, and participants in the First EH/Clio Lab UC Conference, the 2014 AEA
              Meetings, the 2014 NBER Summer Institute DAE session, the 2014 LACEA Meetings, 2015 SOLE-EALE
              conference and seminars at CEA-Univ. de Chile, FEN-Univ. de Chile, Maryland, Yale, Northeastern,
              Toronto, UC-Merced, and Colgate for their comments. Tessada acknowledges Fondecyt Grant Iniciación
              #11110101 and Conicyt Programa de Investigación Asociativa SOC1102 for funding. Lafortune thanks
              Conicyt Programa de Investigación Asociativa SOC1102. The usual disclaimer applies. We wish to
              thank Claudia Allende, Alejandra Benítez, Rodrigo Carril, Sofía Garcés, Sarah Morse, Francisco Muñoz
              and Fernanda Rojas for excellent research assistance and to Alejandro Guin-Po Bon, Joaquín Galeno,
              Miguel Perez, Dominique Araya, Camila Henríquez, Kayla Kesslen, Carla Larín, Mariana Traipe,
              Una Lee, and Gérard Lafortune for careful data entry. The views expressed herein are those of the
              authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

              NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
              reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
              NBER publications.

              © 2015 by Jeanne Lafortune, José Tessada, and Ethan Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
              text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
              including © notice, is given to the source.
People and Machines: A Look at the Evolving Relationship Between Capital and Skill In Manufacturing
1860-1930 Using Immigration Shocks
Jeanne Lafortune, José Tessada, and Ethan Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 21435
July 2015
JEL No. J24,N61,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the elasticity of substitution between capital and skill using variation across U.S.
counties in immigration-induced skill mix changes between 1860 and 1930. We find that capital began
as a q-complement for skilled and unskilled workers, and then dramatically increased its relative complementary
with skilled workers around 1890. Simulations of a parametric production function calibrated to our
estimates imply the level of capital-skill complementarity after 1890 likely allowed the U.S. economy
to absorb the large wave of less-skilled immigration with a modest decline in less-skilled relative wages.
 This would not have been possible under the older production technology.


Jeanne Lafortune                                       Ethan Lewis
Instituto de Economia                                  Department of Economics
Facultad de Ciencias                                   Dartmouth College
Economicas y Administrativas                           6106 Rockefeller Hall
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile               Hanover, NH 03755
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860                              and NBER
Macul, Santiago                                        ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
Chile
and IZA
jlafortune@uc.cl

José Tessada
Escuela de Administracion
Facultad de Ciencias
Economicas y Administrativas
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860
Macul, Santiago
Chile
jtessada@gmail.com
    Rising inequality and persistently high unemployment are once again raising concerns that
technological change is outpacing many workers’ ability to adapt to it (Brynjolfsson and McAffee,
2011).1 These concerns echo with stunning similarity those of earlier times of disruption, includ-
ing the Great Depression (e.g., Jerome, 1934; Keynes, 2008) and industrialization (e.g., Marx,
1932). Indeed, the conventional view is that the sorts of changes now leading to greater inequal-
ity have been ongoing since at least the early twentieth century (Goldin and Katz, 1998), and
possibly even earlier (Katz and Margo, 2013). In this view, capital-skill complementarity, com-
bined with the falling relative cost of capital (which embodies much of technological change),
have pushed up relative demand for skilled labor (See also Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull and Vi-
olante., 2000).2 In modern times this is thought to be due to advances in computers (e.g., Autor,
Levy and Murnane, 2003), but in an earlier era, qualitatively similar patterns of mechanization,
driven primarily by the spread of electricity, may have relatively benefitted skilled workers (e.g.,
Gray, 2013; Jerome, 1934).3
    Is this conventional view correct? This project revisits the origins of capital-skill comple-
mentarity using a common data source and identification strategy across the period both before
and after the mechanization of manufacturing, starting in the mid-nineteenth century and fin-
ishing at the outset of the Great Depression. Following the literature on technology and firms
during the period we study, we focus solely on the manufacturing sector.4 To identify the level
of complementarity between skill and capital, we exploit the predictable effect that large waves
of immigration (and, implicitly, immigration restrictions) in the nineteenth and early twentieth
century had on each U.S. county’s skill mix, and ask how capital intensity of the industries in the
area responded.5 We do not rely on actual regional patterns of immigration, but instead use an
“ethnic enclave” or “shift-share” style instrumental variable strategy which essentially imputes
the impact of immigration on skill mix based on apportioning national arrivals, by origin, to their
“ethnic enclaves” in a base year. This strategy has been used successfully in modern immigration
research (e.g., Card, 2001; Cortés, 2008), but until recently, has seen little application in historical
data (though see Goldin, 1994). Our approach is facilitated by manufacturing sector data we
have entered from tabulations of Censuses of Manufactures at the county/city and industry level
   1 See also “The Future of Jobs: The Onrushing Wave,” The Economist, January 2014.
   2 Inthis view, the reason inequality in the U.S. has not always been on an upward trajectory is that at some times
in U.S. history this demand trend has been offset by rising education levels (Goldin and Katz, 2008).
   3 We are glossing over the view that recent –and possibly past– technological change was “polarizing,” rather than

purely inequality increasing (e.g., Acemoglu and Autor, 2011; Autor et al., 2003; Goos and Manning, 2007; Gray, 2013;
Katz and Margo, 2013).
   4 This is an important caveat because technical change outside the sector may have been different (Katz and Margo,

2013). However, we believe the manufacturing sector is important in the period we are examining because its evolution
seems to be closely related to the exact technological innovations that have been mentioned in the literature as the
drivers of the changes around the turn of the twentieth century.
   5 This approach parallels the approach of Lewis (2011) used in modern manufacturing data, and Lafortune, Tessada

and Gonzalez-Velosa (2013) in historical agricultural data. The use of regional differences in skill mix to identify
capital-skill complementarity goes back to at least Griliches (1969).



                                                         1
from 1860 to 1930, and by skill mix and immigration data at the county level from the Censuses
of Population. This allows us to investigate whether, if we go back far enough in time, skilled
arrivals to an area ever induced local manufacturing plants to decrease their capital intensity,
consistent with capital being more complementary with unskilled than skilled labor, rather than
increase their capital intensity, consistent with capital being more complementary with skilled
labor, as it seems to be in modern manufacturing.
    Our data allow us to control for detailed industry effects, thus removing any confounding
factors such as changes in the production mix or other structural trends. In other words, we are
able to examine changes in factor intensity within industry in our preferred specification.6
    We will also use our estimates to try to infer something about the likely impact of immigration
during this era. It has previously been shown that, in theory, the impacts of immigration-driven
skill mix changes on relative wages can be substantially muted when capital complements skill
compared to when it does not (e.g., Lewis, 2013).7 Whether this makes any difference at realistic
parameter values, however, has never been evaluated. We turn to an era in which the set of pro-
duction choices may have been quite different from modern times, even while concerns about the
impact of technological change and immigration were quite similar to modern times, motivating
our interest.
    Our instrumental variables estimates suggest that immigration had a significant impact on
skill ratios –literacy rates– in local labor markets.8 Furthermore, capital intensity responded
to changing skill intensity, and its response changed over time. 1860-1880, capital’s response
was consistent with it being a q-complement of both skilled and unskilled labor, and, unlike
today, the complementarity was stronger with unskilled labor. This changed dramatically during
the period 1890-1930, when capital became relatively more complementary with skilled labor
(consistent with previous research on early twentieth century manufacturing Goldin and Katz
(1998)) and a q-substitute for unskilled labor.9 Shifts in industry mix are negligible in either
set of results.10 Despite the fact that we therefore find that immigration induces large within-
industry changes in skill ratios, simulations of a parametric production function calibrated to our
   6 This also allows another motivation for this analysis: we can use our approach to ask whether shifts in industry

mix are an important source of adjustment to immigration-driven skill mix shocks. Simple small, open economy
models predict that shifts in input mix will be absorbed, at least in part, by changes in traded industry mix (see, e.g.,
Leamer, 1995). Although this sort of model enjoys little empirical support in modern data, one study finds strong
support for it in agricultural data from this era (Lafortune et al., 2013), reopening this question.
   7 The relative wage impacts of skill mix shocks may also be muted during periods when modes of production of

substantially different factor intensities overlap, such as, potentially, artisanal and factory production (Beaudry, Doms
and Lewis, 2010; Caselli and Coleman, 2006)
   8 Although this first result is very basic, it is also important. Without it –if, as it has been suggested, U.S. labor

markets at this time were highly geographically integrated by inter-city migration (Rosenbloom, 2002)– our approach
would not be feasible.
   9 The response of capital we estimate is not always statistically significant, however.
  10 This reinforces that the significant response of industry mix in the agriculture sector to immigration during this

period (Lafortune et al., 2013) has to do with the lack of specificity of capital in agriculture, rather than something
else about this period.


                                                           2
estimates suggest that the flood of less-skilled immigrants from the turn of the twentieth century
likely had a modest impact on less-skilled relative wages (a 7% decline), as they were mitigated
by a decrease in capital intensity in response to the change in skill ratios.11 In contrast, under
the older production technology in which capital was not a substitute for, but a complement of
low-skill labor, the same immigration wave would have pushed down low-skilled relative wages
severely (perhaps as much as 35%).



1      Historical Background

Immigrants have shaped the U.S. manufacturing sector throughout its history. From Samuel
Slater memorizing and bringing the plans for textile machines to the U.S., to the skilled British
and other European artisans of the nineteenth century, and finally to the masses of less-skilled
immigrant labor filling factories, immigrants have consistently played a prominent role in U.S.
manufacturing (e.g., Berthoff, 1953). Interestingly, a prominent contemporaneous account of
early twentieth century manufacturing states that its main initial motivation was to investigate
how well mechanization had allowed the manufacturing sector to adapt to the severe immi-
gration restrictions of the mid-1920s (Jerome, 1934).12 The study’s purpose was later shifted to
include an investigation of the contribution of technological change to unemployment. This was
of heightened concern during the Great Depression, when the study was completed, but it comes
up continually and is being raised again in today’s relatively high unemployment environment
(Brynjolfsson and McAffee, 2011).
      The two motivations for Jerome’s study are really two sides of the same coin: new technolo-
gies have different skill requirements, and immigration (or its restriction) can shift the set of
skills available. Many have argued the arrival of factories reduced demand for skilled artisan
labor but raised demand for less-skilled production workers performing simple, repetitive tasks.
For example, Atack, Bateman and Margo (2004) found using 1850-80 data that larger manufac-
turing plants –an indicator of factory (non-artisanal) production– paid lower wages, an indicator
of lower average skill. On the flip side, it is the availability of less-skilled labor to fill factories
that enabled the adoption of factory production. In particular, Goldin and Sokoloff (1984) argue
that such labor was only readily available in Northern U.S. in the mid-nineteenth century, which
is why the north industrialized first. Women and children initially filled such factories; in the
South, in contrast, women and children’s labor was already demanded by agriculture. Rosen-
    11 We
        have also directly estimated the impact of immigration on the wage structure using the wage gap between
“salaried officials” and “wage workers” in the census of manufacturing data, which is available starting in 1890, and
found no significant relationship. However, at best this provides a noisy proxy for relative wages and these estimates
are confounded by direct compositional impacts of immigration.
  12 On page 3, Jerome states “Our survey had its origin in the hectic years of the post-War decade as an inquiry

into the extent to which the effects of immigration restriction upon the supply of labor were likely to be offset by an
increasing use of labor-saving machinery”.


                                                          3
bloom (2002) makes a similar argument about the latter half of the nineteenth century: he argues
a shortage of skilled labor in local markets might have pushed producers towards adopting more
labor-intensive methods (e.g., p. 87). Kim (2007) shows that in 1850-1880, U.S. counties with
higher immigrant density had larger manufacturing establishments. Chandler (1977) argues that
modern manufacturing required professional management, and you also see evidence of a shift
to more “white collar” jobs in the late nineteenth century (Katz and Margo, 2013).
    After the switch to factory production from an artisanal system, manufacturing is thought to
have begun, perhaps somewhere around the turn of the twentieth century, a switch to continu-
ous production system relying increasingly on electricity and large (more recently, automated)
machinery, which Jerome called “mechanization.”13 The exact timing may have differed by in-
dustry, and of particular interest to us, location.14 Goldin and Katz (1998) argue and provide
evidence that the latter change is associated with greater skill and capital requirements, and so
capital and skill became complementary by the early twentieth century, as they continue to be in
modern times (e.g., Griliches, 1969; Lewis, 2011). They show that industries with greater capital-
and electricity intensity had higher average production wages in 1919 and 1929, and had more
educated workers in 1939. There are some different, or perhaps more nuanced, views of what
mechanization did to skill requirements. Gray (2013) found that states which electrified more
saw large relative increases in the employment of non-production workers, but among produc-
tion workers decreases in the proportion of jobs requiring “dexterity” - which includes craftsman
- relative to those requiring manual labor. She argues the overall effect was to “polarize” labor
demand, as craftsmen were likely in the middle of the wage distribution. In contrast, Jerome
(1934) argued that conveyer belts and other handling technologies may have reduced demand
for manual labor.
    In an earlier era, Goldin and Katz (1998) argue that factory output likely substituted for
the less capital-intensive artisanal production. This is a sensible view, but it is only directly
supported by a solitary study: James and Skinner (1985). They show that in 1850 capital and
labor were more substitutable in manufacturing sectors that were more skill-intensive than in
sectors that were less skill-intensive, though the paper does not describe how the skill intensity
of the sectors was assessed.
    Many of the studies above use variation in some capital-use measure –the right-hand side
variable– to estimate the response of skill mix measures. We examine the other side of the
coin: how immigration-induced changes in skill mix are associated with adjustments in various
  13 Goldin and Katz (1998) present a slightly richer evolution in which the assembly line is another step between

factories and mechanized continuous production.
  14 As an example of cross-industry heterogeneity, Berthoff (1953) describes how machines for weaving cotton textiles

were developed much earlier than those for weaving woolen textiles. Similarly, Jerome’s surveys suggest that steel
and iron adopted mechanized production methods earlier than other industries. In terms of regional heterogeneity,
Jerome (1934) found considerable cross-state variation in industrial power use, which is also the variation that Gray
(2013) relies on in her study on the impact of mechanization on skill demand.


                                                          4
measures of capital use. Like the twin motivations for Jerome’s study, both approaches should
reveal the nature of the complementarity between capital and skills (demonstrated below). Our
approach will also give insight in the ability of the economy to “absorb” large immigrant inflows,
as adjustments to technology can help mitigate the impact of immigration on the wages of native-
born workers (Lewis, 2013).
      There is another way in which the economy may have absorbed immigrants: immigrants may
shift the industry mix, as Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) trade theory would suggest. In early twentieth
century agriculture, for example, Lafortune et al. (2013) find evidence that immigration shifted
the mix of crops towards more labor-intensive ones. This is interesting per se because, in the
extreme case where HO fully holds, an economy can adjust to skill mix changes without any
long-run impact on the wage structure; more generally, such adjustments mitigate the wage im-
pact of immigration. In addition, changes in industry mix may confound changes in production
technology: to the extent that production technology differs across industries, an impact of immi-
gration on industry mix may make it (spuriously) appear that production technology has shifted
at an aggregate level. The solution is to examine changes in production technology within de-
tailed industries –in other words, to hold industry constant– a purpose which motivates our data
collection, described below. Before turning to that, however, we describe a theoretical approach
will motivate our empirical approach.



2      Theoretical Framework

Our work starts from a simple framework that considers a single (aggregate) production function
with three production factors: capital (K), high skilled labor (H) and low skilled labor (L), which
is a common formulation both in the immigration and the technology adoption literatures (see for
example Lewis, 2011, 2013), so let Y = g( H, L, K ), where Y is aggregate output.15 We assume the
production function is constant returns to scale and satisfies standard quasi-concavity constraints
(g j < 0 and g jj < 0 ∀ j ∈ { H, L, K }). Throughout we also assume that the capital is supplied
elastically to that production method and that the interest rate is fixed at the economy level.
      Under these assumptions, the capital stock adjusts to maintain equality
                                                                          between its marginal
                                                                                        ∂Y
product and the cost of capital, which implies that in equilibrium d ln                 ∂K   = 0. Under constant
    15 Individual
                labor markets, c, may differ in overall TFP, say Yc = Ac ∗ g( H, L, K ), where Ac is TFP, but otherwise
have identical production functions.




                                                          5
returns to scale, this translates into,16
                                                              2
                                                              ∂ Y                                ∂ Y2
                                                           L ∂K∂L                             H ∂K∂H
                             d ln K =                 2
                                                     ∂ Y      ∂ Y       2    d ln L +         2
                                                                                             ∂ Y      ∂ Y   2    d ln H                            (1)
                                                  H ∂K∂H + L ∂K∂L                         H ∂K∂H + L ∂K∂L

    Substracting d ln L from both sides of this, we derive the following expression, which de-
scribes the impact of a change in the endowment of high-to-low-skilled workers on the capital-
to-low-skilled labor ratio:
                                                                                      2
                                                                                    ∂ Y
                                                                                 H ∂K∂H
                                                d ln(K/L) =                  2
                                                                           ∂ Y      ∂ Y   2   d ln( H/L)                                           (2)
                                                                        L ∂K∂L + H ∂K∂H

    The denominator in equation (2) is positive if the production function displays decreasing
returns to capital, which was assumed. Therefore, the sign of the numerator indicates input
                                                                                                                                            ∂2 Y
complementarity with high skill labor: capital and high skill labor are “q-complements” if       >                                         ∂K∂H
                                         ∂2 Y
0 and “q-substitutes” if        < 0. One can also subtract d ln H from both sides to derive a
                                        ∂K∂H
symmetric expression for the complementarity between capital and low skill labor from the
response of the capital-to-high-skill labor ratio to changes in the relative endowment of high skill
workers. The problem with this approach is that it is not robust to mismeasurement of who is
high and low skill, which is a serious concern in the economic census data we will use (which
at best contains only crude cuts of “skill.”). If our empirical definition of “L” in the left-hand
side of (2) included some high skill workers, what we would get instead is a weighted average of
the complementarity between capital and high and capital and low skill labor. What’s worse, in
the earliest census data we have, we can observe only the total workforce, N = L + H. Defining
φh = H/N, the share of workers who are high skill, the best we can observe in these years is:
                                   2                                2                                        2
                                                                                                                              !
                             ∂ Y                ∂ Y                                                        ∂ Y
                      −φh L ∂K∂L + (1 − φh ) H ∂K∂H                                                     H ∂K∂H
  d ln(K/N ) =                   ∂ Y   2  ∂ Y          2                    d ln( H/L) =            2∂ Y      ∂ Y 2    − φh       d ln( H/L) (3)
                              L ∂K∂L + H ∂K∂H                                                     L ∂K∂L + H ∂K∂H

    Note that the relationship between K/N and H/L is not dispositive, on its own, of the level
of complementarity between capital and either type of labor. However, comparing it with φh
indicates whether capital and high-skill labor are complementary or substitutes and the relative
degree of that relationship compared to that of low-skill workers.
    We can also obtain similar information simply by evaluating the response of the capital-
                                           
  16 The                               ∂Y                                                 HgKH              LgKL        KgKK
           total derivative d ln       ∂K       = d ln gK can be written out as            gK d ln H    +    gK d ln L + gK d ln K.   Set this equal
                                              HgKH                LgKL
to zero and solve for d ln K =              − KgKK
                                              −    d ln H    By homogeneity −KgKK = HgKH + LgKL , which when
                                                                  KgKK d ln L.
substituted in produces expression (1). Also, as it is assumed that gKK < 0, the denominator is positive.




                                                                                  6
output ratio, given by:
                                                         2
                                                         ∂ Y            2
                                                                      ∂ Y
                                                  s L H ∂K∂H − s H L ∂K∂L
                                 d ln(K/Y ) =           2
                                                       ∂ Y      ∂ Y 2       d ln( H/L)                                (4)
                                                    L ∂K∂L + H ∂K∂H

              ∂Y
where s H = H ∂H /Y is high-skill labor’s output share and s L = L ∂Y
                                                                   ∂L /Y is the low-skill’s share.
If capital is particularly complementary to low-skill labor, we would thus anticipate a negative
response of the capital-output ratio to an increase in the skill ratio.
    The relationship of capital intensity to skill ratios is important in understanding how changes
in capital affect relative skill demand. This can be seen explicitly by rewriting (4) as

                                                          ∂ ln(WH /WL )
                                                                ∂K
                                d ln(K/Y ) = Ys H s L      ∂2 Y       ∂2 Y
                                                                             d ln( H/L)                               (5)
                                                        H ∂K∂H   + L ∂K∂L

The numerator of (5) contains the response of high-skill relative wages (with WH = ∂Y/∂H and
WL = ∂Y/∂L), assuming workers are paid their marginal product, to capital, which has the same
sign as the response of capital-output ratios to increases in high-skill relative supply.17 (5) is an
explicit reminder us that complementarities work in both directions: the estimated response of
the capital-to-output ratio to changes in relative skill supply also reveals the other side of the
coin, how capital adoption affects relative skill demand. This is useful, as measures of the wage
structure are quite crude during this era.
    Indeed, our estimates of the relationships above could also be used to learn something about
the likely magnitude of the response of relative wage to changes in skill endowments. A simple
derivative identity reveals that

                         d ln(WH /WL )   ∂ ln(WH /WL ) ∂ ln(WH /WL ) ∂ ln K
                                       =              +                        ,                                      (6)
                           d ln( H/L)      ∂ ln( H/L)       ∂ ln K  ∂ ln( H/L)

        ∂ ln(WH /WL )
where     ∂ ln( L/H )
                        represents the short-run (capital fixed) relative wage adjustment to a change in
relative skill supply, which is negative. Note that this expression implies that the long-run relative
wage impacts of a change in skill ratios (say, induced by immigration) may be smaller or larger
than this depending on the relative complementarity of capital with skill. If capital complements
                                                                                                      ∂ ln(WH /WL )
skilled labor relative to unskilled labor – if the response in (5) is positive, so that     >0             ∂ ln K
         ∂ ln K
and          > 0 – then the long-run response of relative wages to immigration is diminished
      ∂ ln( H/L)
by the adjustment of capital.18 Relative wage impacts are larger than this when capital is skill
  17 Indeed, as will describe again in Section 5, a positive response to capital of the marginal product of skilled

labor that is larger in proportional terms than the response of unskilled labor is often what is called “capital-skill
complementarity” (e.g., Krusell et al., 2000). We will instead attempt to describe this more precisely by saying
“capital is a (q-)complement of skilled labor relative to unskilled labor.”
  18 While for this to be true it is necessary that capital be not just a relative, but an absolute complement of skill –




                                                             7
neutral. Two specific contrasting examples of prominently used production functions may be
helpful in delineating this point. It is common for studies of the modern-day labor market
impact of immigration to model labor demand using a constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
                                                          σ −1  σ −1
                                                                       (1σ−−γ1)σ
production function featuring separable capital, like K γ H σ + L σ               . In such a setup,
capital’s share is fixed at γ and

                                      d ln(WH /WL )   ∂ ln(WH /WL )
                                                    =               = −1/σ                                                (7)
                                        d ln( H/L)      ∂ ln( H/L)

    Put differently, the response of relative wages to relative supply estimates of the inverse elas-
ticity of substitution between H and L which, more the point, is unaffected by the adjustment of
capital. At another extreme, in the CES production function featuring capital-skill complemen-
                                     σ −1  σ −1
                                                  σ−σ 1
tarity in Autor et al. (2003), (K + L) σ + H σ           , even if the elasticity of substitution between
                                                                                  d ln(WH /WL )
and H and L remains the same (σ), the long-run relationship                  = 0 as skill mix changes
                                                                                    d ln( H/L)
are entirely absorbed by adjustments in capital. Intuitively, fixed rental rates for capital pin down
the price of labor inputs, as capital and low-skill labor are perfect substitutes in this extreme form
of capital-skill complementarity.


Alternative Models             Empirically, apparent shifts in capital intensity are potentially confounded
by endogenous shifts in industry mix predicted by simple open economy models (so-called “Ry-
bczynski effects”). With one historical exception (Lafortune et al., 2013), these have generally
been found to be small in response to immigration-induced skill mix shocks (e.g., Card and
Lewis, 2007; Gonzales and Ortega, 2011; Lewis, 2003). The primary way in which we will ad-
dress this is with industry controls, a key motivation for our data collection.
    Up to now we have worked under the assumption that we can represent the economy with
an aggregate production function. However, this is not necessarily the only way to model the ad-
justment to the changes in the relative endowment of high-to-low-skilled labor. In particular, as
Beaudry and Green (2003) suggest, if there are two modes of production, each of them character-
ized by different intensities of use of the factors, then the economy can respond to the changes in
the relative endowments choosing a different mode of production rather than just moving along
the same isoquant as before. In this era, this might be represented by a shift between “artisanal”
and “factory” production. Since the latter is thought to be more capital-intensive, this potentially
also confounds our estimates. Researchers typically proxy for factor production with plant size
(e.g., Kim, 2007), so we will also study plant size as an outcome (in the appendix).
                                                          ∂ ln K
we need the response in (2) to be positive so that     ∂ ln( H/L)
                                                                    > 0 – in this this three-factor setup capital is always an
absolute q-complement of skill      (∂2 Y/∂K∂H    > 0) whenever it is a relative q-complement of skill (that is, whenever
∂ ln(WH /WL )               ∂2 Y      ∂2 Y      ∂2 Y
     ∂ ln K     > 0). As H ∂K∂H  + L ∂K∂L  = −K ∂K 2 > 0, the larger cross derivative must be positive.




                                                               8
3      Empirical Methodology

3.1      Baseline equation

Following the results from our model, we want to estimate this equation (for J = N, Y)
                                                                                             
                                            H                                               H
                 lnK/Jcit = γearly ln                    × 1 (t ∈ {early}) + γlate ln                    × 1 (t ∈ {late})
                                            L       ct                                      L       ct                      (8)
                                        +νc × 1 (t ∈ {early}) + δc × 1 (t ∈ {late}) + ηt + µit + ecit

where K/Jcit corresponds to either the capital per worker or the capital-output ratio in industry
i in county c at time t, ( H/L)ct is the high-to-low-skilled labor ratio in the county c at time t,
1 (t ∈ {early}) and 1 (t ∈ {late}) are, respectively, indicators for the first and second half of our
sample period (defined below), and νc , δc ηt , and µit represent country, time and industry-time
fixed effects.19 All standard errors will be clustered at the geographical level and regressions are
weighted as to give each geographical location the same weight.
      Since our interest lies in comparing the evolution of the production function over our sample,
we divide it between an early period and a late period, allowing γ to change between the two.
We unfortunately do not have sufficient variation to reliably estimate γ separately by decade,
though we can estimate it with as few as two decades. So what we do instead is move the cut-off
points between an “early” and and “late” period to attempt to identify when, if any, changes
seem to have occurred in the relationship we attempt to estimate. Since historical analyses by
Chandler (1977) and Jerome (1934) argue that the Second Industrial Revolution transformed the
productive process of manufacturing, we will look for a change around the 1880-1890 period,
years during which some of the elements of the Second Industrial Revolution took place.
      The interpretation of the coefficient γ depends on the relevant outcome that is being estimated
(as shown by the equations (3) and (4)). In equation (4), for example, where ln(K/Y ) is the
outcome, it captures the complementarity between capital and skill relative to capital and low-
skill: γ will be positive if capital complements skilled labor relative to unskilled labor (γ > 0
implies that ∂ ln(WH /WL )/∂K > 0).
      Motivated in part by Goldin and Katz (1998)’s argument that capital-skill complementarity
arises across sectors (in their model, across the combination of a machine- and goods-producing
sectors), we also explore whether county- or city-wide (aggregate) outcomes are influenced by
estimating the following equation, which corresponds to equation (8) but using data aggregated
    19 Results
             where we keep the break-point of the county fixed effects constant and only alter the break-point for the
skill ratios are similar in the industry-by-city regressions and are available upon request. We are also able, in this
context, to add one more period to our analysis, namely using as “early” up to 1900 and the results are similar.




                                                                    9
at the geographic level,
                                                                                         
                                        H                                               H
             lnK/Jct = γearly ln                     × 1 (t ∈ {early}) + γlate ln                    × 1 (t ∈ {late})
                                        L       ct                                      L       ct                      (9)
                                                +νc × 1 (t ∈ {early}) + δc × 1 (t ∈ {late}) + ηt + ect

In this specification K/Jct corresponds to the aggregate outcome variables from the previous
estimation equation measured at the county level. Standard errors are again clustered at the
county level and regressions are unweighted. In this case we can explore how the county as
whole adjusts to the changes in the skill-mix of workers. Estimates of (9) may alternatively
viewed as suffering from aggregation bias: shifts in output mix towards industries that use a
different production technology could confound the results. This is why the industry-city data,
which allow us to estimate (8) instead, are useful. The difference between Equations (8) and (9)
would be driven by industrial composition shifts that occurred in response to changes in factor
endowments. In the appendix, we also test this directly by using as an outcome variable the
share of labor in industries that use some factors more intensively.


3.2     Identification strategy

Although our estimation equation and model are tightly linked, in practice identification is an
issue: skill mix is likely to be endogenous, as workers’ location (or skill acquisition) decisions are
influenced by where their skills are most highly paid. Thus, depending on how our outcomes are
correlated with relative wages, we could be over or under-estimating the relationship between
our variables of interest. Furthermore, it is important to note that manufacturing is only one
sector in the broad economy – a minority of employment – so local demand shocks outside
the manufacturing could be an important source of endogeneity.20 It is thus difficult to sign
exactly the bias of the basic correlations. OLS estimates might also be attenuated by error in the
measurement of skill ratios due to sample variation.21
      To solve these problem, we attempt to identify relative skill supply shocks using immigration-
driven shocks to the relative endowment of high-to-low-skilled labor. As immigrants are them-
selves likely to elect locations based on economic conditions, we use in place of actual immi-
gration, the impact that predicted inflows of immigrants, based on historical regional settlement
   20 According to the Census of Population, it ranges from roughly to one quarter to one third of employment in

identified cities over the years in our sample, using industry codes constructed by Ruggles, Alexander, Genadek,
Goeken, Schroeder and Sobek (2010).
   21 We can get some sense of the magnitude of this using tabulated data on literacy rates by area (Minnesota Popula-

tion Center, 2011), which are available for some (but not all) of the years in our sample. The comparison between our
estimated literacy rates and the tabulated ones, conditional on the full set of fixed effects, suggests that OLS estimates
might be 10-15% attenuated due to measurement error.




                                                                10
patterns, would have on skill ratios. Specifically, the instrument is given by:
                                                                             
                                                                       Njc0
                                                                                         
                                                              ∑j       Nj0        HS_jt
                                         \) = ln 
                                     ln( H/L                                                                      (10)
                                             ct
                                                                             
                                                                       Njc0
                                                              ∑j       Nj0        LS_jt

where j represents each country or state of birth, c (US) county, and t period; N is the stock of
immigrants/natives (not broken out by skill); HS_jt and LS_jt are the national stocks of high-
skill and low-skill individuals from each country or state in each period t, respectively. Note that
                                                      Njc0
the numerator and denominator includes                Nj0 ,   which represents the share of individuals from
j living in c in some base year. This is used to apportion the current stocks of immigrants by
country and natives by state of birth to locations within the U.S. Thus, the instrument represents
the ratio in the number of high- and low-skill individuals, respectively, that would be living in
c if immigrants and natives were still apportioned across counties in the same manner as they
were in the base year. This style of instrument has been widely used to study modern-day
immigration impacts (see, for example Card, 2001; Cortés, 2008; Lewis, 2011) but until recently
has seen limited application in this historical context. It attempts to circumvent the problem
of endogenous location choice by allocating individuals to counties based on the location of
immigrants from one’s country of birth or one’s state of birth in previous waves. We use the
previous location of all immigrants instead of allowing high- and low-skilled individuals from a
given country to be distributed in a distinct way such that these shares are less likely to capture
economic conditions particularly suitable for a given skill level. Lafortune and Tessada (2013)
provided significant evidence of ethnic network’s role in the determination of the first location of
immigrants arriving to the U.S., which supports the validity of the instrument. This contrasts a bit
with Rosenbloom (2002)’s argument that labor markets were highly integrated by interregional
(at least within the North) and even international migration (from Europe) by the late nineteenth
century, although he also provides evidence that explicit international recruiting was a trivial
component of factory hires (chapter 3). We return to this argument when we discuss the first
stage: if true in the extreme, there would be no first stage relationship and our approach would
not be feasible. As immigration patterns evolved over the entire period, we will use two base
years: 1850 for 1860-1880 and 1880 for 1890-1940.
    We modify the typical instrument by adding migration across states by natives as well. (10)
including only immigrant groups in the index j does quite a good job of predicting immigrant
skill ratios. However, we need something which predicts proportional total changes in skill ratios,
so we need to normalize it by some defensibly exogenous measure of the skill ratio of natives
in the area. The approach we settled on was to treat natives’ state of origin as another set of
“groups.”22
  22 Another approach we tried was similar to Smith (2012)’s approach of obtaining the predicted skills of natives. We

used the base year ratio of high- and low-skill natives interacted with the national growth rate of skills among native-


                                                          11
    The identification strategy has to fulfill the following two requirements to be valid. First,
the total national stock of immigrant from a particular country at time t must not be correlated
with differential shocks to manufacturing industries across counties. Given that few counties
include a very large fraction of immigrants from a given country, it is difficult to imagine that
the increase in the number of immigrants from a given skill group in a given country is driven
by the higher demand for that skill in one or two counties. Second, the location choice made
by immigrants in base years among counties should be uncorrelated with differential changes in
the manufacturing innovations of the future. Namely, immigrants did not locate in cities where
they anticipated that their skills was going to become more valuable in the future. We attenuate
the concern regarding this second condition by using the stock of all immigrants (not only the
ones of a given skill level) to predict the location of both skilled and unskilled workers in the
future. This is preferred because the location choices of skilled versus unskilled workers in the
base year may be more related to the anticipated changes in the manufacturing sector than the
location choices of their aggregate.
    Thus our instrument represents a predicted skill ratio based on the interaction of initial con-
ditions and national changes in the skill and country-composition of workers. Because it is struc-
tured like the actual skill ratio, a first stage coefficient of one means that predicted immigration-
driven changes in skill mix have a one-for-one impact on the actual skill ratio; coefficients differ-
ent than one imply that the actual skill mix is offset by either native migratory response or other
offsetting demographic changes (for example, if trends in native-born literacy differed in high-
and low-immigration markets).



4    Data and Descriptive Statistics

Information regarding the number of high and low-skill individuals in a given locality can be
obtained in each decade from IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) from 1860 to 1930 (except in 1890,
which are estimated from 100% tabulations in U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census
Office, 1897, –see C.4 in the Data Appendix). There are really two options for defining “skill” in
these data: occupation or literacy.23 An advantage of literacy is that it is something close to a pre-
labor market skill, whereas occupation-derived measures are a match between workers’ skills and
local labor market demand conditions. Furthermore, literacy is available uniformly during the
period. It also correlates relatively well with the distinction of production and non-production
workers where literacy would have been essential for the second type of employment but not for
born workers. Thus, this version of the instrument represented the predicted skill ratio given the initial locations of
immigrants and natives and national changes in the country mix of immigrants and the skill mix of immigrants and
natives. Similar results were obtained and are available upon request.
  23 Completed education is not available until 1940; only measures of school enrolment for youth are available prior

to that time.



                                                          12
the first. Finally, it has also been documented that US natives achieved higher rates of growth in
literacy than sending countries, making immigration particularly important in determining the
illiteracy of the US labor force.
    Recall that we use predicted immigration as a shock to skill mix local labor markets that
immigration generates over the period 1860 to 1930. This is a period of great potential for this
purpose as immigration flows were very large. It also includes periods of slower immigration
driven by potentially exogenous factors (Civil War, First World War) and by a dramatic change in
the legal environment (1924’s Johnson Act). We propose to use an instrumental variable approach
as detailed above in equation (10). To construct this instrument, we require a reliable estimate of
the location of immigrants of different origins in a “base year” (the Njc0 /Nj0 in (10)). Recall that
we use two different base years, 1850 and 1880. For both we obtained 100% samples. For 1850,
the data came from the preliminary samples of the North Atlantic Population Project (Ruggles et
al., 2010) and by querying www.ancestry.com (for states not yet available); and for 1880, we used
a 100% sample from IPUMS. We use these 100% tables to alleviate concerns of small-cell biases
(see Aydemir and Borjas, 2010). We also need to obtain the national stock of immigrants from
each country by country/state of birth and skill. In principle, there are several ways we could
have constructed the national number of high and low-skill immigrants arriving after 1850. To
be as consistent as possible, we chose to measure the with the stocks from each country (and U.S.
state) in 1860 to 1930 by aggregating IPUMS data. The 1890 data had to again be constructed from
tabulations, and in some cases by interpolating between 1880 and 1900 data (see Data Appendix).
    Our outcome variables focus on the adjustment mechanisms in the manufacturing sector over
this period. Our conceptual framework calls for data at the level of the labor market x industry.
These can be obtained from published Manufacturing Census tabulations. Conveniently for our
analysis, manufacturing censuses occurred roughly concurrently with the Census of Population
over this entire period. Unfortunately, the tabulations are available only in paper format but we
have digitalized them.24
    One issue in covering such a long time series is that the unit of geography reported in these
tables changes over time. We merged counties over time to ensure that borders were very similar
between years. In 1860 and 1870, the data are only available by county while in 1880 and later, the
main geographic tabulations are for largest cities, occasionally supplemented by tabulations for
selected urban counties. Because of this change of geography, and because, with rare exception,
cities are within county boundaries, we have chosen to make “county” the unit of analysis for
our skill ratio measure, matching each city to the county they correspond to.25
  24 See Data Appendix for an exact description of all tables we entered for this project.
  25 The only significant exception to this is New York City, which spans multiple counties and whose county compo-
sition changes over time. We therefore construct New York City to cover the five “boroughs” (counties) that make it
up at the end of the period throughout the entire 1860-1930 period. This aggregates together Brooklyn and New York
City, which reported as separate cities in earlier years.



                                                        13
    In later years there is a minimum “cell size” to be included (often, at least 3 establishments)
while in 1860 and 1870, it appears that almost all establishments were tabulated.26 However, even
with these reporting restrictions, there is “balancedness” in the sense that the industries detailed
for each city often repeat, allowing us to use panel methods as detailed in the empirical methods
section.27
    While we obtained measures for a variety of outcomes, we here focus on capital, labor and
output, which are the ingredients of our theoretical framework. Value of products and costs are
available for the full period, which allows us to define value-added as our measure of output
(Y). To measure labor (N), we use the measure of all workers. Value of capital, our key variable,
is only available from 1860 to 1920. However, in 1910, 1920 and 1930, we have a measure of
horsepower which we use to obtain a proxy measure of capital for 1930 based on the relationship
between horsepower and capital in the two previous decades.28 Since this measure of capital
includes all forms of capital (land, buildings, machinery and equipment), we may also wish
to look at a measure that focuses a bit more directly on machines instead of land. We first
propose to use horsepower directly. As we discussed before, this variable is available for 1910-
1930. Before 1910, we impute horsepower from machinery capital for 1890 and 1900, which is
separately reported in these two years.29 Before 1890, we were unable to obtain any similar
measures but from the sample data of Atack and Bateman (1999), we were able to find evidence
that very few firms had positive horsepower in 1860. We thus replace our measure of horsepower
with 0.1 for 1860 for all industries and counties.30 Finally, capital utilization may also respond
to skill ratios so we use expenditure on fuel and rent of power (in some years it is a single
category while in others, it was decomposed) as an alternative measure of capital which may
capture more utilization than purchase of capital. Again, since that variable is only available
from 1890 onwards, we used micro-data from Atack and Bateman (1999) to determine that few
firms devoted large amounts to fuel and power in 1860 and we thus proxy it with 0.1 for all
industries and counties in that year.
    From 1890 onwards, we can also distinguish between wage earners and salaried officials,
something that we will use to proxy for production and non-production workers, following
Goldin and Katz (1998). We use IPUMS data to estimate φH = 0.85, the fraction of workers in
manufacturing that were literate. From there, we can impute production shares, s L and s H , by
allocating the wage-bill of each worker type (production/nonproduction) to literate and illiterate
  26 Home    industries, which may have been important in these early years, were not included; there was also a sales
threshold for inclusion.
  27 Industries were matched by hand by the authors, aggregating where necessary to create consistency over time.

Census reports were used from 1900 onwards where merging and disaggregation were detailed. For periods previous
to that, some comparative tables were used as a guide. Details are provided in the Data Appendix.
  28 ln
     \  (K ) = 0.77839346ln( Horsepower ) – see data Appendix
  29 Theestimated relationship from state-level tabulations is Horsepower
                                                                     \        = 0.004 ∗ M&ECapital –see Data Appendix.
  30 Includingthis does little to alter the results of our “late” period but does allow us to estimate a parameter for the
“early” period which is why we chose to make this assumption.


                                                           14
workers according to their representation in each type. This is likely a lower-bound estimate of
s H since it assumes no return to skill within production or non-production workers. We obtain
estimates of s L = 0.0787 and s H = 0.5085, implying that the capital share was around 40 percent,
consistent with Taylor and Williamson (1997).
      We restrict our sample of analysis to any county that was included in Census of Manufactures
tabulations over this period in at least three different years. In the aggregate analysis, we include
all industries for a given city/county. In the industry by area analysis, we exclude the residual
“All other industries” cells, as they are not comparable across years or areas and also exclude
industry-year cells where the industry appeared in no more than 2 areas in that year.31 Merged
all together, we obtain a very rich panel including 37,278 industry-city-year observations. This
includes a total 175 areas (more in some years than in others) and 137 industries (our classification
over time generated 150 separate industries but 13 of them were eliminated due to the fact that
they had too few observations in a given year –see Data Appendix for a list). These areas cover on
average 58 percent of the U.S. immigrant population, and the industry division is very detailed.
      The means of our sample are shown in Table 1 in which we present the two different distinc-
tions we will make between early and late period. In the first panel, we call “early” 1860-1880
and the rest as late. In the second panel, we move our window by 10 years, implying that all
observations from the 19th century are called “early”. What we can observe is that there is capital
deepening over the full period, as can be seen from the change in values as we alter the cut-off
points. Literacy in the US was also relatively high over this period with the logarithm of skilled
per unskilled worker of around 2 in the 19th century and growing to about 3 in the early 20th
century (implying a change from about 80 percent of the workers being literate to almost every-
body being literate by 1930). Our predicted measure seems to be slightly lower than the actual
one, suggesting that endogenous migration exacerbated existing differences.



5      Results

5.1     First stage

Our identification strategy relies on the impact regional clustering of immigrants has on skill
ratios as the origin composition of immigrants shifts over time, an approach which has seen a lot
of use in modern studies of the labor market impact of immigration. To demonstrate visually how
the instrument functions, we present, in Figure 1, the actual and instrumented skill ratio for two
cities in our sample: Chicago and New Orleans. Chicago was particularly receiving immigrants
of German origin and New Orleans, of Italian and Russian origins. Since German immigrants
were very highly literate but that their flow stopped by about 1910, Chicago is predicted to have
    31 The   latter is essential to the construction of our standard errors.


                                                                15
first an increase in its literacy rate and then a slowdown by the later part of our sample. New
Orleans, on the other hand, received migrants that had lower levels of literacy, particularly after
1880, and thus faced a decrease in its skill ratio right until immigration slowdowns in 1930. The
predictions generated by our instruments are indicative of the trends we find in the actual data.
      Appendix Table B.1 shows the first stage regressions estimated in the industry x county
level data combining all years of data. To both account for the fact there are multiple “copies” of
county within a year and for the fact that the errors are likely autocorrelated over time, we cluster
standard errors by county. In addition, we weight by the inverse of the number of industries
represented in a county (to give each county equal weight).32 As we move from column (1) to (3),
we explore increasingly demanding controls for industry, which will parallel our analysis below:
with no industry effects, with industry effects, and with industry x year effects. In Appendix
Table B.1, the only reason they should make any difference is because of small changes in the
composition of areas which identify the relationship (since the instrument and skill mix measure
do not vary by industry). The results suggest that these added controls change little the first
stage which remains very highly significant and almost unmoved in terms of magnitude. The
results suggest that a change in 1 percent in our predict skill ratio translates into about a 0.75
percent change in the actual skill ratio of a county. This could be consistent with endogenous
location choice by natives and immigrants, some deterioration of the settlement patterns from
historical patterns, or both.
      Recall that our skill ratio will be interacted with a period-indicator for “early” or “late”. Thus,
we will not only have one first stage but two first stages for each of these interactions. However,
Wooldridge (1997) suggests that it is more efficient not to interact the instrument with such an
indicator variable but instead to use the first stage we presented in Appendix Table B.1, obtain
the predicted values and interact them with our indicator dummies. We do this and obtain a very
strong first stage for each sub-period of analysis as can be seen in Table 2. Skill mix tends to load
onto the instrument from the appropriate period, and the confidence interval usually includes
one. We do find that the period with most immigration (“early”) also seems to have a stronger
first stage than the “late” one.


5.2     Responses of capital

Having shown that our instrument is capable of generating significant variation in the endoge-
nous variable, we now turn to exploring how capital intensity responded to the change in the
skill ratio generated by immigration. Table 3 shows results at the “aggregate” level, that is using
only variation across areas, not accounting for potential differences in industry mix. Columns
(1) and (3) examine capital per worker and columns (2) and (4) capital per dollar of output. The
 32 The   standard errors are larger if we do not make this weighting adjustment, but the F-stat remains above 10.



                                                          16
first two columns present the OLS while the last two show the IV estimates. OLS seems to show
limited responses of capital ratios to change in skill ratios: there is a positive correlation between
capital intensity and skill ratio in the “early” period and a negative but not significant correla-
tion in the “late”. The IV estimates, on the other hand, suggest that capital per worker positively
responded to an immigration-induced increase in skill ratios in both “late” periods. The impact
for the early part of the sample is positive but not significantly different from zero. The impact
on capital-output ratios, on the other hand, is negative and significant for the “early” period
and positive and significant for the “late” period when we use 1880 as the last year of the early
period. From these aggregate results, we would thus conclude that capital-skill complementarity
strengthened over the period and that capital and low-skill workers were q-complements in the
early part of our sample.
   A concern with results in Table 3 is that they are potentially driven by shifts in industry mix:
that is, more less skilled workers may attract less capital intensive industries (e.g., Goldin and
Katz, 1998; James and Skinner, 1985) and this would alter capital ratios. To address this, we
now turn to estimates that allow us to examine within industry responses to aggregate skill mix
changes, using our data on production techniques detailed by area and industry.
   Table 4 shows ordinary least squares (OLS), and Table 5 shows instrumental variables (IV)
estimates of the relationship between skill mix and capital measures at the industry x area level.
The first 3 columns of each table focus on the capital per worker while the last 3 columns present
the results for the capital-output ratios. The panels are organized as previously depending on the
moment in which our sample is split between “early” and “late” periods. For each outcome and
period, we successively increase the number of fixed effects, starting from none, to fixed effects
for industries and finally for industry-year fixed effects.
   We first consider the results of the OLS regressions in Table 4. We find that an increase in
skill mix is positively associated with capital per worker measure throughout the period and
relatively similarly in magnitude between the late and early periods. Capital per output is also
positively associated with an increase in the skill ratio but less so than for capital per worker.
   Let us now consider the IV estimates in Table 5. In that case, we tend to observe a negative
impact of skill ratio on capital per worker and capital per output in the early period for both
cut-offs, particularly significant for capital-output. The results for capital-output are robust to
the inclusion of various fixed-effects but those for capital per worker lose their significance once
larger sets of fixed effects are introduced. In the later period, we find some weak evidence that the
skill-ratio increased significantly the capital per worker, result that is not robust to the inclusion
of multiple fixed effects. From the model, this suggests that capital-skill complementarity used
to be much weaker in the “early” period than in the late period. Using our framework, this
would imply that in the early period, capital was relatively more complementary with low- than
high-skill workers, but its relative complementary with low-skilled workers fell (and its relative


                                                 17
complementarity with skilled labor increased) as time passed. As we will discover below, the
magnitudes of the positive coefficient in the “late” period may even suggest that capital and
low-skill workers became q-substitutes.
    Our estimates were, in some cases, sensitive to industry mix controls. In the appendix we ask
directly if industry mix responds to changes in skill ratios in Table B.2, and find that it largely
does not.
    Thus, while the statistical significance of some late period results is weaker than one would
hope, the magnitudes are clearly suggestive of a change in the relationship of capital with skilled
and unskilled labor as time went by. This is consistent with what some historians have pre-
viously argued, that in the nineteenth century capital was a relative substitute of skilled labor,
and became a relative complement of skilled labor only some time later in the nineteenth or
early twentieth century. The argument is that early factories were low-skill and capital-intensive
relative to the alternative, artisanal production. In light of this, it is interesting that we do not
find a significant association between skill supplies and establishment size in the early period
(See results in Table B.3).33 While not entirely ruling out that capital’s response is due to a shift
between “modes” of production, this is not consistent with the being driven by shift between
artisanal and factory production. Another way to see it as providing reassurance that results are
really being driven by changes in production technique, as, for example, Katz and Margo (2013)
argue establishment size can significantly confound estimates of the changes in capital usage.
    OLS estimates would have not been able to tell us this as they implied that capital-skill com-
plementary was present since the beginning although maybe increasing over time. A standard
story would be that OLS estimates are attenuated by measurement error. This seems a plau-
sible contributor to bias in this context, with a crude self-reported measure of skill conditional
on a large number of fixed effects. However, there may also be other sources of bias. A key
unobservable might be the local outside (non-manufacturing) option of low-skill workers. For
instance, to take a Goldin and Sokoloff (1984) type of story, certain areas may have very produc-
tive agricultural land. In such areas, low-skill workers might drawn to the area but away from
manufacturing, which could reduce the adoption of capital- and low skill-intensive production
techniques.
    One may be worried that our measure of the value of capital may not be as close as to what
we wish to measure since it includes land and buildings. We thus turn to our two alternative
measures of capital, namely horsepower (which in some years is predicted from value of ma-
chinery and equipment) and fuel expenditures and rent of power. These two measures are only
available from 1890 on but we extrapolated their value for 1860 as well. However, since our
instrument requires at least 2 years within each sub-period, this implies that we cannot get an
  33 This contrasts with Kim (2007), who finds an association between immigration, not parameterized by skill, and
plant size.


                                                       18
estimate of the causal effect of a change in the skill ratio when the early period only includes
1860-1880. Thus, Table 6 includes only one panel instead of two for that reason. The format of the
table mirrors that of the previous one except that for each outcome, we now have two different
measures. Columns (1)-(3) and (7)-(9) measure capital from fuel expenditure and the others from
horsepower and its proxy. A difference to keep in mind between this table and the previous one
is that we have limited information in the “early” period –it is essentially an 1890 cross section–
thus limiting our capacity to make comparisons. This may explain why in this table, we do not
estimate a significant negative coefficient as we found previously for the “early” period. For both
measures, we find strong, positive and robust effects of the skill ratio on capital per worker in
the late period, suggesting that the exogenous arrival of more skilled workers increased the use
of these measures of capital. The results for capital-output ratios are also positive.
   If we use our theoretical framework, we would again draw a similar analysis than before:
fuel expenditures and horsepower became more and more complementary to high-skill workers
around the turn of the twentieth century. There is some indication that both these measures
of capital had similar cross-partials with high-skill than low-skill workers in the early period
of analysis but that the relationship between these form of capital and literate workers became
much more complementary as time went by.
   Conducting our analysis separately may be penalizing us since we are estimating the same
fundamental relationship using two different capital-ratios. If we assume that our framework
is correct, then we can combine the two equations to potentially improve the precisions of our
estimates. One can note from our theoretical framework that

                             ∂ln(K/N )
                                          = − φ (1 − κ ) + (1 − φ )κ = − φ + κ
                             ∂ln( H/L)
                       ∂ln(K/Y )
                                  = s L (κ ) − s H (1 − κ ) = − s H + ( s L + s H )κ
                       ∂ln( H/L)

where
                                                      ∂ Y   2
                                                   H ∂K∂H
                                         κ=        2
                                                 ∂ Y      ∂ Y   2
                                              H ∂K∂H + L ∂K∂L

   This system is over-identified as there are two equations and one unknown parameter, which
is κ. Formally, we can estimate a system of two equations given by:

                                     ln(K/N ) + φ ln( H/L) = β(ln( H/L))
                         ln(K/Y ) + s H ln( H/L) = β((s L + s H ) ln( H/L))

and impose that the coefficients β, which is an estimate of κ, be identical in both equations.



                                                       19
   κ measures absolute q-complementarity between capital and skills. To interpret it, recall
                     ∂ln(K/Y )
from (5), that          > 0 defines what is often called capital-skill complementarity (e.g., Goldin
                     ∂ln( H/L)
and Katz, 1998; Krusell et al., 2000), a condition under which capital proportionately raises the
marginal product of skilled labor more than unskilled. From above, the two are related by
−s H + (s L + s H )κ > 0, or κ > s Ls+Hs H . Thus, this joint estimation of κ allows us to draw simple
conclusions about the relationship between inputs:

   • If κ < 0, then capital and skills are q-substitutes and capital and low-skill are q-complements
             sH
   • If        > κ > 0, then capital and both types of labor are q-complements with capital but
          s L +s H
      capital is more complementary to low-skill labor than high-skill labor
                           sH
   • If 1 > κ >         s L +s H ,   then capital and both types of labor are q-complements with capital but
      capital is more complementary to high-skill labor than low-skill labor

   • If κ > 1, then capital and high-skill labor are q-complements and capital and low-skill labor
      are q-substitutes

Recall in section 4 we calculated that s L = 0.0787 and s H = 0.5085, which produces a cutoff of
           sH
about        = 0.866. We perform this estimation and report the results in Table 7 where we report
        s L +s H
a different estimate of κ for early and late periods using two different cut-offs in each panel, as
before. The first three columns use our regressions of the value of capital, the next three our fuel
expenditures and the last three, our horsepower measure. For each of these outcomes, we also
explore the impact of controlling for fixed effects.
   We can see that we do gain some statistical power by imposing some structure on our esti-
mates. We can now argue that capital increased the marginal productivity of low-skill labor in the
early period when using the value of capital or fuel expenditures as our measure of K. Our mea-
sure of κ is statistically larger than 0 in all cases and for capital and fuel expenditures, it is also
less than 1. It is also smaller than 0.866, although not statistically so. This would suggest that for
the early period, capital was q-complements of both types of labor but capital was slightly more
complementary to low-skill than to high-skill labor. For 1890-1930, we find a κ which is slightly
larger than one, implying that capital would have not altered the marginal productivity of low-
skill workers or if anything, may have lowered it. When we divide our late period to include only
1900-1930, we find even larger values for κ, suggesting that capital became q-substitute to low-
skill labor around 1900. For horsepower, we see a very similar pattern when we do not include
fixed effects by industry but these are not robust to the inclusion of additional controls. Once
we include industry-time fixed effects, we would argue that horsepower was q-complement with
both types of labor and more complementary to high-skill than low-skill workers but this would
not be different in either period. This may be because horsepower measures a type of capital that



                                                           20
is exactly the core of the Second Industrial Revolution and thus would not experience this break
over time as other types of capital we presented.
      Overall, these “structural” results suggest that capital and high-skill labor (as measured by
literacy) have been consistently q-complementary in manufacturing since at least the 1860 but
that this relationship was strengthened substantially around 1890-1900 when, in some of our
estimates, it became so complementary that low-skill workers became substitutes for capital. This
also seems to vary by type of capital where technologies using horsepower appear to have been
more complementary with high-skill workers than other types of capital. Furthermore, we have
explored how sensitive our results are to our assumptions and have found little reason to believe
that the results we present would look different if we had used the estimates of parameters for
any other years.34 In particular, given that the share accrued to low-skill workers was shrinking
over time, the results we present are potentially an understatement in terms of the change we
measure in κ.



6      Parametric Specifications, Calibration and Simulation

Having estimated that the relationship between capital and skill has strongly changed over our
period of study and being limited by data to study directly the wage effects of the policies, we
now take a more parametric specification to explore how this changing relationship may have
affected how the US economy was able to absorb changes in skill mix generated by migration.


6.1      Setup

In order to simulate the wage and capital accumulation impacts of immigration, we turn to a
parametric form for our single-good model of production in section 2. Capital-skill complemen-
tarity is generally modeled using a nested CES structure, which can either group together capital
and skilled labor (e.g., Goldin and Katz, 1998; Krusell et al., 2000), or capital and unskilled labor
(e.g., Autor et al., 2003; Lewis, 2011) in the inner nest. For example, the general form of the
production function used in Goldin and Katz (1998) is
                                                                              1/ρ
                                 Y = A α( βK θ + (1 − β) H θ )ρ/θ + (1 − α) Lρ      ,            (11)

where ρ > θ implies capital is more complementary with high- than low-skill labor (ρ < θ im-
plies the opposite). Goldin and Katz (1998) model the shift between different manufacturing
production technologies – from hand production, to factory and assembly line and later to con-
tinuous and batch processes – as shifts in the parameters A, α, and β over time. Alternatively,
    34 Results   not presented but available upon request


                                                            21
Lewis (2013) runs simulations using the function
                                                                        1/ρ
                           Y = A α( βK θ + (1 − β) Lθ )ρ/θ + (1 − α) H ρ      .                  (12)


The only difference from (11) is in the position of H and L. In (12), θ > ρ instead implies
relative capital-skill complementarity. Since there is not consensus on the “right” way to nest the
production function, we will try it both ways, and see which fits the data better. Under (11):

                                                (1 − ρ ) s L (1 − s L )
                               κ=                                                                (13)
                                    (1 − ρ ) s L (1 − s L − s H ) + (1 − θ ) s H

while under (12)

                                        −(1 − ρ)s L s H + (1 − θ )s L
                               κ=                                                                (14)
                                    (1 − ρ ) s H (1 − s L − s H ) + (1 − θ ) s L

      On top of this, we can show that the wage impact will depend on κ such that

                          d ln(WH /WL )        (ρ − θ )(1 − s L − s H )(−κ )
                                        = ρ−1+                                                   (15)
                            d ln( H/L)                    1 − sL

under (11) and

                         d ln(WH /WL )        (θ − ρ)(1 − s L − s H )(1 − κ )
                                       = ρ−1+                                 .                  (16)
                           d ln( H/L)                   1 − sH

under (12). Again, when capital is more complementary to skills the second term is positive. So
like in section 2, the magnitude of the relative wage response to changes in skill mix is smaller
than predicted by the short-run inverse elasticity of substitution (that is, ρ − 1 < 0). The appendix
provides all the demonstration of the above equations.


6.2    Parameter Values

To estimate the impact on wages, we must first estimate (13) and (14). We have estimates of s L
and s H described earlier (in section 4) as well as κ for different periods of our data but we do
not have parameter estimates of ρ or θ. Obtaining estimates of ρ is especially problematic due to
a lack of disaggregated wage data, which means we do not have good, direct estimates of (15)
and (16). To deal with this, we will assume different values of the parameter ρ, where (1 − ρ)−1
represents the short-run elasticity of substitution between high and low-skill labor (and, as a
check, we will compare our simulations to estimates in Goldin (1994) below). We will then set
θ to be consistent with our estimates of (13) and (14), subject to assumed values of capital and
skilled labor’s share.

                                                     22
   To see this, Table 8 maps out the parameter estimates and relative wage impact of a one unit
change in ln( H/L) implied by various assumed parameter estimates, using, alternatively, model
(12) (in columns 4-5) or model (11).35 The top panel assumes, as Goldin and Katz (1998) did, that
the outer nest is Cobb-Douglas (ρ = 0). As a benchmark, we will start by assuming that capital
is not more or less complementary to skill, i.e. is “skill neutral,” by setting θ = ρ = 0, shown in
row 1. This implies that relative wages fall one-for-one as skill ratios rise. (More generally, the
relative wage impact of a one unit increase in ln( H/L) is given by ρ − 1 in the skill neutral case
θ = ρ – see (15) and (16)).
   Next, let us turn to choosing parameters consistent with our estimate of κ for 1860-80 of 0.7,
shown in row 2 of the table. This implies a negative value of θ = −0.85 when capital is nested
with unskilled labor and a positive value of θ = 0.58 when capital is nested with skilled labor.
In both cases, this implies that capital is q-complementary with both skilled and unskilled labor
but more so with unskilled than skilled labor. In the capital-unskilled nesting, wage impacts are
larger than the capital neutral benchmark in row (1), as capital adjustments magnify the relative
productivity impact of changes in skill supply. This does not happen here when capital is nested
with skilled labor.
   In contrast, as noted in section 2, if the response of capital output ratios to skill mix is positive
(and so κ> s Ls+Hs H ≈ 0.866) –so that capital and skill are relative complements – then the relative
wage impacts are smaller than the benchmark case. Our estimate of κ = 1.1 for 1890-1930
from Table 7 implies the impossible θ > 1 when capital is nested with skilled labor, which
casts some doubt on the appropriateness of this nesting. However, when we nest capital with
unskilled labor, row 3 of Table 8 shows we obtain a large positive estimate of θ = 0.77 that
is in the admissible range below one. In that case, the impact of the change in skill ratio on
the relative wage is strongly attenuated by the response of capital, with magnitudes about one
third that of the “skill-neutral” benchmark case in the table’s first row. Interestingly in modern
data and using a similar approach, Lewis (2011) estimates a κ only slightly more positive (albeit
for different skill categories, high school dropouts and completers) than the one we obtain for
the “late period,” potentially consistent with Goldin and Katz (1998)’s argument that modern
capital-skill complementarity is a continuation of similar relationship between labor and non-
labor inputs in this earlier era. Rows 4 and 5 show that larger estimates of κ would imply even
smaller wage impacts (such as the extreme case of Autor et al., 2003).
   How sensitive are these relationships to different parameter choices? The pattern of relative
magnitudes are not sensitive to the choice of our least well justified parameter ρ, the one which
governs the elasticity of substitution between skill types. For example, the bottom panel shows
the same set of simulations with instead ρ set at 0.33, which is roughly what you would need
to get to the consensus value for the elasticity of substitution between college and non-college
 35 This   is generalized from a similar table in Lewis (2013).


                                                            23
labor in the modern U.S. labor market (e.g., Hamermesh, 1993). The absolute wage impacts are
smaller in this panel (by design of the larger elasticity), but the proportional difference across
rows varies in nearly the same way as the upper panel (for example, the estimates in row 8
are about one-third those of row 6). The estimated wage impact would also be even smaller if,
realistically, the capital or skill share were even larger in the later period.36
      Interestingly, the estimates in the lower panel of Table 8 are also roughly in line with the
reduced form elasticity of substitution between artisans and laborers implied by estimates in
Goldin (1994), whose estimates come from the middle of our period of study.37 Given the large
differences in methodology, perhaps not too much should be made of this; nevertheless, be-
cause of this similarity, the estimates in the lower panel will be used to simulate the impact of
counterfactual immigration flows in the next section.


6.3     Simulating the Impact of Immigration

The one unit increase in ln( H/L) used in the Table 8 simulations may not be typical of the
impact of immigration. So now we turn to simulations based on the actual experience of the
U.S. economy with immigration during the period of our estimates. Table 9 shows estimates
of the impact of immigration on wage ratios in manufacturing under various counterfactual
immigration scenarios, using the estimated capital responses from the period under study to
generate the parameter values, under the continuing assumptions that ρ = 0.33, s L = 0.08, and
s H = 0.51. Since nesting capital and unskilled labor seems to fit the data better, we will focus on
simulations using that nesting.
      Panel A of Table 9 simulates the impact of net immigration between 1860 and 1880 using
the production function we estimated for that period. Comparing the “actual” to counterfactual
ratios of literate to non-literate population, columns 1 and 2 reveal that absent of net immigra-
tion in this period, skill ratios would actually have been about 8 percent lower.38 During this
  36 Additional discussion appears in the appendix B.
  37 Goldin (1994) combines wage data by broad occupation in several cities from 1890-1907 with percent foreign born
estimated from the Census of Population to estimate the regression ∆ ln woc = a + bo ∆Fc + µc , where ∆ ln woc is the ln
change in the wage in occupation o and city c and ∆Fc is the change in the share foreign-born in the city. Her estimates
tend to be more negative for laborers than artisans, consistent with a relative wage impact of an increase in the relative
supply of less-skilled labor induced by immigration. To convert her estimates to a reduced-form relative wage impact
                                                                                                          d ln( H/L) dp −1
                                                                                                                     
                                                                   d ln(WH /WL )     d ln WH   d ln WL
of the sort shown in columns (5) and (7), we use the fact that d ln( H/L     )
                                                                                 =      dF   −    dF          dp     dF    ≈
(bartisans − blaborers )[ p(1 − p)]/( p F − p D ), where bartisans − blaborers represents Goldin’s slope estimates for artisans
relative to laborers, p = HH    + L represents the share “skilled” (artisan), and p F , and p D represent the share skilled for
foreigners and domestic workers, respectively. In the upper panel of Goldin (1994)’s table 7.8, bartisans − blaborers ranges
from 0.481 to 1.465 depending on time period. (Caveats: each of bartisans and blaborers was estimated in a different
sample of cities; the estimates are also possibly confounded by the direct compositional impacts of immigration.) If
p is 0.9 (the non-laborer share in manufacturing and construction in 1900) and p F − p D is about -0.2 (the gap in this
share between immigrants who arrived in the 1890s and natives) then the reduced form relative wage impact will be
in the range of -.66 to -0.22, which overlaps with the wage impacts in rows 6-9 of the lower panel of Table 8.
  38 This calculation is made imposing that the same number of literate and illiterate immigrants present in the U.S.



                                                              24
era – at least nationally – immigrants had higher literacy rates than natives. According to the
parameterization in Table 8 row 7, column 5, removing immigrants who came between 1860 and
1880 would have raised skilled relative wages by about 8 percent, which is equivalent to saying
net immigration during that era raised unskilled wages by roughly 8 percent. Capital intensity
was also rising during this era, and our complementarity estimates suggest this also would have
raised unskilled relative wages. Thus both immigration and technological change during this era
likely had the effect of compressing the wage distribution of natives.
    The remaining rows of Table 9 examines what would have happened if the U.S. Congress had
succeeded in passing a literacy test in 1897.39 This is done under under two different scenarios:
first, using the production function we estimated for 1890-30 in the aggregate (panel B); and
second, using the production function we estimated for 1860-80 (panel C). The panel C asks,
therefore, what would the impact of the wave of southern and eastern European immigration
have been if the production technology had not changed?
    To implement this simulation, we drop from the census of population sample (Ruggles et
al., 2010) any illiterate immigrants who arrived after 1897, and compute the counterfactual skill
ratios. Column (2) of Table 9 shows that this raises skill ratios over time, by 1920 substantially,
about 35 percent. To do the middle panel simulations, we take the wage elasticity in row 8 of
Table 8. Column (4) shows that the literacy test might have lowered skilled relative wages by 7
percent; put differently, the illiterate arrivals who stayed in the U.S. after 1897 appear to have
lowered unskilled relative wages by 7 percent. This is quite a modest wage impact given the
magnitude of arrivals over this period and the related outcry. The adverse labor market impacts
of immigration thus may have been a weak justification for the ultimate passage of a literacy
test in 1917, although the sensitivity analysis in the previous section suggests the wage impacts
might have been larger than this. However, even these alternatives are quite modest compared
to what the relative wage impact would have been true had the production technology in use in
the early twentieth century remained the same as it had been 1860-80: using that wage elasticity,
the relative wage impacts would have been over 30 percent. Thus, the new role of capital in
production may have played an important role in the absorbtion of large waves of immigrants at
the turn of the twentieth century.
    We would like to test this more directly by estimating how much immigration-induced
changes in the skill ratio affected relative wages in manufacturing. Measuring relative wages
directly is challenging, however, as individual-level wage data are not available until 1940 in
IPUMS. Wage data by “skill” – salaried officials and wage workers – only becomes available in
the Census of Manufactures starting in 1890. Thus, at best we are only able to analyze the “late”
in 1860 would have been present in 1880 and native skill mix would have remained the same.
  39 Goldin (1994) investigates the history of attempts to pass immigration restrictions in the U.S. According to her

research, 1897 was the first credible attempt to impose a literacy test. In that year, a bill made it through Congress but
was vetoed by President Cleveland.


                                                           25
period. We have used these data to construct a crude proxy for the relative wage of literate work-
ers (by assuming, as above, that within production category there is no return to literacy). Using
this proxy, we estimate that changes in skill ratios have a small, positive and not significant effect
on wage ratios in all specifications.40 This may be because the approximation of the wage ratio
is just too crude and may be confounded by compositional changes in who makes up salaried
officials and wage workers as literacy rates change. However, they are also consistent with the
effect of the skill ratio on wages being muted by changes in capital-ratios.



7      Conclusions

Our analysis suggests that immigration between 1860 and 1930 was a sufficiently important
shock to the local labor force to alter skill ratios in urban counties. It also suggests that manfac-
turing capital intensity responded to immigration-induced changes in skill ratios (a relationship
which holds within industry).41 The estimated responses support the notion that capital rela-
tively substituted for skilled labor in in nineteenth century manufacturing. This appears to have
dramatically changed around the turn of the century, when low-skill workers became substitutes
for capital and ushering in the level of capital-skill complementarity we see in modern times.
This shift appears to coincide with the Second Industrial Revolution suggesting that something
in that new way of production altered the relationship between capital and skill.
      Our analysis potentially suffers from several limitations. First, we have examined a very crude
measure of skill composition based on literacy. Not only might this not be a very relevant skill
margin – especially towards the end of our period – but it may obscure more subtle relationship
between skills and technology, such as the notion that technological advance throughout this
period were raising demand for skills as the “poles” of the skill distribution relative to the middle
(including Gray, 2013; Katz and Margo, 2013). Some these changes may have taken place outside
of the manufacturing sector, the only sector we have data on in this study. Our measure of capital
stocks is also very broad, though the same is true of many of the existing U.S. historical studies
on manufacturing; we attempted to address this with alternative proxies for machinery use.
      We are also only able to directly estimate relative wage impacts using a crude proxy for
relative wages; these estimates show little impact. However, simulations based on fitting our es-
timates to a parametric production function suggest that the small wage impacts we do find are
consistent with the adjustments in capital-intensity that we observe. These simulations suggest
the importance of the early twentieth century production technology in allowing the U.S. econ-
omy to absorb the wave of southern and eastern European migrants with only a modest decline
    40 Results
            available upon request.
    41 We
        find little support for the idea that shifts in industry mix helped absorb immigrant inflows during the nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries.



                                                         26
in less-skilled wages. This was possible because the production technology allowed a sufficient
rate of substitution away from capital (at a fixed rental rate) in response to the less-skilled labor
shock. Under the older production technology in which capital complemented low-skill labor,
this would not have been possible. This historical context thus reveals that the way in which
non-labor inputs adjust to labor mix shocks can play a critical role in the economy’s ability to
adapt to such shocks.



References
Acemoglu, Daron and David H. Autor, “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for Em-
  ployment and Earnings,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David E. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
  Economics, Vol. 4B Elsevier 2011, pp. 1043–1171.

Atack, Jeremy and Fred Bateman, “Nineteenth-Century U.S. Industrial Development through
  the Eyes of the Census of Manufactures,” Historical Methods, 1999, 32 (4), 177–188.

  ,   , and Robert A. Margo, “Skill Intensity and Rising Wage Dispersion in Nineteenth-Century
  American Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic History, March 2004, 64 (1), 172–192.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent Technologi-
  cal Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003, 118 (4),
  1279–1334.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas, “Attenuation Bias in Measuring the Wage Impact
  of Immigration,” Working Paper 16229, NBER July 2010.

Beaudry, Paul and David Green, “Wages and Employment in the United States and Germany:
  What Explains the Differences?,” American Economic Review, June 2003, 93 (3), 573–602.

  , Mark Doms, and Ethan Lewis, “Should the PC be Considered a Technological Revolution?
  Evidence from US Metrpolitan Areas,” Journal fo Political Economy, October 2010, 118 (5), 988–
  1036.

Berthoff, Rowland Tappan, British Immigrants in Industrial America, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
  University Press, 1953.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAffee, Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution
  is Accelerating Innovation and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy, Lexington:
  Digital Frontier Press, 2011.

Card, David, “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
  Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 2001, 19 (1), 22–64.

                                                 27
   and Ethan Lewis, “The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations
  and Impacts,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United States, Univ 2007,
  pp. 193–228.

Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur J. II Coleman, “The World Technology Frontier,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, June 2006, 96 (3), 499–522.

Chandler, Alfred D. Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Harvard
  University Press, 1977.

Cortés, Patricia, “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI
  Data,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2008, 116 (3), 381–422.

Goldin, Claudia, “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the U.S.,” in Claudia
  Goldin and Gary Libecap, eds., The Regulated Economy, University of Chicago Press Chicago
  1994.

  and Kenneth Sokoloff, “The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of Industrialization: The Amer-
  ican Case, 1820 to 1850,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1984, 99 (3), 461–487.

   and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, August 1998, 113 (3), 693–732.

  and      , The Race Between Education and Technology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
  2008.

  and      , “The 1915 Iowa State Census Project. ICPSR28501-v1.,” Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
  Consortium for Bibliographic Citation: Political and Social Research [distributor], December
  2010.

Gonzales, Libertad and Francesc Ortega, “How do very open economies absorb large immigra-
  tion flows? Recent evidence from Spanish regions.,” Labour Economics, January 2011, 18 (1),
  57–70.

Goos, Maarten and Alan Manning, “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in
  Britain,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2007, 89 (1), 120–135.

Gray, Rowena, “Taking Technology to the Task: The Skill Content of Technological Change in
  the Early Twentieth Century United States,” Explorations in Economic History, July 2013, 50 (3),
  351–367.

Griliches, Zvi, “Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November
  1969, 51 (4), 465–468.



                                                 28
Hamermesh, Daniel, Labor Demand, Princeton University Press, 1993.

James, John A. and Jonathan S. Skinner, “The Resolution of the Labor-Scarcity Paradox,” Journal
  of Economic History, September 1985, 45 (3), 513–540.

Jerome, Harry, Mechanization in Industry, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search, 1934.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Robert A. Margo, “Technical Change and the Relative Demand for Skilled
  Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective,” Working Paper 18752, NBER February
  2013.

Keynes, John Maynard, “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” in Lorenzo Pecchi and
  Gustavo Piga, eds., Revisiting Keynes: Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren, Cambridge,
  MA: MIT Press, 2008, chapter 1, pp. 17–26.

Kim, Sukkoo, “Immigration, Industrial Revolution and Urban Growth in the United States, 1820-
  1920: Factor Endowments, Technology and Geography,” Working Paper 12900, NBER February
  2007.

Krusell, P., L.E. Ohanian, J-V Rios-Rull, and G.L. Violante., “Capital-Skill Complementarity
  and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, September 2000, 68 (5), 1029–53.

Lafortune, Jeanne and José Tessada, “Smooth(er) Landing? The Role of Networks in the Lo-
  cation and Occupational Choice of Immigrants,” Mimeo, Instituto de Economía, Pontificia
  Universidad Católica de Chile September 2013.

  ,   , and Carolina Gonzalez-Velosa, “More Hands, More Power? The Impact of Immigra-
  tion on Farming and Technology Choices in US Agriculture in the Early Twentieth Century,”
  Working Paper 431, Instituto de Economía, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile March
  2013.

Leamer, Edward, “The Heckscher-Ohlin Model in Theory and Practice,” Princeton Studies in
  International Finance, 1995, 77.

Lewis, Ethan, “Local, Open Economies Within the U.S.: How Do Industries Respond to Immi-
  gration?,” Working Paper 04-01, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 2003.

  , “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  May 2011, 126 (2), 1029–1069.

  , “Immigration and Production Technology,” Annual Review of Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 165–191.

Marx, Karl, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Chicago: C.H. Kerr and Company, 1932.


                                               29
Minnesota Population Center, “National Historical Geographic Information System: Version
  2.0,” Technical Report, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 2011.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L., Looking for Work, Searching for Workers, Cambridge University Press,
  2002.

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
  and Matthew Sobek, “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
  database],” Technical Report, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 2010.

Smith, Christopher, “The Impact of Low-Skilled Immigration on the Youth Labor Market,” Jour-
  nal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (1), 55–89.

Taylor, Alan M. and Jefferey G. Williamson, “Convergence in the Age of Mass Migration,”
  European Review of Economic History, April 1997, 1 (1), 27–63.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Manufactures 1909: General Report and
  Analytical Tables, Vol. VIII of Thirteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1910, Wash-
  ington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1913.

  , Manufacrtures 1919: General Report and Analytical Tables, Vol. VIII of Fourtheenth Census of the
  United States, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1923.

  , Manufactures: 1929 Volume I, General Report Statistics by Subjects, Vol. Volume I of Fifteenth
  Census of the United States: 1930, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1933.

U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census Office, The Statistics of the Wealth and Industry
  of the United States, Vol. III of Ninth Census, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1872.

  , Report on the Population of the United States at the Eleventh Census: 1890, Part II, Washington,
  DC: Government Printing Office, 1897.

  , Manufactures Part I: United States by Industries, Vol. VII of Twelfth Census of the United States:
  1900, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1902.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “On two stage least squares estimation of the average treatment effect
  in a random coefficient model,” Economics Letters, October 1997, 56 (2), 129–133.




                                                 30
             Figure 1. Instrument: Graphical Example




3
2.5
2
1.5
1




      1860      1880               1900         1920              1940
                                   year

              New Orleans actual          New Orleans predicted
              Chicago actual              Chicago predicted




                                   31
           Table 1. Descriptive Statistics on Area x Industry Sample

                                   Early period                        Late period
Variable                 # cells    Mean       Std. Dev.     # cells    Mean      Std. Dev.
                              Panel A: Cut-off in 1880
ln(K/N)                  16668    6.650     0.984     20635              7.217       0.991
ln(K/Y)                  16667 -0.105       0.827     20613              0.032       0.724
ln(Fuel/N)                6750   -5.277     1.678     19542              2.916       1.417
ln(Fuel/Y)                6750 -11.907      1.765     19558             -4.288       1.189
ln(Horspower/N)           6750   -5.277     1.678     20497             -0.260       1.242
ln(Horspower/Y)           6750 -11.907      1.765     20516             -7.441       1.119
ln(H/L)                  16713    1.921     0.783     23541              2.980       0.687
    [
ln( H/L)                 16713    1.335     0.223     23541              2.204       0.442
                             Panel B: Cut-off in 1890
ln(K/N)                  22454  6.673      0.960     14849               7.405       0.966
ln(K/Y)                  22453 -0.100      0.796     14827               0.077       0.729
ln(Fuel/N)               11784 -2.158      3.953     14508               3.225       1.243
ln(Fuel/Y)               11784 -8.878      3.865     14524              -4.105       1.038
ln(Horspower/N)          12528 -3.143      2.737     14719              -0.107       1.229
ln(Horspower/Y)          12528 -9.860      2.662     14738              -7.430       1.143
ln(H/L)                  22500  2.126      0.840     17754               3.065       0.660
    [
ln( H/L)                 22500  1.439      0.264     17754               2.357       0.403
Unweighted means. Skill Ratio is literate/non literate population older than 15, except 1890,
which uses published tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area. K includes capital
imputed for 1930 from horsepower and Horsepower includes imputed horsepower for 1880
and 1890 using machinery and equipment. See Data Appendix.




                                             32
                    Table 2. First stage regressions-by period

                               Early                                    Late
                    (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                                            Cut-off in 1880
X̂*Early         2.802***     2.782***     2.862*** -0.000*            0.000        0.000
                  (0.942)     (0.918)      (0.914)   (0.000)          (0.006)      (0.000)
X̂*Late          -0.000**      -0.001      -0.000*   0.645**          0.653**      0.639**
                  (0.000)     (0.003)      (0.000)   (0.282)          (0.283)      (0.289)
R2                 0.934       0.935        0.937     0.977            0.977        0.978
                                            Cut-off in 1890
X̂*Early        1.266***      1.260***     1.263*** 0.000***           0.000      -0.000***
                 (0.366)      (0.356)      (0.348)   (0.000)          (0.001)      (0.000)
X̂*Late         -0.000***      0.001        0.000    0.672***        0.679***      0.671***
                 (0.000)      (0.003)      (0.000)   (0.229)          (0.229)      (0.232)
R2                0.933        0.933        0.935     0.990            0.990        0.991
Fixed Effects:
Year                 Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
Area                 Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
Industry             N            Y            Y            N            Y            Y
Ind. x Year          N            N            Y            N            N            Y
Outcome is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population from IPUMS, except 1890,
which uses published tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area. X̂ represents the
predicted value of this of this ln skill ratio based on the average relationship between it
and the instruments, which apportions immigrants to counties by country of birth (and
natives by state of birth) based on their locations in an earlier base year (1850 or 1880) –
see text and table B.1. Standard errors in parentheses, calculated to be robust to arbitrary
error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to industry-years where at least 2 cities
in that year reported a given industry. N=37,278. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.




                                             33
        Table 3. Estimation with Aggregate Data

                           OLS                        IV
                      K/N      K/Y            K/N          K/Y
                       (1)      (2)            (3)          (4)
                                  Cut-off in 1880
ln(H/L)*Early        0.093**      0.020      0.280       -0.292**
                     (0.044)     (0.049)    (0.240)       (0.117)
ln(H/L)*Late          0.037      -0.150     1.242**       0.913*
                     (0.062)     (0.203)    (0.533)       (0.470)
R2                    0.907       0.935      0.890         0.923
RootMSE               0.800       0.721      0.722         0.652
                                  Cut-off in 1890
ln(H/L)*Early        0.079**      0.013      0.046      -0.385***
                     (0.038)     (0.042)    (0.142)      (0.137)
ln(H/L)*Late         -0.077      -0.385     1.166**       0.556
                     (0.144)     (0.334)    (0.553)      (0.469)
R2                    0.908       0.937      0.900        0.930
RootMSE               0.803       0.718      0.689        0.621
All outcomes in logs. All regressions include fixed effects by
area and by year and are unweighted. Right-hand side variable
is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population (except 1890,
which uses published tabulations of the age 10+ population of
the area). Standard errors in parentheses, calculated to be robust
to arbitrary error correlation with area. N=991. Significance lev-
els: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. K includes capital imputed for 1930
from horsepower. See Data Appendix.




                                34
 Table 4. Manufacturing outcomes, Ordinary Least Squares Estimates

                           Capital/Workers                     Capital/Output
                       (1)        (2)      (3)              (4)      (5)     (6)
                                             Cut-off in 1880
ln(H/L)*Early       0.073**      0.078**      0.075**     0.022       0.024      0.018
                     (0.036)     (0.034)      (0.033)    (0.045)     (0.045)    (0.043)
ln(H/L)*Late        0.066***      0.035        0.037     0.052**     0.034*      0.032
                     (0.025)     (0.023)      (0.023)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.021)
R2                    0.300       0.561        0.610      0.102       0.284      0.353
RootMSE               0.872       0.692        0.658      0.751       0.672      0.644
                                             Cut-off in 1890
ln(H/L)*Early        0.071**     0.079***    0.076***      0.035      0.039      0.035
                     (0.030)      (0.027)     (0.026)     (0.035)    (0.035)    (0.033)
ln(H/L)*Late         0.069*        0.040       0.051       0.037      0.023      0.029
                     (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.032)     (0.032)    (0.031)    (0.029)
R2                    0.299        0.561       0.610       0.101      0.284      0.353
RootMSE               0.872        0.692       0.658       0.752      0.672      0.645
Fixed Effects:
Industry                N           Y            Y           N          Y          Y
Ind. x Year             N           N            Y           N          N          Y
All outcomes in logs. All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are
weighted such that each area-year is given the same weight. Right-hand side variable
is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population (except 1890, which uses published
tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area). Standard errors in parentheses, cal-
culated to be robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to
industry-years where at least 2 cities in that year reported a given industry. N=37,278.
Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. K includes capital imputed for 1930 from horse-
power. See Data Appendix.




                                            35
        Table 5. Manufacturing outcomes, Instrumental Variable Estimates

                                      Capital/Worker                       Capital/Output
                                   (1)      (2)     (3)              (4)          (5)     (6)
                                                          Cut-off in 1880
ln(H/L)*Early                   -0.028      -0.035      -0.008    -0.360**     -0.406**     -0.377**
                                (0.104)     (0.152)     (0.154)    (0.168)      (0.180)      (0.187)
ln(H/L)*Late                    0.689*       0.250       0.227      0.366        0.071        0.073
                                (0.376)     (0.268)     (0.274)    (0.324)      (0.284)      (0.301)
R2                               0.279       0.557       0.607      0.075        0.261        0.334
RootMSE                          0.881       0.690       0.650      0.759        0.679        0.644
Red. Form F-Stat (early)         0.068       0.048       0.002      5.168        4.286        3.856
Red. Form F-Stat (late)          7.269       1.056       0.827      1.606        0.064        0.059
                                                          Cut-off in 1890
ln(H/L)*Early                   -0.136*     -0.032      -0.011    -0.344***    -0.286**     -0.259*
                                (0.079)     (0.103)     (0.103)    (0.119)      (0.137)     (0.135)
ln(H/L)*Late                     0.516       0.229       0.217      0.472        0.291       0.281
                                (0.334)     (0.289)     (0.287)    (0.345)      (0.315)     (0.324)
R2                               0.290       0.558       0.608      0.069        0.262       0.336
RootMSE                          0.874       0.689       0.649      0.762        0.678       0.643
Red. Form F-Stat (early)         2.628       0.089       0.011      6.796        3.259       3.132
Red. Form F-Stat (late)          3.849       0.734       0.680      2.729        1.033       0.929
Fixed Effects:
Industry                           N           Y          Y           N            Y           Y
Ind. x Year                        N           N          Y           N            N           Y
All outcomes in logs. All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are
weighted such that each area-year is given the same weight. Right-hand side variable
is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population (except 1890, which uses published
tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area). Standard errors in parentheses, cal-
culated to be robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to
industry-years where at least 2 cities in that year reported a given industry. N=37,278.
Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. K includes capital imputed for 1930 from horse-
power. See Data Appendix.




                                                   36
                                       Table 6. Alternative capital measures, Instrumental Variable Estimates

                                                            Capital/Worker                                                       Capital/Output
                                                Fuel exp.                 Horsepower                                Fuel exp.                  Horsepower
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)     (4)     (5)    (6)                     (7)       (8)         (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)
                                                                                               Cut-off in 1890
     ln(H/L)*Early                   -0.192      -0.030      -0.031      0.104       0.170      0.119      -0.289      -0.165    -0.188      -0.011      0.050      -0.019
                                     (0.201)     (0.184)     (0.211)    (0.271)     (0.259)    (0.273)    (0.239)     (0.224)    (0.233)     (0.299)    (0.282)     (0.288)
     ln(H/L)*Late                    1.257**     0.691**     0.716**    0.852**      0.097      0.042     1.207**     0.756**    0.795**     0.795*      0.159       0.106
                                     (0.495)     (0.309)     (0.316)    (0.407)     (0.289)    (0.281)    (0.493)     (0.328)    (0.348)     (0.424)    (0.323)     (0.310)
     R2                               0.866       0.909       0.924      0.680       0.795      0.846      0.849       0.884      0.902       0.626      0.727       0.791
     RootMSE                          1.245       1.027       0.937      1.260       1.009      0.874      1.215       1.063      0.978       1.224      1.045       0.914
     Red. Form F-stat (early)         0.713       0.024       0.020      0.165       0.525      0.211      1.312       0.505      0.571       0.001      0.031       0.004
     Red. Form F-stat (late)         22.668      11.787      11.912      4.956       0.105      0.021     19.959      14.860     14.037       3.837      0.227       0.112
     Fixed Effects:
     Industry                            N          Y           Y          N           Y          Y          N           Y          Y           N          Y          Y




37
     Ind. x Year                         N          N           Y          N           N          Y          N           N          Y           N          N          Y
     All outcomes in logs. All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are weighted such that each area-year is given the same weight.
     Right-hand side variable is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population (except 1890, which uses published tabulations of the age 10+ population of
     the area). Standard errors in parentheses, calculated to be robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to industry-years where at
     least 2 cities in that year reported a given industry. N=26,292 for fuel expenditures and N=27,247 for horsepower. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.
     Horsepower includes imputed measures for 1880 and 1890 from machinery and equipment. See Data Appendix.
                               Table 7. Structural estimate of relative capital-skill complementarity

                                   Capital                         Fuel expenditures                            Horsepower
                         (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)                (7)        (8)              (9)
                                                                        Cut-off in 1880
     κ*Early          0.684***     0.658***     0.691***
                       (0.137)      (0.173)      (0.177)
     κ*Late           1.534***     1.079***     1.062***
                       (0.408)      (0.308)      (0.320)
                                                                        Cut-off in 1890
     κ*Early          0.611***     0.713***     0.740***     0.593**      0.768***     0.756***     0.934***     1.010***       0.942***
                       (0.100)      (0.130)      (0.128)      (0.233)      (0.212)      (0.240)      (0.317)      (0.301)        (0.314)
     κ*Late           1.451***     1.159***     1.146***     2.321***     1.703***     1.740***     1.839***     1.001***       0.936***
                       (0.392)      (0.344)      (0.345)      (0.577)      (0.363)      (0.376)      (0.483)      (0.349)        (0.335)
     Fixed Effects:




38
     Industry            N            Y             Y           N            Y             Y           N            Y               Y
     Ind. x Year         N            N             Y           N            N             Y           N            N               Y
     All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are weighted such that each area-year is given the same weight. A
     corresponds to the ratio of the cross-partial derivative of the production function with respect to capital and illiterate labor over
     the sum of the cross-partial derivatives with respect to capital and each type of labor. Standard errors in parentheses, calculated to
     be robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to industry-years where at least 2 cities in that year reported
     a given industry. N=37,278. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. K includes capital imputed for 1930 from horsepower and
     Horsepower includes imputed values for 1880-1890 from machinery and equipment. See Data Appendix.
        Table 8. Impact of a Unit Increase in the ln(Skill Ratio) on the Skilled Wage Premium, Nested CES Production Functions

                                                  Assumed Parameter Values               K Nested w/Unskilled         K Nested w/Skilled
                                                                                                  %Impact on                  %Impact on
                                                                                         Implied   skilled wg        Implied skilled wg
     Source for Parameter Choices:                    κ              sH         sL          θ      premiuma             θ      premiuma
                                                     (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)
                                                                                  Panel A: Assuming ρ = 0
     (1) Benchmark, ρ = θ                      s H /(s H + s L )   ∈ (0, 1)   ∈ (0, 1)     0.00        -1.00           0.00         -1.00
     (2) This Paper, 1860-1880                       0.70           0.51       0.08        -0.85       -1.50           0.58         -0.92
     (3) This Paper, 1890-1930                       1.10           0.51       0.08        0.77        -0.29                  N/Ad
     (4) Lewis (2011a)c 1980-2000                    1.15           0.51       0.08        0.90        -0.14                  N/Ad
     (5) Autor, Levy, Murnane (2003)                N/A            ∈ (0, 1)   ∈ (0, 1)     1.00         0.00           1.00          0.00
                                                                                Panel A: Assuming ρ = 0.33




39
     (6) Benchmark, ρ = θ                      s H /(s H + s L )   ∈ (0, 1)   ∈ (0, 1)     0.33        -0.67           0.00         -0.67
     (7) This Paper, 1860-80                         0.70           0.51       0.08        -0.24       -1.00           0.72         -0.62
     (8) This Paper, 1890-30                         1.10           0.51       0.08        0.85        -0.19                  N/Ad
     (9) Lewis (2011a)c 1980-2000                    1.15           0.51       0.08        0.93        -0.09                  N/Ad
     (10) Variant of (5)                            N/A            ∈ (0, 1)   ∈ (0, 1)     1.00         0.00           1.00          0.00

     Notes: a Simulated impact of a one unit increase in ln( H/L), where H represents skilled (literate) and L unskilled (illiterate)
     labor, on the returns to literacy (skilled-unskilled log wage gap) in a competitive single-good economy represented by the
     production function (12) in column (5) and (11) in column (7), where K represent capital. This impact is approximated
     as (16) in column (5) and (15) in column (7) where s L represents low-skill and s H skilled labor’s share of output, and κ
     represents the relative cross partial of low-skill labor, estimated in table 7. b Estimates of κ from Table 7 are converted to an
     estimate of θ (for the given value of ρ, s H and s L ) using (14) when capital is nested with unskilled labor and (13) when capital
     is nested with skilled labor. c Lewis estimates dln(K/Y )/d( L/H ) = −0.56, (with L, H high school dropouts and completers,
     respectively) which evaluated at the mean L/H of 0.3 (in Lewis’s sample) converts to an elasticity of about ε = 0.17, which
     is converted to an estimate of κ using that κ = −(ε − s L )/(s L + s H ). d κ > 1 is not feasible under this parameterization, as it
     would require θ > 1.
                           Table 9. Impact of Counterfactual Immigration Flows on Skilled Relative Wage

                                                                   Literate/Not Literate Ratio        %Impact on         Table 8
                                                                          Counter-                    Skilled Rel-    Wage Elas-
     Year                Counterfactual Scenario                  Actual Factual Gap (in ln)          ative Wage      ticity Used
                                                                   (1)       (2)         (3)               (4)             (5)
     A. Using 1860-80 Estimated Production Function
     1880              No net immigration 1860-80                  5.06      4.67        -0.08           8.15%       Row 7, Col 5
     B. Using 1890-1930 Estimated Aggregate Production Function
     1900             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897               7.94      8.25          0.04           -0.75%      Row 8, Col 5
     1910             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897               10.17     12.72         0.22           -4.31%      Row 8, Col 5
     1920             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897               13.58     19.18         0.35           -6.65%      Row 8, Col 5
     1930             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897               21.03     29.76         0.35           -6.69%      Row 8, Col 5
     C. Using 1860-80 Estimated Production Function
     1900             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897               7.94        8.25         0.04          -3.88%       Row 7, Col 5
     1910             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897              10.17       12.72         0.22         -22.43%       Row 7, Col 5




40
     1920             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897              13.58       19.18         0.35         -34.62%       Row 7, Col 5
     1930             Literacy Test Imposed in 1897              21.03       29.76         0.35         -34.84%       Row 7, Col 5
     Data source for Skill Ratios: U.S. Census of Population (Ruggles et. al 2008). Literacy rates computed for all those (both
     men and women) who were at least age 15. Counterfactual in panel A constructed by adding together natives present
     in 1880 with immigrants present in 1860. In Panels B and C, counterfactuals were constructed by dropping illiterate
     immigrants who reported a year of immigration after 1897 from the sample.
Online Appendix

A      Derivation of Parametric Model

A.1    Deriving Model of Equation (10)

We know from Equation (4) that the impact of the skill ratio on capital intensity will depend on
the cross-partial derivatives of the production function. It is relatively straightforward to show
that



                                                           ∂2 Y                ∂Y
                                                      L         = (1 − ρ ) s L                                                                       (17)
                                                          ∂L∂K                 ∂K

and that



                                             ∂2 Y                                      (ρ − θ )s L s H
                                                                                                              
                                                    ∂Y
                                        H         =                (1 − θ ) s H +                                                                    (18)
                                            ∂H∂K    ∂K                                    1 − sL

    Combining these, we obtain that κ is given by


                                                              (1 − ρ ) s L (1 − s L )
                                        κ=                                                                                                           (19)
                                                  (1 − ρ ) s L (1 − s L − s H ) + (1 − θ ) s H

Let us turn to the first order conditions for L and H to get wages. They are:
                                                              !ρ/θ                                    1/ρ−1
                                           θ                                                   ρ                                    ρ −1
                                        K                                                     L                                     L
           WL = A α            β                + (1 − β )             + (1 − α )                                 (1 − α )                         (20)
                                        H                                                     H                                     H

and
                                                !ρ/θ                                 1/ρ−1                                             !ρ/θ −1
                          θ                                                   ρ                                   θ
                       K                                                     L                                     K
WH = A α      β                + (1 − β )              + (1 − α )                               α        β                + (1 − β )             (1 − β ).
                       H                                                     H                                     H

                                                                                                                                                     (21)


                                                                       θ                 !ρ/θ −1                  ρ −1
                                 α (1 − β )
                                                               
                            WH                                     K                                           H
                               =                           β                + (1 − β )                                      .                        (22)
                            WL    (1 − α )                         H                                           L


                                                                        41
This has the log differential form d ln(WH /WL ) = (ρ − θ ) 1−1s−L −  sH
                                                                   s L d ln( K/H ) + ( ρ − 1) d ln( H/L ).
Substituting in for d ln(K/H ) for −κd ln( H/L) produces

                          d ln(WH /WL )                 1 − s L − sH
                                        = (ρ − θ )(−κ )              + ρ − 1.                               (23)
                            d ln( H/L)                     1 − sL


A.2   Derivation Model Version 2

In this case:



                                 ∂2 Y   (1 − θ )s L (1 − s H ) + (ρ − θ )s H s L ∂Y
                            L         =                                                                     (24)
                                ∂L∂K                    1 − sH                   ∂K

and that



                                              ∂2 Y   ∂Y
                                         H         =    ((1 − ρ)s H )                                       (25)
                                             ∂H∂K    ∂K

   Combining these, we obtain that κ is given by


                                             (1 − θ ) s L − (1 − ρ ) s H s L
                                 κ=                                                                         (26)
                                       (1 − ρ ) s H (1 − s L − s H ) + (1 − θ ) s L

   Going back to the firm’s problem, the first order conditions for high and low skill labor are

                                                   ρ 1/ρ−1
                                 !ρ/θ                
                   θ                                                  ρ −1
                   K                               H                  H
WH = A α       β      + (1 − β )      + (1 − α )            (1 − α )
                   L                               L                   L

                                                   ρ 1/ρ−1
                                 !ρ/θ                                                          !ρ/θ −1
                   θ                                                            θ
                   K                               H                             K
WL = A α       β      + (1 − β )      + (1 − α )            α                 β      + (1 − β )         (1 − β )
                   L                               L                              L

so relative wages are
                                                                 !1−ρ/θ  
                                                                         H ρ −1
                                                  θ
                        WH     1−α                K
                           =                   β      + (1 − β )                .                           (27)
                        WL   α (1 − β )           L                      L




                                                        42
Taking the log differential of this expression we obtain

                                          (1 − s L − s H )
               d ln(WH /WL ) = (θ − ρ)                     d ln(K/L) + (ρ − 1)d ln( H/L)
                                             1 − sH

which, after substituting for d ln(K/L) = (1 − κ )d ln( H/L), becomes

                                                     (1 − s L − s H )
                                                                              
              d ln(WH /WL ) =       (θ − ρ)(1 − κ )(                  + (ρ − 1) d ln( H/L)   (28)
                                                        1 − sH




                                                   43
B     Additional Results

B.1   Restricted First Stage

In table B.1 we present the first stage regressions which restrict the coefficients to be the same
in the early and late period. As is referenced in section 5, the predicted values from this are
what are actually used in the construction of the instrument interacted with period, following
Wooldridge (1997).

                                 Table B.1. First stage regressions

                                              (1)           (2)          (3)
                                                    Cut-off in 1880
                               [
                           ln( H/L)        0.548***       0.543***    0.517***
                                            (0.171)        (0.167)     (0.157)
                           R2                0.874          0.874       0.879
                                                    Cut-off in 1890
                               [
                           ln( H/L)        0.789***       0.784***    0.765***
                                            (0.166)        (0.159)     (0.149)
                           R2                0.874          0.875       0.879
                           Fixed Effects:
                           Year                Y             Y           Y
                           Area                Y             Y           Y
                           Industry            N             Y           Y
                           Ind. x Year         N             N           Y
                           Outcome is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+
                           population from IPUMS, except 1890, which uses
                           published tabulations of the age 10+ population of
                           the area. Standard errors in parentheses, calcu-
                           lated to be robust to arbitrary error correlation with
                           area. Sample is restricted to industry-years where at
                           least 2 cities in that year reported a given industry.
                           N=37,278. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.




B.2   Alternative adjustment mechanisms

Our estimates were, in some cases, sensitive to industry mix controls. So we now directly explore
whether the change in skill availability within an area altered the industry mix. The difference
between our aggregate results and our industry-level results may indicate that there is some
change by industry mix but it is difficult to quantify it. We present, in Table B.2, the IV estimates
of a regression of the share of low-skill workers employed in each quartile of the distribution of

                                                     44
firms on the skill ratio in the area. Since these regressions are run by area and not by industry,
they only include area and year fixed effects as those in Table 3. To measure industry shift,
we need to divide our industries in categories as running the share of each industry separately
would be too lengthy and difficult to interpret. As a first approximation, we separated industries
based on their capital/labor and literate/non-literate workers ratios at the national level in the
first year that variable was provided in the data (namely 1860 for K/N and 1890 for H/L).42 .
We find no strong evidence indicating that the aggregate skills ratio influenced significantly
industry composition and the allocation of low-skill workers to different industries. We find
only one significant coefficient which suggests that industries in the second quartile of the H/L
distribution expanded more in the 1860-1890 period in response to an increase in the local H/L
ratio, at the expense of all other quartiles.
    Combining these with the difference in factor intensity of each industry, we find very limited
evidence overall that these shifts allowed the economy to absorb the area-level shift in skills
availability. What we do here is we multiply the response in terms of size of industry by the
factor-ratio in each of these quantiles and sum them up. By dividing that sum by the average
factor ratio in the economy, we then obtain what is the change in percent that would have been
generated through shifts of industries alone. We find that in all periods, except 1860-1880, taking
the coefficients as face value, the change in industry composition would have actually lowered the
capital per worker in each county. The estimates range from 5 percent decrease in 1860-1890 to 28
percent decrease in 1890-1930. In 1860-1880, the results would suggest an increase of 17 percent.
Given that, if anything, the results we obtain here go in the opposite direction as our estimated
impacts at the disaggregated results, this suggest limited role for industry-shift responses. These
are simply averages and given the fact that none of the coefficients are significant, should not be
perceived as in any way precise. Nevertheless, they suggest little role for the pattern we observe
in aggregate to be driven by shifts across industries.
    The results for the skill ratio are all extremely small, suggesting that the manufacturing sector
did not absorb the change in skill ratios by altering its industry mix. Furthermore, we do not
see much evidence of a change as time goes by suggesting that we cannot justify the pattern we
identify as time passes.
    Overall, these results seem to suggest little role for within-manufacturing sectoral realloca-
tions in response to the skill shock. Finally, while not reported here, we also find that areas which
experienced an increase in their skill ratio over the later period did observe a lower growth in
manufacturing employment than other areas and the coefficient for the earlier period is positive
and not significant.43
  42 We also used the average value for all years where the information was available with very similar results,   available
upon request
  43 Results available upon request.




                                                           45
Table B.2. Impact on industry composition (share of low-skill workers employed)

                                    Ranked by their K/L                  Ranked by their H/L
                                                          Cut-off in 1880
ln(H/L)*Early                     0.014       -0.113      -0.016    -0.050         0.087      -0.071
                                 (0.097)      (0.071)     (0.198) (0.063)         (0.087)     (0.067)
ln(H/L)*Late                      0.181       -0.055       0.021    -0.074         0.161       0.111
                                 (0.178)      (0.162)     (0.177) (0.204)         (0.161)     (0.134)
Red. Form F-stat (early)          0.014        1.029       0.005     0.481         0.523       1.026
Red. Form F-stat (late)           0.917        0.140       0.021     0.066         0.746       0.587
                                                          Cut-off in 1890
ln(H/L)*Early                     0.017       -0.029       0.053      -0.022     0.163***     -0.073
                                 (0.084)      (0.064)     (0.119)     (0.057)     (0.059)     (0.079)
ln(H/L)*Late                      0.093        0.000      -0.055      -0.055       0.072       0.073
                                 (0.152)      (0.151)     (0.148)     (0.171)     (0.117)     (0.109)
Red. Form F-stat (early)          0.027        0.112       0.107       0.090       3.037       0.474
Red. Form F-stat (late)           0.264        0.000       0.087       0.071       0.247       0.316

Average K/L or H/L               335.006     620.050     955.658       5.627       5.749       5.917
All outcomes in share of low-skill workers employed in each quartile of the distribution of industries.
All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are unweighted. Right-hand side
variable is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population except 1890, which uses published
tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area. Standard errors in parentheses, calculated to be
robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. N=884. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.




                                                  46
   We also test whether there is a relation to firm size, which can be considered a proxy of factory
and modern production rather than artisan installations. Our instrumental variable estimates
suggest that the effect of the skill ratio is more positive in the second half, but none of our
estimates is statistically different from 0.44

                                        Table B.3. Firm size and skill ratios

                                        Ordinary Least Squares             Instrumental Variables
                                        (1)      (2)       (3)              (4)     (5)      (6)
                                                             Cut-off in 1880
                ln(H/L)*Early         0.145***   0.148***    0.141***     0.300       0.170      0.237
                                       (0.042)    (0.034)     (0.035)    (0.247)     (0.197)    (0.210)
                ln(H/L)*Late            0.036      0.047     0.065**      0.553       0.324      0.515
                                       (0.034)    (0.030)     (0.027)    (0.350)     (0.282)    (0.337)
                R2                      0.158      0.369       0.471      0.148       0.366      0.464
                RootMSE                 1.232      1.069       0.987      1.234       1.064      0.979
                                                             Cut-off in 1890
                ln(H/L)*Early          -0.039    0.146***    0.134***     -0.039      -0.025     -0.062
                                      (0.208)     (0.031)     (0.030)    (0.208)     (0.119)    (0.132)
                ln(H/L)*Late           0.368       0.019       0.032       0.368      0.336       0.364
                                      (0.311)     (0.044)     (0.042)    (0.311)     (0.310)    (0.328)
                R2                     0.151       0.368       0.470      0.151       0.364      0.466
                RootMSE                1.232       1.070       0.989       1.232      1.066       0.977
                Fixed Effects:
                Industry                    N       Y            Y          N          Y           Y
                Ind. x Year                 N       N            Y          N          N           Y
                All outcomes in logs. All regressions include fixed effects by area and by year and are
                weighted such that each area-year is given the same weight. Right-hand side variable
                is ln(literate/not literate) in the age 15+ population (except 1890, which uses published
                tabulations of the age 10+ population of the area). Standard errors in parentheses, cal-
                culated to be robust to arbitrary error correlation with area. Sample is restricted to
                industry-years where at least 2 cities in that year reported a given industry. N=37,408.
                Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.




B.3   Robustness checks for simulations

In the simulations in section 6, the estimates of s H and s L used were calculated from aggregate
data assuming that within occupational groups, there are no “return” to literacy, that is, within
each of production and non-production status that each worker received the same wage. In
fact, to the best of our ability to measure it, the “return” to literacy, that is ln(w H /w L ) may
have been around 50% over most of the years of our sample. We estimated this using the Iowa
 44 Results   are available in Table B.3.


                                                            47
Census (Goldin and Katz, 2010), which has actual data on earnings, and in the U.S. Censuses of
Population (Ruggles et al., 2010), using 1950 “occupation score” (that is, the mean wages in the
person’s reported occupation in the 1950 census). We limited to the sample to urban native-born
who are at least age 20. Figure B.1 shows our estimates of the return to literacy by year.45

                        Figure B.1. Estimates of returns to literacy, by Census year
                 .8
                 .6




                                                                     Iowa Census
                                                                                             US Cens.
                 .4
                 .2




                                                                                                  Iowa
                                                                                             (US Cens.)
                 0




                      1860     1870       1880       1890          1900    1910       1920       1930
                                                            Year



    We are using that φH = 0.85 and ln(w H /w L ) = 0.5, which means that that H/L = 5.7 and
                                  H wH
that the relative wage bills       = e0.5 ∗ 5.7 = 9.34. Given this, we could think that estimates of
                                  L wL
s H and s L that would be potentially more realistic would be s H = 0.53 and s L = 0.06, which is
not that different than what we are using. The results for our estimates of κ are robust to these
changes; if anything, sensitivity of wage responses to the level of κ was shown in in Table 8 with
these alternative share parameters.




  45 There is insufficient data to estimate the returns to literacy in Iowa in 1860. Even in the Iowa Census, there are

only 116 illiterate individuals who meet our sample criteria.


                                                          48
C       Data Appendix

This section covers some more of the details of the data sources and construction for the manu-
facturing data, and for the right-hand side variables (literacy ratio and the instrument).


C.1     Data Sources by Decade

The exact location of the tables used to construct our manufacturing outcomes are shown below.


C.1.1    1870 and covers 1850-1870

Table VIII(B), pp. 394-408 in Volume III, 1870 Census.


C.1.2    1900 and covers 1880-1900

Table 1, pp. 3-17 in Volume VII, 1900 Census.


C.1.3    1910

Table I, pp. 507-517 in Volume VIII, 1910 Census.


C.1.4    1920

Table 52, pp. 278-295 in Volume VIII, 1920 Census.


C.1.5    1930

Table 1, pp. 310-322 in Volume I, 1930 Census.


C.2     Imputed Capital Stock

Table C.4 shows the availability of variables in the manufacturing census tabulations by year. Not
all variables are tabulated in all available years (even if they were in the underlying surveys). For
example, data on capital stocks has always been collected, but was never tabulated after 1920.
Employment and value added are always available.
    To extend our main outcome to 1930, we used the 1910-1920 samples to run a regression of
ln(Capital) on ln(Horsepower), controlling for year, area, and industry effects. From these es-
timates we imputed that ln(\
                           capital ) = 0.77839346 ∗ ln( Horsepower ). The relationship between

                                                 49
                           Table C.4. Manufacturing Variables by Year

                                      Variables           Years
                                 Capital                1860-1920
                                 Value of Machinery     1890-1900
                                 Horsepower             1910-1930
                                 Fuel expenditures      1890-1930
                                 Number of Workers      1860-1930
                                 Value added            1860-1930


horsepower and capital is very strong; the predicted values from 1910 and 1920 from this regres-
sion are quite close to the actual values.
   Recall that we also examine horsepower variable directly. It represents the horsepower of
rated machinery, which is likely closer to the capital variable of interest in terms of replacing
manual labor. Unfortunately, the tabulated series on this is quite short, running just 1910-1930.
To extend the series backwards, we would like to use the closest variable to it, the value of
machinery, which was tabulated 1890 and 1900. So, unfortunately, there is no overlap in the
city-level tabulations of these variables from which to do the imputations. To address this, we
turn to a 1900 state level (aggregate) tabulation which included both the value of machinery and
                                                                    \ = 0.004 ∗ Machinery,
horsepower. The relationship between these two at this level is horsepower
which was applied to the 1890 and 1900 data to extend the horsepower variable back to 1890.
   We also examine fuel expenditures as a third outcome. In each case, the regression outcome
variable is the natural log of the capital variable divided by either the number of workers or value
added. Horsepower and fuel expenditures only begin in 1890. To get some kind of estimates for
the “early” period using these variables, we essentially put in blank cells for 1860 (and just
for 1860: there remains no data for 1870 or 1880 in the regressions which use these variables).
Specifically, we enter 0.1 for the value of horsepower and fuel expenditures in all 1860 cells. This
is motivated by the microdata available for 1860 suggest that fuel expenditures and machinery
horsepower in this era was trivial – see Atack and Bateman (1999) for a description of these
microdata.


C.3   Industry Matches

Industries were matched across census tabulations using tabulated crosswalks in years in after
1900, and by hand before that. Table C.5 gives our final set of industry crosswalks.




                                                50
                             Table C.5. Detailed Industry Matching

                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

                                             Industry 1
Biscuit, crackers, and pretzels     Confectionery and ice cream       Meat packed pork
Blended and prepared flour          Cooking and other edible fats     Meat packing, wholesale
made from purchased flour           and oils, not elsewhere classi-
                                    fied
Bread and crackers                  Cured fish                        Mustard
Bread and other bakery prod-        Feeds, prepared, for animals      Mustard, ground
ucts                                and fowls
Bread and other bakery prod-        Fish and oysters, canned          Oysters, canning and preserv-
ucts (except biscuit, crackers,                                       ing
and pretzels)
Bread, crackers, and other bak-     Fish cured and packed             Pickled fruits and vegetables
ery products                                                          and vegetable sauces and sea-
                                                                      sonings
Candy and other confectionery       Fish, canning and preserving      Pickles, preserves, and sauces
products
Canned and dried fruits and         Food preparations                 Prepared feeds (including min-
vegetables (including canned                                          eral) for animals and fowls
soups)
Canned fish, crustacea, and         Food preparations animal          Preserves and sauces
mollusks
Canning and preserving              Food preparations vegetable       Preserves, jams, jellies, and fruit
                                                                      butters
Canning and preserving, fish        Food preparations vermicelli &    Provisions
                                    macaroni
Canning and preserving, fruits      Food preparations, not else-      Salad dressings
and vegetables                      where classified
Canning and preserving: Fish,       Food preparations, not else-      Sausage
crabs, shrimps, oysters, and        where specified
clams
Canning and preserving: Fruits      Fruits & vegetables, canned &     Sausage casings—not made in
and vegetables: pickles, jellies,   preserved                         meat-packing establishments
preserves, and sauces
Cereal preparations                 Fruits and vegetables, canning    Sausage, meat puddings, head-
                                    and preserving                    cheese, etc., and sausage cas-
                                                                      ings, not made in meat-packing
                                                                      establishments




                                                  51
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Chewing gum                        Hominy                             Sausage, not made in slaughter-
                                                                      ing and meat-packing establish-
                                                                      ments
Coffee and spice, roasting and     Ice cream                          Sausages, prepared meats, and
grinding                                                              other meat products—not made
                                                                      in meat-packing establishments
Coffee and spices, ground          Ice cream and ices                 Slaughtering and meat packing
Coffee and spices, roasted and     Lard, refined                      Slaughtering and meat packing,
ground                                                                not including retail butchering
Coffee essence of                  Macaroni and vermicelli            Slaughtering and meat packing,
                                                                      wholesale
Coffee roasters                    Macaroni, spaghetti, vermicelli,   Slaughtering      and     meat-
                                   and noodles                        packing, wholesale
Coffee roasting                    Meat cured and packed (not         Slaughtering, wholesale, not in-
                                   specified)                         cluding meat packing
Confectionery                      Meat packed beef

                                            Industry 2
Poultry dressing and packing,      Poultry killing, dressing, and     Poultry, killing and dressing,
wholesale                          packing, wholesale                 not done in slaughtering and
                                                                      meatpacking establishments

                                            Industry 3
Butter                             Cheese                             Condensed and       evaporated
                                                                      milk
Butter, cheese, and condensed      Cheese, butter, and condensed      Creamery butter
milk                               milk

                                            Industry 4
Barley, pearl                      Flour-mill and gristmill prod-     Rice flour
                                   ucts
Flour and meal                     Flouring and grist mill products
Flour and other       grain-mill   Husks, prepared
products

                                            Industry 5
Rice cleaning                      Rice cleaning and polishing        Rice, cleaning and polishing

                                            Industry 6
Cane-sugar refining                Sugar and molasses refined         Sugar refining
                                   cane
Sugar and molasses                 Sugar and molasses, refining       Sugar, refining, not including
                                                                      beet sugar


                                                 52
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Sugar and molasses beet and     Sugar molds
grape

                                         Industry 7
Chocolate                       Chocolate and cocoa products,
                                not including confectionery
Chocolate and cocoa products    Cocoa

                                         Industry 8
Beverages                       Mineral water                      Water lime
Mineral and soda waters         Nonalcohclic beverages

                                         Industry 9
Liquors bottled                 Liquors vinous                     Liquors, rectified or blended
Liquors distilled               Liquors wine                       Liquors, vinous
Liquors malt                    Liquors, distilled                 Malt liquors
Liquors rectified               Liquors, malt                      Wines


                                         Industry 10
Malt                            Malt kilns                         Small beer


                                         Industry 11
Baking and yeast powders        Baking powders, yeast, and         Baking-powders
                                other leavening compounds
Baking powders and yeast        Baking, and yeast cakes and        Saleratus
                                powders


                                         Industry 12
Oleomargarine                   Oleomargarine and other butter
                                substitutes


                                         Industry 13
Glucose                         Starch                             Sugar and molasses sorghum


                                         Industry 14
Cordials and flavoring sirups   Flavoring extracts and flavoring   Liquors cordials
                                sirups




                                               53
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Cordials and sirups              Flavoring extracts and flavoring   Molasses, refined
                                 sirups, not elsewhere classified
Flavoring extracts               Liquor-coloring                    Sirups, other than sorghum


                                         Industry 15
Cider                            Vinegar
Cider refined                    Vinegar and cider


                                         Industry 16
Ice                              Ice, (by patented process)         Ice, manufactured


                                         Industry 17
Cigarettes                       Tobacco and cigars chewing         Tobacco, chewing, smoking,
                                 and smoking, and snuff             and snuff
Cigars                           Tobacco and cigars cigars          Tobacco, cigars and cigarettes
Cigars and cigarettes            Tobacco and snuff                  Tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes
Tobacco (chewing and smok-       Tobacco manufactures
ing) and snuff
Tobacco and cigars               Tobacco, chewing and smoking,
                                 and snuff


                                         Industry 18
Cotton braid, thread, lines,     Cotton lamp-wick                   Cotton thread, twine, and yarns
twine, and yarn
Cotton broad woven goods         Cotton mosquito-netting            Cotton yarn
Cotton flannel carding           Cotton narrow fabrics              Cotton, cleaning and rehan-
                                                                    dling
Cotton goods                     Cotton pressing                    Cotton, compressing
Cotton goods, (not specified)    Cotton small wares                 Cotton, ginning
Cotton goods, including cotton   Cotton table-cloths                Lace goods
small wares
Cotton lace                      Cotton thread


                                         Industry 19
Combs                            Miscellaneous fabricated prod-     Silk broad woven      goods—
                                 ucts not elsewhere classified      contract factories




                                                 54
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Combs and hairpins, not made        Pins                               Silk broad woven goods—
from metal or rubber                                                   regular factories or jobbers
                                                                       engaging contractors
Combs, shell and other              Rayon broad woven goods—           Silk goods
                                    contract factories
Fancy and miscellaneous arti-       Rayon broad woven goods—           Silk goods (not specified)
cles, not elsewhere classified      regular factories or jobbers en-
                                    gaging contractors
Fancy articles                      Rayon narrow fabrics               Silk goods sewing and twist
Fancy articles, not else where      Rayon        throwing       and    Silk narrow fabrics
specified                           spinning—contract factories
Fancy articles, not elsewhere       Rayon yarn and thread, spun        Silk sewing and twist
specified                           or thrown—regular factories or
                                    jobbers engaging contractors
Fans                                Rules, ivory and wood              Silk throwing and spinning—
                                                                       contract factories
Ivory and bone work                 Sewing birds                       Theatrical scenery
Ivory work                          Silk and fancy goods, fringes,     Theatrical scenery and stage
                                    and trimmings                      equipment
Ivory, shell, and bone work, not    Silk and rayon manufactures        Turning ivory and bone
including buttons, combs, or
hairpins
Ivory, shell, and bone work, not    Silk and silk goods
including combs and hairpins
Lamp shades                         Silk and silk goods, including
                                    throwsters


                                            Industry 20
Artificial and preserved flowers    Embroideries,      other   than    Millinery
and plants                          Schiffli-machine     products—
                                    contract factories
Artificial feathers and flowers     Embroideries,      other   than    Millinery and dressmaking
                                    Schiffli-machine     products—
                                    made in regular factories or by
                                    jobbers engaging contractors
Artificial feathers, flowers, and   Embroideries: Schiffli-machine     Millinery and lace goods
fruits                              products
Artificial flowers                  Embroidery                         Millinery and lace goods, not
                                                                       elsewhere specified
Artificial flowers, feathers and    Feathers and plumes                Millinery goods
plumes


                                                  55
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Belting and hose, rubber            Feathers, cleaned, dressed, and    Millinery, custom work
                                    dyed
Belting and hose, woven and         Feathers, plumes, and artificial   Raincoats and other waterproof
rubber                              flowers                            garments (except oiled cotton)
Belting and hose, woven, other      Feathers, plumes, and manufac-     Robes, lounging garments, and
than rubber                         tures thereof                      dressing gowns
Bleaching straw-goods               Finishing of men’s and boys’       Rubber and elastic goods
                                    hats of fur-felt, wool-felt, and
                                    straw
Boot and shoe findings              Flowers                            Rubber goods other than tires,
                                                                       inner tubes, and boots and
                                                                       shoes
Boots and shoes, custom work        Fur hats                           Rubber goods, not elsewhere
and repairing                                                          specified
Boots and shoes, factory prod-      Furnishing goods, men’s            Rubber products not elsewhere
uct                                                                    classified
Boots and shoes, not including      Furnishing goods, men’s not        Rubber tires, tubes, and rubber
rubber boots and shoes              elsewhere classified               goods, not elsewhere specified
Boots and shoes, rubber             Gloves and mittens                 Shirts
Cap fronts                          Gloves and mittens, cloth          Straw bonnet bleaching
Children’s and infants’ wear        Gloves and mittens, leather        Straw goods
not elsewhere classified-made
in inside factories or by jobbers
engaging contractors
Children’s coats-made in con-       Gutta-percha goods                 Straw goods,    not elsewhere
tract factories                                                        specified
Children’s coats-made in inside     Hair cloth                         Suspenders
factories or by jobbers engaging
contractors
Children’s dresses-made in          Hat and bonnet blocks              Suspenders, garters, and elastic
contract factories                                                     woven goods
Children’s dresses-made in in-      Hat and cap materials              Trimmings (not made in textile
side factories or by jobbers en-                                       mills) and stamped art goods
gaging contractors                                                     for embroidering
Clothing                            Hat and cap materials, men’s       Trimmings (not made in textile
                                                                       mills), stamped art goods, and
                                                                       art needlework—contract facto-
                                                                       ries




                                                  56
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Clothing (except work cloth-       Hat and cap materials; trim-      Trimmings (not made in textile
ing), men’s, youths’, and boys’,   mings, etc                        mills), stamped art goods, and
not elsewhere classified                                             art needlework—made in reg-
                                                                     ular factories or by jobbers en-
                                                                     gaging contractors
Clothing children’s                Hat and cap, except felt and      Trousers (semidress), wash
                                   straw men’s                       suits, and washable service
                                                                     apparel
Clothing ladies’                   Hat bodies                        Trusses, bandages, and sup-
                                                                     porters
Clothing men’s                     Hat materials                     Women’s and misses’ blouses
                                                                     and waists—made in contract
                                                                     factories
Clothing men’s, custom work        Hat tips                          Women’s and misses’ blouses
and repairing                                                        and waists—made in inside fac-
                                                                     tories or by jobbers engaging
                                                                     contractors
Clothing men’s, factory prod-      Hats and caps                     Women’s and misses’ clothing,
ucts                                                                 not elsewhere classfied—made
                                                                     in contract factories
Clothing men’s, factory prod-      Hats and caps, not including      Women’s and misses’ clothing,
ucts buttonholes                   fur hats and wool hats            not elsewhere classified—made
                                                                     in inside factories or by jobbers
                                                                     engaging contractors
Clothing women’s                   Hats and caps, other than felt,   Women’s and misses’ dresses
                                   straw, and wool                   (except house dresses)—made
                                                                     in contract factories
Clothing, leather and sheep-       Hats, fur-felt                    Women’s and misses’ dresses
lined                                                                (except house dresses)—made
                                                                     in inside factories or by jobbers
                                                                     engaging contractors
Clothing, men’s                    Hats, straw                       Women’s,       children’s    and
                                                                     infants’     underwear       and
                                                                     nightwear of cotton and
                                                                     flannelette woven fabrics
Clothing, men’s, buttonholes       Hats, straw, men’s                Women’s,      children’s,    and
                                                                     infants’     underwear       and
                                                                     nightwear of knitted fabrics




                                                    57
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Clothing, men’s, custom work         Hats, wool-felt                     Women’s,     children’s,   and
and repairing                                                            infants’   underwear       and
                                                                         nightwear of silk and rayon
                                                                         woven fabrics
Clothing, men’s, factory prod-       Hatsand caps, not including         Women’s, neckwear, scarfs, etc
uct                                  wool hats
Clothing, men’s, factory prod-       Hatters’ trimmings                  Wool hats
uct, buttonholes
Clothing, men’s, including           House dresses, uniforms, and        Wool scouring
shirts                               aprons—made in contract fac-
                                     tories
Clothing, women’s                    House dresses, uniforms, and        Woolen and worsted goods
                                     aprons—made in inside facto-
                                     ries or by jobbers engaging con-
                                     tractors
Clothing, women’s, dressmak-         India-rubber and elastic goods      Woolen      and      worsted
ing                                                                      manufactures—contract facto-
                                                                         ries
Clothing,   women’s,       factory   India-rubber goods                  Woolen      and      worsted
product                                                                  manufactures—regular     fac-
                                                                         tories or jobbers engaging
                                                                         contractors
Clothing, women’s, not else-         Leather gloves and mittens          Woolen goods
where classified
Clothing,     work (including        Men’s and boys’ hats and caps       Woolen yarn
sheep-lined and blanket-lined        (except felt and straw)
work coats but not including
shirts), men’s
Coats, suits, and skirts (except     Men’s and boys’ shirts (except      Woolen, worsted, felt goods,
fur coats)-made in contract fac-     work shirts), collars, and night-   and wool hats
tories                               wear made in inside factories or
                                     by jobbers engaging contractors
Coats, suits, and skirts (except     Men’s and boys’ shirts (except      Work clothing (except work
fur coats)-made in inside facto-     work shirts), collars, and night-   shirts), sport garments (except
ries or by jobbers engaging con-     wear—made in contract facto-        leather), and other men’s and
tractors                             ries                                boys’ apparel, not elsewhere
                                                                         classified
Collars and cuffs, men’s             Men’s and boys’ suits, coats,       Work gloves and mittens: cloth,
                                     and overcoats (except work          cloth and leather combined
                                     clothing)—made in contract
                                     factories



                                                    58
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Collars and cuffs, paper         Men’s and boys’ suits, coats,       Work shirts
                                 and overcoats (except work
                                 clothing)—made in inside fac-
                                 tories or by jobbers engaging
                                 contractors
Embroideries                     Men’s neckwear—made in in-          Worsted goods
                                 side factories or by jobbers en-
                                 gaging contractors


                                          Industry 21
Bleaching and dyeing             Dyeing and finishing cotton,        Printing cotton and woolen
                                 rayon, silk, and linen textiles     goods
Calico-printing                  Dyeing and finishing textiles       Satinet printing
Dyeing and bleaching             Dyeing and finishing textiles,      Whiting
                                 exclusive of that done in textile
                                 mills
Dyeing and cleaning              Dyeing and finishing woolen
                                 and worsted


                                          Industry 22
Hosiery                          Hosiery—seamless                    Knitted outerwear (except knit
                                                                     gloves)—contract factories
Hosiery and knit goods           Knit goods                          Knitted outerwear (except knit
                                                                     gloves)—regular factories or
                                                                     jobbers engaging contractors
Hosiery—full-fashioned           Knitted cloth                       Knitted underwear


                                          Industry 23
Cloth sponging and miscella-     Cloth, sponging and refinishing
neous special finishing
Cloth sponging and refinishing   Cloth-finishing


                                          Industry 24
Carpets                          Carpets rag                         Mats and matting
Carpets and rugs, other than     Carpets, rag                        Mats and rings
rag




                                                 59
                         Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Carpets other than rag             Carpets, rugs, and mats made            Mats and rugs
                                   from such materials as paper
                                   fiber, glass, jute, flax, sisal, cot-
                                   ton, cocoa fiber, and rags


                                             Industry 25
Oil floor cloth                    Oil floor-cloth                         Oilcloth, floor


                                             Industry 26
Felting                            Haircloth


                                             Industry 27
Batting, padding, and wadding:     Upholstering materials                  Upholstery
upholstery filling
Cotton batting and wadding         Upholstering materials,          not    Upholstery materials
                                   elsewhere specified


                                             Industry 28
Cotton waste                       Processed waste and recovered           Waste
                                   wool fibers—regular factories
                                   or jobbers engaging contractors
Oakum                              Shoddy


                                             Industry 29
Artificial leather and oilcloth    Oil cloth, silk
Oil and enameled cloth             Oilcloth, enameled


                                             Industry 30
Bagging                            Coach lace                              Jute goods
Bagging, flax, hemp, and jute      Cordage                                 Jute goods (except felt)
Bags                               Cordage and twine                       Linen goods
Bags other than paper              Cordage and twine and jute              Paper bags
                                   and linen goods
Bags paper                         Cotton bags                             Paper bags, except those made
                                                                           in paper mills
Bags, other than paper             Cotton cordage                          Textile bags—not made in tex-
                                                                           tile mills


                                                     60
                         Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Bags, other than paper, not in-     Filter bags                     Thread, linen
cluding bags made in textile
mills
Bags, other than paper, not         Flax and linen goods            Webbing
made in textile mills
Bags, paper                         Hemp hose
Bags, paper, exclusive of those     Jute and jute goods
made in paper mills


                                             Industry 31
Corsets                             Hoop-skirts and corsets
Corsets and allied garments         Skirt-supporters


                                             Industry 32
Bellows                             Pocket-books                    Trunks and valises
Belt clasps and slides              Pocket-books, portemonnaies,    Trunks carpet-bags, and valises
                                    and wallets
Belts (apparel),    regardless of   Pocketbooks, purses, and card   Trunks, suitcases, and bags
material                            cases
Belts, children’s                   Razor-strops                    Trunks, valises, and satchels
Leather goods                       Saddlery and harness            Whips
Leather goods       not elsewhere   Saddlery, harness, and whips    Whips and canes
classified
Leather goods,      not elsewhere   Small leather goods             Whips, whip-lashes, sockets,
classified                                                          and canes
Leather goods,      not elsewhere   Suitcases, brief cases, bags,   Women’s pocketbooks, hand-
specified                           trunks, and other luggage       bags, and purses
Pocketbooks                         Trunk and carpet-bag frames


                                             Industry 33
Fur coats and other fur gar-        Fur goods
ments, accessories, and trim-
mings


                                             Industry 34
Aluminum manufactures               Curtains,  draperies,     and   Housefurnishings       (except
                                    bedspreads—contract factories   curtains, draperies, and bed-
                                                                    spreads)



                                                  61
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Aluminum products (including       Curtains,      draperies,    and   Mops and dusters
rolling and drawing and ex-        bedspreads—made in regular
truding), not elsewhere classi-    factories or by jobbers engaging
fied                               contractors
Cotton coverlets                   House-furnishing goods, not        Quilts
                                   elsewhere classified
Curtains                           House-furnishing goods, not
                                   elsewhere specified


                                           Industry 35
Awnings and tents                  Awnings, tents, sails, and can-    Sails
                                   vas covers
Awnings, tents, and sails          Canvas products (except bags)


                                           Industry 36
Clothing, horse                    Military goods                     Regalia and society banners
                                                                      and emblems
Flags and banners                  Miscellaneous fabricated textile   Regalia, and society badges and
                                   products not elsewhere classi-     emblems
                                   fied
Flags, banners, regalia, society   Nets and seines                    Regalia, badges, and emblems
badges, and emblems
Horse covers                       Nets, fish and seine               Regalias, banners, and flags


                                           Industry 37
Logging camps and logging          Lumber staves, shooks, and         Timber   cutting   and   timber
contractors   (not     operating   headings                           hewed
sawmills)
Lumber and timber products         Lumber, sawed                      Veneering
Lumber and timber products,        Sawmills, veneer mills, and        Veneers
not elsewhere classified           cooperage-stock mills, includ-
                                   ing those combined with log-
                                   ging camps and with planing
                                   mills
Lumber sawed                       Shingles and lath


                                           Industry 38




                                                 62
                          Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Lumber planed                       Planing-mill products (includ-    Window blinds and shades
                                    ing general millwork), not
                                    made in planing mills con-
                                    nected with sawmills
Lumber, planed                      Sash, doors, and blinds           Window shades
Lumber, planing mill prod-          Venetian blinds                   Window shades and fixtures
ucts, including sash, doors, and
blinds
Lumber, planing-mill products,      Window and door screens and
not including planing mills con-    weather strip
nected with sawmills
Planing mills not operated in       Window and door screens and
conjunction with sawmills           weather strips


                                            Industry 39
Beds, spring                        Mattresses and beds               Mattresses and spring beds
Mattresses and bed springs, not     Mattresses and bedsprings         Mattresses and spring beds, not
elsewhere classified                                                  elsewhere specified


                                            Industry 40
Furniture                           Furniture, including store and    Safes cheese
                                    office fixtures
Furniture (not specified)           Household furniture, except       Safes provision
                                    upholstered
Furniture and refrigerators         Laboratory, hospital, and other   Sewing machine cases
                                    professional furniture
Furniture cabinet, school, and      Medicine-chests                   Show cases
other
Furniture chairs                    Office furniture                  Show-cases
Furniture iron bedsteads            Partitions, shelving, cabinet     Umbrella furniture
                                    work, and office and store fix-
                                    tures
Furniture polish                    Public-building furniture         Upholstered household furni-
                                                                      ture
Furniture refrigerators             Refrigerators                     Upholstering
Furniture, chairs                   Refrigerators and refrigerator    Upholstery
                                    cabinets, exclusive of mechani-
                                    cal refrigerating equipment
Furniture, factory products         Refrigerators and water-coolers   Whalebone and rattan



                                                  63
                     Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Furniture, including cabinet-    Refrigerators, domestic (me-
making, repairing, and uphol-    chanical     and   absorption),
stering                          refrigeration machinery and
                                 equipment,      and complete
                                 air-conditioning units


                                         Industry 41
Baskets                          Baskets, and rattan and willow     Whalebone and rattan, pre-
                                 ware                               pared
Baskets and rattan and willow    Rattan and willowware (except      Willow furniture and willow
ware, not including furniture    furniture) and baskets other       ware
                                 than vegetable and fruit baskets
Baskets for fruits and vegeta-   Whalebone and rattan               Willow ware
bles


                                         Industry 42
Boxes cigar                      Boxes wooden tobacco               Boxes, cigar, wooden
Boxes tobacco                    Boxes, cigar                       Cigar boxes: wooden, part
                                                                    wooden


                                         Industry 43
Boxes cheese                     Boxes wooden packing               Boxes, wooden packing, except
                                                                    cigar boxes
Boxes fancy                      Boxes, fancy and paper             Boxes, wooden, except cigar
                                                                    boxes
Boxes packing                    Boxes, paper and other, not        Fiber cans, tubes, and similar
                                 elsewhere specified                products
Boxes paper                      Boxes, paper, not elsewhere        Paperboard containers and
                                 classifled                         boxes not elsewhere classified
Boxes sugar                      Boxes, wooden packing              Wooden boxes except cigar
                                                                    boxes


                                         Industry 44
Carving                          Skewers, wooden, for butchers      Wood turned and shaped and
                                 & packers                          other wooden goods, not else-
                                                                    where classified
Cooperage                        Staves, heading, hoops, and        Wood work, miscellaneous
                                 shooks



                                               64
                        Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Cooperage and wooden goods,        Truss hoops                     Wood, turned and carved
not elsewhere specified
Handles                            Turning scroll-sawing, and      Wooden door-knobs
                                   molding
Handles, wooden                    Wood brackets, moldings, and    Wooden goods, not elsewhere
                                   scrolls                         specified
Kindling wood                      Wood products not elsewhere     Wooden ware
                                   classified
Kindling-wood                      Wood pulp miscellaneous arti-   Woodenware,         not elsewhere
                                   cles                            specified
Oars                               Wood pulp turned and carved


                                             Industry 45
Caskets, coffins, burial cases,    Coffin trimmings                Coffins, burial cases, and un-
and other morticians’ goods                                        dertakers’ goods
Coffin screws                      Coffins


                                             Industry 46
Cork products                      Cork-cutting                    Life-preservers
Cork, cutting                      Corks


                                             Industry 47
Matches


                                             Industry 48
Wood preserving


                                             Industry 49
Boot and shoe patterns             Lasts and boot-trees
Lasts                              Lasts and related products


                                             Industry 50
Looking-glass     and    picture   Mirror and picture frames       Mirror     frames    and   picture
frames                                                             frames


                                             Industry 51


                                                  65
                     Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Card boards                      Envelopes and cards, embossed     Paper writing
Card cutting                     Greeting cards (except hand-      Paper, printing and wrapping
                                 painted)
Card cutting and designing       Paper                             Paper, printing and writing
Cardboard                        Paper (not specified)             Patterns and models
Cardboard, not made in paper     Paper and paperboard mills        Pencil cases
mills
Cards enameled                   Paper and wood pulp               Printing materials
Cards hand                       Paper goods, not elsewhere        Pulp goods
                                 classified
Cards other than playing         Paper goods, not elsewhere        Show cards
                                 specified
Cards playing                    Paper printing                    Stationery goods, not elsewhere
                                                                   classified
Coated and glazed paper          Paper ruling                      Stationery goods, not elsewhere
                                                                   specified
Converted paper products not     Paper shades                      Tags
elsewhere classified
Die-cut paper and paperboard,    Paper staining                    Tapes and binding
and converted cardboard
Envelopes                        Paper wrapping                    Valentines


                                         Industry 52
Paper hangings                   Wall paper
Paper-hangings                   Wall paper, not made in paper
                                 mills


                                         Industry 53
Book binding                     Engraving, steel and copper       Paper patterns
                                 plate, including plate printing
Bookbinding and blank book       Engraving, steel and copper-      Patterns and models
making                           plate, and plate printing
Bookbinding and blank books      Engraving, steel, including       Periodicals:    publishing and
                                 plate printing                    printing
Bookbinding and blank-book       Engraving, wood                   Periodicals: publishing without
making                                                             printing
Bookbinding and related indus-   General commercial (job) print-   Photo-engraving, not done in
tries                            ing                               printing establishments




                                                  66
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Books: printing without pub-      Gravure, rotogravure, and ro-     Printing and publishing
lishing                           tary photogravure (including
                                  preparation of plates)
Books: publishing and printing    Labels and tags                   Printing and publishing (not
                                                                    specified)
Books:    publishing without      Lithographing                     Printing and publishing book
printing
Charts, hydrographic              Lithographing and engraving       Printing and publishing job
Chromos and lithographs           Lithographing     and    photo-   Printing and publishing news-
                                  lithographing        (including   paper
                                  preparation of stones or plates
                                  and dry transfers)
Engraving                         Lithography                       Printing and publishing, book
                                                                    and job
Engraving (other than steel,      Machine and hand typesetting      Printing and publishing, music
copperplate, or wood), chasing,   (including advertisement type-
etching, and diesinking           setting)
Engraving (steel, copperplate,    Map mounting and coloring         Printing and publishing, news-
and wood); plate printing                                           paper and periodical
Engraving and diesinking          Maps                              Printing and publishing, news-
                                                                    papers and periodicals
Engraving and die-sinking         Maps and atlases                  Printing, tip
Engraving and stencil-cutting     Music-printing                    Watch engraving
Engraving calico                  Newspapers: publishing and
                                  printing
Engraving on metal (except for    Newspapers: publishing with-
printing purposes)                out printing


                                          Industry 54
Photo-engraving                   Photoengraving, not done in
                                  printing establishments (in-
                                  cluding preparation of plates)
Photo-engraving, not done in      Photolithographing and photo-
printing establishments           engraving


                                          Industry 55
Electrotyping and stereotyping,   Stereotyping and electrotyping    Stereotyping and electrotyping,
not done in printing establish-                                     not done in printing establish-
ments                                                               ments



                                                  67
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included



                                           Industry 56
Bark ground                       Dyestuffs and extracts—natural      Paints, varnishes, and lacquers
Bark sumac, and sumac pre-        Paint and varnish                   Sumac, ground
pared
Bark, ground                      Paint-mills                         Tanning materials,      natural
                                                                      dyestuffs, mordants and assis-
                                                                      tants, and sizes
Colors and pigments               Paints                              Tanning materials,      natural
                                                                      dyestuffs, mordants, assistants,
                                                                      and sizes
Dye woods, stuffs, and extracts   Paints (not specified)              Varnish
Dye-woods and dye-stuffs          Paints and varnishes                Varnishes
Dyestuffs and extracts            Paints lead and zinc                White-lead


                                           Industry 57
Cottonseed oil, cake, meal, and   Oil linseed                         Oil, essential
linters
Lard, refined                     Oil neatsfoot                       Oil, lard
Oil Resin                         Oil vegetable (not specified)       Oil, linseed
Oil and cake, cottonseed          Oil vegetable castor                Oil, lubricating
Oil animal                        Oil vegetable cotton-seed           Oil, not elsewhere specified
Oil castor                        Oil vegetable essential             Oil, resin
Oil cocoa-nut                     Oil vegetable linseed               Oils essential
Oil cotton-seed                   Oil water                           Soybean oil, cake, and meal
Oil fish                          Oil, cake, and meal, cottonseed     Vegetable and animal oils, not
                                                                      elsewhere classified
Oil fish, whale and other         Oil, cottonseed and cake
Oil lard                          Oil, cottonseed, cake


                                           Industry 58
Acid pyroligneous                 Compressed and liquefied            Patent medicines and com-
                                  gases—not made in petroleum         pounds
                                  refineries or in natural-gasoline
                                  plants
Acid sulphuric                    Drug grinding                       Patent medicines and com-
                                                                      pounds and druggists’ prepara-
                                                                      tions




                                                 68
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Alcohol                            Druggists’ preparations             Patent or proprietary medicines
                                                                       and compounds
Barilla                            Druggists’ preparations, not in-    Pitch, brewers’ and Burgundy
                                   cluding prescriptions
Celluloid and celluloid goods      Druggists’ proparations             Sulphur
Chemicals                          Drugs and chemicals                 Tar and turpentine
Chemicals       bichromate    of   Drugs and medicines (includ-        Turpentine and rosin
potash                             ing drug grinding)
Chemicals not elsewhere classi-    Drugs, ground                       Turpentine crude
fied
Chemicals, not elsewhere clas-     Gum and gum cleaning                Turpentine distilled
sified
Coal-oil, refined                  Lye, condensed                      Zinc oxide of
Coal-tar products                  Medicines, extracts and drugs
Compressed and liquefied           Oil, illuminating, not including
gases                              petroleum refining


                                            Industry 59
Perfumery and cosmetics            Perfumery,     cosmetics, and
                                   fancy soaps
Perfumery and fancy soaps          Perfumes, cosmetics, and other
                                   toilet preparations


                                            Industry 60
Blacking and water-proof com-      Insecticides, fungicides, and re-
position                           lated industrial and household
                                   chemical compounds


                                            Industry 61
Candle adamantine                  Candles, adamantine and wax         Soap and candles
Candle wax                         Salt                                Soap and glycerin
Candles                            Soap                                Wax-work


                                            Industry 62
Bee-hives                          Charcoal pulverized                 Granular fuel
Charcoal                           Coke                                Oven coke and          coke-oven
                                                                       byproducts




                                                  69
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Charcoal and coke                 Coke, not including gas-house
                                  coke


                                           Industry 63
Ashes, pot and pearl              Fertilizers                        Fertilizers, (not plaster, ground)


                                           Industry 64
Explosives and fireworks          Gunpowder                          Saltpeter
Fireworks                         High explosives                    Torpedoes
Fire-works                        Salpeter and nitrate of soda


                                           Industry 65
Salt                              Salt ground


                                           Industry 66
Bone black                        Ivory-black                        Lamp-black
Bone, ivory, and lamp black       Lampblack


                                           Industry 67
Ink                               Ink writing                        Ink, writing
Ink printing                      Ink, printing                      Printing ink


                                           Industry 68
Ammunition                        Ammunition, cartridges


                                           Industry 69
Blacking                          Cleaning and polishing    prepa-   Polishing preparations
                                  rations
Blacking and cleansing and pol-   Cleaning and polishing    prepa-   Stove-polish
ishing preparations               rations, blackings, and   dress-
                                  ings
Blacking, stains, and dressings   Cleansing and polishing   prepa-
                                  rations


                                           Industry 70


                                                  70
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Glue                               Glue, not elsewhere specified
Glue and gelatin                   Isinglass


                                            Industry 71
Bone boiling                       Grease and tallow (except lubri-   Hides and tallow
                                   cating greases)
Grease                             Grease and tallow, not includ-
                                   ing lubricating greases
Grease and tallow                  Greaso and tallow


                                            Industry 72
Axle grease                        Gas, illuminating and heating      Oil kerosene
Benzoline                          Lubricating greases                Oil lubricating
Camphene and burning-fluid         Lubricating oils and greases,      Petroleum refining
                                   not made in petroleum refiner-
                                   ies
Gas                                Lubricating oils and greases—      Petroleum, refining
                                   not made in petroleum refiner-
                                   ies
Gas illuminating                   Oil coal


                                            Industry 73
Blueing                            Bluing                             Washing blue


                                            Industry 74
Mucilage and paste                 Mucilage, paste, and other ad-
                                   hesives, except glue and rubber
                                   cement
Mucilage, paste and other ad-      Putty
hesives, not elsewhere specified


                                            Industry 75
Wallboard and wall plaster (ex-
cept gypsum), building insula-
tion (except mineral wool), and
floor composition




                                                 71
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

                                            Industry 76
Asphaltum work                     Paving materials                    Paving-materials
Paving and paving materials        Paving materials: Asphalt, tar,     Paying blocks and paying mix-
                                   crushed slag, and mixtures          tures: asphalt, creosoted wood,
                                                                       and composition


                                            Industry 77
Alloying; and rolling and draw-    Foundry     and     machineshop     Paper-mill,  pulp-mill,  and
ing of nonferrous metals, except   products                            paper-products machinery
aluminum
Artificial eyes                    Foundry supplies                    Pencils (except mechanical) and
                                                                       crayons
Artificial limbs                   Furnaces, ranges, registers, and    Pencils lead
                                   ventilators
Artists’ materials                 Gas and electric fixtures           Pencils, lead (including me-
                                                                       chanical)
Automotive elcetrical equip-       Gas and electric fixtures, lamps    Penholders, wooden
ment                               and reflectors
Babbitt metal and solder           Gas and electric fixtures; lamps,   Pens and pencils gold
                                   lanterns, and reflectors
Batteries, storage and primary     Gas and lamp fixtures               Pens and pencils steel
(dry and wet)
Beauty-shop and barber-shop        Gas fixtures, lamps, and chan-      Pens, fountain and stylographic
equipment                          deliers
Bells                              Gas machines and gas and wa-        Pens, fountain and stylo-
                                   ter meters                          graphic; pen points, gold, steel,
                                                                       and brass
Blacksmiths’ tools                 Gas machines and meters             Pens, fountain, stylographic
                                                                       and gold
Blocks, pumps and spars            Gas machines, gas meters, and       Pens, gold
                                   water and other liquid meters
Blocks, pumps, and spars           Gasometers                          Pens, mechanical pencils, and
                                                                       pen points
Blowers; exhaust and ventilat-     Gasometers and tanks                Phonographs
ing fans
Bookbinders’ machinery             Generating, distribution, and       Phonographs      and     grapho-
                                   industrial apparatus, and appa-     phones
                                   ratus for incorporation in man-
                                   ufactured products, not else-
                                   where classified



                                                  72
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Brass and German silver, rolled    Globes, terrestrial and celestial   Plated and britannia ware
Brass and bell founding            Gold and silver assaying and        Plated ware
                                   refining
Brass and bronze products          Gold and silver, reduced and        Printers’ chases, furniture, and
                                   refined                             rollers
Brass and copper tubing            Gold and silver, reducing and       Printers’ fixtures
                                   refining, not from the ore
Brass and copper, rolled           Gold, silver, and platinum, re-     Printing lithographic presses
                                   ducing and refining, not from
                                   the ore
Brass and copper-tubing            Hair jewelry                        Printing materials
Brass book clasps and badges       Hatters’ tools                      Printing materials, not includ-
                                                                       ing type or ink
Brass castings and brass finish-   Hoisting apparatus and ma-          Printing-trades machinery and
ing                                chines                              equipment
Brass founding and brass ware      Industrial machinery, not else-     Professional and scientific in-
                                   where classified                    struments (except surgical and
                                                                       dental)
Brass founding and finishing       Instruments                         Pumping equipment and air
                                                                       compressors
Brass ornaments                    Instruments, professional and       Pumps
                                   scientific
Brass rolled                       Iron forged,      rolled,   and     Pumps (hand and power) and
                                   wrought                             pumping equipment
Brass ware                         Jewelers’ dies, tools, and ma-      Pumps, not including power
                                   chinery                             pumps
Brass wire and wire cloth          Jewelers’ findings and materials    Pumps, not including steam
                                                                       pumps
Brass, bronze, and copper prod-    Jewelry                             Pumps, steam and other power
ucts
Brassware                          Jewelry (not specified)             Radios, radio tubes, and phono-
                                                                       graphs
Brick machinery and tools          Jewelry (precious metals)           Registers, cash
Bronze castings                    Lamp tixtures                       Roofing and roofing materials
Bronze powders                     Lamp trimmings                      Roofing materials
Calcium lights                     Lamps                               Roofing, built-up and roll; as-
                                                                       phalt shingles; roof coating (ex-
                                                                       cept paint)
Calcium-lights                     Lamps and reflectors                Roofing, built-up and roll; as-
                                                                       phalt shingles; roof coatings
                                                                       other than paint



                                                  73
                        Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Carpenters’ tools                 Lamps, lanterns, & locomotive     Roofing-materials
                                  head-lights
Cars and trucks, industrial       Lead bar and sheet                Rooting
Cash registers and calculating    Lead manufactures of              Seal and copying presses
machines
Chalk and crayons                 Lead pigs                         Secondary smelting and refin-
                                                                    ing of nonferrous metals, not
                                                                    elsewhere classified
Churns                            Lead pipe                         Secondary smelting and refin-
                                                                    ing, gold, silver, and platinum
Coffins and burial cases, trim-   Lead shot                         Sheet-metal work not specifi-
ming and finishing                                                  cally classified
Coffins, burial cases, and un-    Lead, bar, pipe and sheet         Shoemakers tools
dertakers’ goods
Commercial laundry,        dry-   Lead, bar, pipe, and sheet        Silver manufactures of
cleaning, and pressing machin-
ery
Communication equipment           Lead, smelting and refining       Silver plated and     Britannia
                                                                    ware
Construction and similar ma-      Lighting fixtures                 Silversmithing
chinery (except mining and oil-
field machinery and tools)
Cooper, tin, and sheet-iron       Lightning rods                    Silversmithing and silverware
work
Coopers’ tools                    Lightning-rods                    Silverware
Copper and brass ware             Machine tools                     Silverware and plated ware
Copper milled and smelted         Machine-shop products not         Smelting and refining, not from
                                  elsewhere classified              the ore
Copper rolled                     Machine-shop repairs              Speaking-tubes
Copper sheet and bolt             Machine-tool accessories and      Special industry machinery, not
                                  small metal-working tools, not    elsewhere classified
                                  elsewhere classified
Copper smelting                   Machine-tool       and    other   Spectacles and eye-glasses
                                  metalworking-machinery
                                  accessories, metalcutting and
                                  shaping tools, and machinists’
                                  precision tools
Copper work                       Machinery (not specified)         Spectacles and eyeglasses
Copper, smelting and refining     Machinery fire-engines            Stationery
Copper, tin, and sheet-iron       Machinery railroad repairing      Sulphuric, nitric, and mixed
products                                                            acids



                                                74
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Copper, tin, and sheet-iron      Machinery shingle-machines         Surgical and medical instru-
work, including galvanizediron                                      ments
work, not elsewhere classified
Coppersmithing                   Machinery steam engines and        Surgical and orthopedic appli-
                                 boilers                            ances, including artificial limbs
Costume jewelry and costume      Machinery steam-engines, &c        Surgical appliances
novelties (jewelry other than
fine jewelry)
Cotton gins                      Machinery   turbine  water-        Surgical appliances and artifi-
                                 wheels                             cial limbs
Curriers’ tools                  Machinery wood-working             Surgical supplies and equip-
                                                                    ment not elsewhere classified;
                                                                    orthopedic appliances
Cutlery                          Machinists’ tools                  Teeth, porcelain
Cutlery and tools, not else-     Measuring instruments, me-         Telegraph and telephone appa-
where specified                  chanical (except electrical mea-   ratus
                                 suring instruments, watches,
                                 and clocks)
Dental equipment and supplies    Mechanical power-transmission      Tin cans and other tinware not
                                 equipment                          elsewhere classified
Dental goods                     Metal repaired and white           Tin cans and other tinware, not
                                                                    elsewhere classified
Dental goods and equipment       Metal spinning                     Tin copper, and sheet-iron ware
Dentistry, mechanical            Metal type                         Tin, copper, and sheet-iron
                                                                    ware
Dentists’ materials              Metal working machinery and        Tinners’ tools and machines
                                 equipment, not elsewhere clas-
                                 sified
Dumb-waiters                     Meters gas                         Tinsmithing, coppersmithing,
                                                                    and sheet-iron working
Eave-troughs                     Meters gas and water               Tinware, not elsewhere speci-
                                                                    fied
Electric lamps                   Meters water                       Tools, not elsewhere specified
Electric light and power         Mining machinery and equip-        Typewriters and supplies
                                 ment
Electrical apparatus and sup-    Money-drawers                      Vault lights and ventilators
plies
Electrical appliances            Newspaper-directing machines       Vault lights, (of iron and glass)
Electrical machinery, appara-    Nickel, smelted                    Vault-lights
tus, and supplies




                                               75
                        Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Electrical products not else-     Nonferrous-metal alloys and       Vending, amusement, and other
where classified                  products, not including alu-      coin-operated machines
                                  minum products
Electro-magnetic machines         Nonferrous-metal      foundries   Windlasses
                                  (except aluminum)
Elevators, escalators, and con-   Nonferrous-metal products not     Windmills
veyors                            elsewhere classified
Engines, steam, gas, and water    Office and store machines, not    Wire insulated
                                  elsewhere classified
Engravers materials               Oil tanks                         Wiring devices and supplies
Engravers’ blocks and wood        Oil-field machinery and tools     Woodworking machinery
Engravers’ materials              Ophthalmic goods: lenses and      X-ray and therapeutic appara-
                                  fittings                          tus and electronic tubes
Food-products machinery           Optical goods                     Zinc
Foundery-facings                  Optical instruments and lenses    Zinc smelted and rolled
Foundry and machine shop          Ornaments paper                   Zinc statuary and building or-
products                                                            naments
Foundry and machine-shop          Ornaments plaster
products
Foundry and machine-shop          Ornaments terra-cotta
products, not elsewhere classi-
fied


                                          Industry 78
Tin and terne plate


                                          Industry 79
Tinfoil


                                          Industry 80
Leather                           Leather patent and enameled       Leather, tanned, curried, and
                                  leather                           finished
Leather curried                   Leather skin-dressing             Leather: Tanned, curried, and
                                                                    finished
Leather dressed skins             Leather tanned                    Leather: tanned, curried, and
                                                                    finished—contract factories
Leather morocco                   Leather, curried                  Leather: tanned, curried, and
                                                                    finished-regular factories or
                                                                    jobbers engaging contractors


                                                76
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Leather morocco, tanned and       Leather, dressed skins              Leather-board
curried
Leather patent and enameled       Leather, tanned


                                           Industry 81
Belting and hose, (leather)       Belting, leather                    Leather belting and hose
Belting and hose, leather         Industrial leather belting and
                                  packing leather


                                           Industry 82
Boot and shoe cut stock           Boot and shoe findings, not         Boots and shoes, other than
                                  made in boot and shoe factories     rubber
Boot and shoe cut stock and       Boot and shoe uppers                Footwear (except rubber)
findings
Boot and shoe cut stock, exclu-   Boots and shoes                     Shoe findings
sive of that produced in boot
and shoe factories
Boot and shoe cut stock, not      Boots and shoes, custom work        Shoe peg machines
made in boot and shoe factories   and repairing
Boot and shoe findings            Boots and shoes, including cut      Shoe-pegs
                                  stock and findings
Boot and shoe findings, exclu-    Boots and shoes, not including
sive of those produced in boot    rubber boots and shoes
and shoe factories


                                           Industry 83
Aquariums                         Glass products (except mirrors)     Looking-glasses
                                  made from purchased glass
Glass                             Glass stained                       Mirrors
Glass containers                  Glass ware, (not specified)         Mirrors and other glass prod-
                                                                      ucts made of purchased glass
Glass cut                         Glass window                        Mirrors, framed and unframed
Glass plate                       Glass, cutting, staining, and or-   Mirrors, framed and unframed,
                                  namenting                           not elsewhere specified


                                           Industry 84
Type and type and stereotype      Type founding                       Type founding and printing
founding                                                              materials



                                                 77
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included



                                            Industry 85
Artificial stone                   Concrete products                  Porcelain ware
Artificial stone products          Conerete products                  Pottery
Bath-tubs                          Crucibles                          Pottery and stoneware
Brick                              Drain and sewer pipe               Pottery, including porcelain
                                                                      ware
Brick and hollow structural tile   Drain tile                         Pottery, terra cotta, and fire-clay
                                                                      products
Brick and tile                     Drain-pipe                         Pottery, terra-cotta and fire-clay
                                                                      products
Brick and tile, terra-cotta, and   Fire brick                         Rooting
fireclay products
Building-stone, artificial         Floor and wall tile (except        Stone and earthen ware
                                   quarry tile)
Cement                             Lime                               Stone- and earthen-ware
Cement pipe                        Lime and cement                    Stucco and stucco work
Cisterns                           Masonry, brick and stone           Terra-cotta ware
Clay products (other than pot-     Porcelain electrical supplies      Water closets
tery) and nonclay refractories


                                            Industry 86
China and glass decorating         China decorating, not including    China firing and decorating,
                                   that done in potteries             not done in potteries
China decorating                   China firing and decorating (for
                                   the trade)


                                            Industry 87
Gypsum products                    Plaster, ground                    Wall plaster and composition
                                                                      flooring
Plaster and manufactures of        Wall plaster                       Wall plaster, wall board, insu-
                                                                      lating board, and floor compo-
                                                                      sition


                                            Industry 88
Mantels, slate, marble, and        Monuments and tombstones           Soap-stone stoves, fire-places,
marbleized                                                            sinks, and cisterns




                                                  78
                         Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Marble and stone work               Monuments, tombstones, cut-       Statuary and art goods
                                    stone, and stone products not
                                    elsewhere classified
Marble and stone work, (not         School apparatus                  Statuary and art goods (except
specified)                                                            stone and concrete)—factory
                                                                      production
Marble monuments and tomb-          School slates and slate pencils   Statuary and art goods, factory
stones                                                                product
Marble, granite, slate, and other   Soap stone                        Well curbs
stone products


                                            Industry 89
Abrasive wheels, stones, paper,     Grindstones                       Sand paper
cloth, and related products
Emery and other abrasive            Grindstones and grindstone        Seythe rifles stones
wheels                              quarrying
Emery wheels                        Hones and whetstones
Emery wheels and other abra-        Sand and emery paper and
sive and polishing appliances       cloth


                                            Industry 90
Asbestos products, not includ-      Steam and other packing; pipe
ing steam packing                   and boiler covering
Steam and other packing, pipe       Steam packing
and boiler covering, and gas-
kets, not elsewhere classified


                                            Industry 91
Barytes                             Emery reduced and ground          Minerals and earths, ground or
                                                                      otherwise treated
Chalk prepared                      Glass sand                        Quartz, milled
Corundum                            Kaolin and ground earths
Emery                               Kaolin and other earth grinding


                                            Industry 92
Blast-furnace products              Iron and steel, processed         Iron forged,      rolled,   and
                                                                      wrought




                                                   79
                        Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Cast-iron pipe                      Iron and steel, steel works and   Iron pigs
                                    rolling mills
Cast-iron pipe and fittings         Iron and steel, tempering and     Steel (not specified)
                                    welding
Gray-iron and semisteel cast-       Iron and steel: Steel works and   Steel Bessemer
ings                                rolling mills
Iron and steel                      Iron blooms                       Steel cast
Iron and steel, blast furnaces      Iron cast                         Steel castings
Iron and steel, bolts, nuts,        Iron castings (not specified)     Steel works and rolling mills
washers, and rivets, not made
in steel works or rolling mills
Iron and steel, cast-iron pipe      Iron forged and rolled            Steel, and manufactures of


                                            Industry 93
Wire                                Wire, drawn from purchased
                                    bars or rods
Wire drawn from purchased           Wired steel
rods


                                            Industry 94
Horse shoe nails                    Iron nails and spikes, cut and
                                    wrought
Iron and steel, nails and spikes,   Nails, cut, wrought, and spikes
cut and wrought, including
wire nails


                                            Industry 95
Iron forged,       rolled,    and   Wire work                         Wirework, including wire rope
wrought                                                               and cable
Wire cloth                          Wire work, sieves, and bird-      Wirework, not elsewhere classi-
                                    cages                             fied
Wire rope                           Wirework not elsewhere classi-    Wirework, not elsewhere speci-
                                    fied                              fied


                                            Industry 96
Cutlery                             Cutlery and edge tools            Mowing-machine knives




                                                  80
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Cutlery (except aluminum, sil-    Cutlery and edge-tools, (not       Scythes
ver, and plated cutlery) and      specified)
edge tools
Cutlery (not including silver     Edge-tools and axes                Stone-cutters’ tools
and plated cutlery) and edge
tools


                                          Industry 97
Anvils and vises                  Shovels, spades, forks, and hoes   Tools, not including edge tools,
                                                                     machine tools, files, or saws
Handspikes                        Tools (except edge tools, ma-
                                  chine tools, files, and saws)
Shovels and spades                Tools, not elsewhere specified


                                          Industry 98
Files


                                          Industry 99
Saws


                                          Industry 100
Bank locks                        Hardware not elsewhere classi-     Hardware, saddlery
                                  fied
Hardware                          Hardware saddlery                  Hinges, wrought and cast


                                          Industry 101
Enameled-iron sanitary ware       Plumbers supplies
and other plumbers’ supplies
(not including pipe and vitre-
ous and semivitreous china san-
itary ware)
Plumbers materials                Plumbers’ supplies, not includ-
                                  ing pipe or vitreous-china sani-
                                  tary ware


                                          Industry 102



                                                81
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Furnaces, ranges, registers, and   Oil burners, domestic and in-    Steam water-gauges
ventilators                        dustrial
Gas and oil stoves                 Steam and gas fittings and       Stoves and furnaces, in cluding
                                   valves                           gas and oil stoves
Heating and cooking appara-        Steam fittings and heating ap-   Stoves and hot-air furnaces
tus, except electric, not else-    paratus
where classified
Heating-apparatus                  Steam fittings and steam and     Stoves and ranges (other than
                                   hot-water heating apparatus      electric) and warm-air furnaces
Iron cast                          Steam fittings, regardless of    Stoves, gas and oil
                                   material
Iron castings stoves, heaters, &   Steam heaters and heating ap-    Stoves, ranges, water heaters,
hollow ware                        paratus                          and hot-air furnaces (except
                                                                    electric)


                                          Industry 103
Power boilers and associated
products


                                          Industry 104
Automobile stampings               Iron, enameled                   Stamped and pressed metal
                                                                    products (except automobile
                                                                    stampings)
Enameling                          Japanned ware                    Stamped ware
Enameling     and     enameled     Japanning                        Stamped ware, enameled ware,
goods                                                               and metal stamping, enamel-
                                                                    ing, japanning, and lacquering
Enameling and japanning            Metallic caps and labels         Tinned iron ware
Enameling, japanning, and lac-     Stamped and enameled ware,
quering                            not elsewhere specified


                                          Industry 105
Galvanizing                        Galvanizing       and  other
                                   coating—carried on in plants
                                   not operated in connection
                                   with rolling mills
Galvanizing and other coating      Iron, galvanized
processes




                                                82
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included



                                            Industry 106
Bridge-building                     Iron forged,          rolled,   and   Structural and ornamental iron
                                    wrought                               and steel work, not made in
                                                                          plants operated in connection
                                                                          with rolling mills
Bridges                             Iron railing, wrought                 Structural ironwork, not made
                                                                          in steel works or rolling mills
Fabricated structural steel and     Ironwork, architectural and or-       Vanes, weather
ornamental metal work, made         namental
in plants not operated in con-
nection with rolling mills
Fire escapes                        Stair building
Grates and fenders                  Stair rods


                                            Industry 107
Doors, shutters, and window         Iron forged,     rolled,        and   Sash, doors, and blinds
sash and frames, metal              wrought
Doors, window sash, frames,         Sash doors and blinds
molding, and trim (made of
metal)
Iron and steel, doors and shut-     Sash metal
ters


                                            Industry 108
Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets    Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets-     Iron and steel, bolts, nuts,
                                    made in plants not operated in        washers, and rivets, not made
                                    connection with rolling mills         in rolling mills
Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets,   Iron and steel, bolts, nuts,          Iron bolts, nuts, washers, and
not made in plants operated in      washers, and rivets                   rivets
connection with rolling mills


                                            Industry 109
Anchors and chains                  Horse shoes                           Iron and steel, wrought pipe
Axles                               Iron anchors and cable chains         Iron forged,      rolled,  and
                                                                          wrought




                                                     83
                      Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Forgings, iron and steel, not     Iron and steel forgings, not        Steel forged
made in plants operated in con-   made in steel works or rolling
nection with rolling mills        mills
Forgings, iron and steel—made     Iron and steel, forgings            Whitesmithing
in plants not operated in con-
nection with rolling mills


                                          Industry 110
Iron and steel, pipe, wrought     Iron forged,        rolled,   and   Iron pipe, wrought
                                  wrought


                                          Industry 111
Springs, car, carriage, locomo-   Springs, steel, car and carriage    Springs, steel, except wire, not
tive, and other                                                       made in plants operated in con-
                                                                      nection with rolling mills
Springs, steel (except wire)—     Springs, steel, car and carriage,   Steel springs
made in plants not operated in    not made in steel works or
connection with rolling mills     rolling mills


                                          Industry 112
Screw-machine products and        Screws, machine
wood screws
Screws                            Wooden screws


                                          Industry 113
Keys, metallic                    Steel barrels, kegs, and drums
Steel barrels, drums and tanks,   Vats
portable


                                          Industry 114
Fire arms                         Gun locks and materials             Powder-flasks and percussion-
                                                                      caps
Firearms                          Gunsmithing
Fire-arms                         Percussion-caps


                                          Industry 115



                                                 84
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Safes and vaults                  Safes fire-proof                    Sates, doors, and vaults, (fire-
                                                                      proof)


                                          Industry 116
Clock materials                   Watch and clock materials and       Watches
                                  parts, except watchcases
Clocks                            Watch and clock materials, ex-      Watches, watch repairing, and
                                  cept watchcases                     materials
Clocks and watches, including     Watch guards
cases and materials
Watch and clock materials         Watch materials


                                          Industry 117
Clock cases                       Watch cases
Clock-cases                       Watchcases


                                          Industry 118
Glaziers’ diamonds                Lapidary work
Lapidaries’ work                  Pearl goods


                                          Industry 119
Electroplating                    Electroplating, plating, and pol-
                                  ishing


                                          Industry 120
Gold and silver leaf and foil     Gold and silver, leaf and foil      Gold leaf and foil


                                          Industry 121
Tin foil


                                          Industry 122
Agricultural implements           Agricultural implements mis-        Agricultural machinery (except
                                  cellaneous                          tractors)
Agricultural         implements   Agricultural implements mow-        Clover hulling
fanning-mills                     ing and reaping machines



                                                 85
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Agricultural implements grain-     Agricultural implements plows,    Hay-pressing
cradles and seythe-snaths          harrows, and cultivators
Agricultural implements grain-     Agricultural implements rakes     Machinery   hay   and     cotton
drills                                                               presses
Agricultural implements han-       Agricultural implements straw-
dles, plow, and other              cutters
Agricultural implements hoes       Agricultural       implements
                                   thrashers, horse-powers, and
                                   separators


                                           Industry 123
Confectioners’ tools               Machinery ribbon-looms            Textile machinery and parts
Machinery cotton and woolen        Textile machinery


                                           Industry 124
Scales and balances


                                           Industry 125
Sad-irons                          Washing machines and clothes-
                                   dryers
Washing machines and clothes       Washing-machines and clothes-
wringers                           wringers


                                           Industry 126
Sewing machine needles             Sewing machines and attach-       Sewing-machine fixtures
                                   ments
Sewing machine shuttles            Sewing machines, cases, and at-   Sewing-machines
                                   tachments
Sewing machines                    Sewing-machine cases


                                           Industry 127
Automobile bodies and parts        Carriage-trimmings                Hubs, spokes, bows, shafts,
                                                                     wheels, & felloes
Automobile trailers (for attach-   Carriages                         Motor vehicles, motor-vehicle
ment to passenger cars)                                              bodies, parts and accessories
Automobiles                        Carriages and sleds, children’s   Motor vehicles, not including
                                                                     motorcycles



                                                 86
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Automobiles, including bodies      Carriages and wagons                 Motor-vehicle    bodies    and
and parts                                                               motor-vehicle parts
Bicycles and tricycles             Carriages and wagons and ma-         Motorcycles, bicycles and parts
                                   terials
Bicycles, motorcycles, and parts   Carriages and wagons, includ-        Spokes, hubs, felloes, shafts,
                                   ing repairs                          and bows
Carriage and wagon materials       Carriages wagons                     Steering apparatus
Carriage trimmings                 Carriagesmithing                     Wheelbarrows
Carriage, wagon, sleigh, and       Fire engines
sled materials


                                           Industry 128
Car and general construction       Cars and general shop con-           Cars, railroad and street, and
and repairs, steam-railroad re-    struction and repairs by steam-      repairs, not including establish-
pair shops                         railroad companies                   ments operated by steam rail-
                                                                        road companies
Car brakes                         Cars and general shop con-           Cars, steam-railroad, not in-
                                   struction and repairs by street-     cluding operations of railroad
                                   railroad companies                   companies
Car fixtures and trimmings         Cars, electric and steam rail-       Cars, street-railroad, not in-
                                   road, not built in railroad repair   cluding operations of railroad
                                   shops                                companies
Car linings                        Cars, electric-railroad, not in-     Car-wheels
                                   cluding operations of railroad
                                   companies
Cars and car equipments-           Cars, omnibuses, and repairing       Locomotive engines and repair-
railroad, street, and rapid-                                            ing
transit
Cars and general shop con-         Cars, railroad and repairs
struction and repairs by steam
railroad companies


                                           Industry 129
Aircraft and parts                 Aircraft and parts, including
                                   aircraft engines


                                           Industry 130
Blocks and spars                   Masts and spars                      Shipbuilding and ship repair-
                                                                        ing


                                                  87
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Blocks, pumps, and spars            Rigging                            Shipbuilding, including boat
                                                                       building
Boat building and boat repair-      Ship and boat building             Shipbuilding, iron and steel
ing
Boats                               Ship and boat building, steel      Shipbuilding, steel
                                    and wooden, including repair
                                    work
Iron ship-building and marine       Ship and boat building,            Shipbuilding, wooden, includ-
engines                             wooden                             ing boat building
Iron steamships                     Ship building, ship materials, &
                                    repairs
Mast hoops and hanks                Shipbuilding


                                              Industry 131
Cameras                             Photographic apparatus and         Photographic materials
                                    materials
Photographic apparatus              Photographic apparatus and         Photographs
                                    materials and projection equip-
                                    ment (except lenses)


                                              Industry 132
Muscial instruments: Organs         Musical instruments miscella-      Musical instruments, piano and
                                    neous                              organ materials
Musical instrument parts and        Musical instruments organs         Musical instruments, pianos
materials: Piano and organ
Musical instruments (not speci-     Musical instruments      organs    Musical instruments, pianos
fied)                               and materials                      and materials
Musical instruments and mate-       Musical instruments      piano-    Musical instruments, pianos
rials, not specified                fortes                             and organs and materials
Musical instruments and parts       Musical instruments      pianos    Musical instruments: Pianos
and materials, not elsewhere        and materials
classified
Musical instruments materials       Musical instruments, organs        Organs
Musical               instruments   Musical instruments, organs        Piano-forte stools
melodeous                           and materials
Musical               instruments   Musical instruments, parts, and
melodeous,          house-organs,   materials not elsewhere classi-
and materials                       fied




                                                   88
                        Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

                                            Industry 133
Carriages and sleds, children’s     Games and toys (except dolls       Toys and games
                                    and children’s vehicles)
Carriages children’s                Toy books and games                Toys tin
Children’s vehicles                 Toys                               Wagons and carts
Dolls (except rubber)               Toys (not including children’s
                                    wheel goods or sleds), games,
                                    and playground equipment


                                            Industry 134
Base-ball goods                     Billiard tables, bowling alleys,   Sporting and athletic good not
                                    and accessories                    else Where classified
Billiard & bagatelle tables, cues   Croquet sets                       Sporting and athletic goods
& materials
Billiard and bagatelle tables       Fish-hooks                         Sporting and athletic goods, not
                                                                       including firearms or ammuni-
                                                                       tion
Billiard and pool tables, bowl-     Fishing lines, nets, and tackle    Sporting goods
ing alleys, and accessories
Billiard cues                       Fly-nets
Billiard tables and materials       Hunting and fishing tackle


                                            Industry 135
Hand stamps                         Hand stamps, stencils        and   Hand-stamps
                                    brands
Hand stamps and stencils and        Hand stamps, stencils,       and   Stencils and brands
brands                              brands


                                            Industry 136
Carbon paper and inked rib-
bons


                                            Industry 137
Buttons


                                            Industry 138




                                                   89
                       Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included

Jewelry and instrument cases       Jewelry cases and instrument
                                   cases
Jewelry boxes and cases            Stereoscopic cases


                                           Industry 139
Brooms                             Brush blocks                      Brushes, (not whisk)
Brooms and brushes                 Brush handles and stocks          Brushes, other than rubber
Brooms and whisk-brushes           Brushes                           Carpet sweepers


                                           Industry 140
Furs                               Furs, dressed                     Furs, dressed and dyed


                                           Industry 141
Signs                              Signs and advertising novelties   Signs, advertising displays, and
                                                                     advertising novelties


                                           Industry 142
Fabricated plastic products, not
elsewhere classified


                                           Industry 143
Umbrellas and canes                Umbrellas and parasols            Umbrellas, parasols, and canes


                                           Industry 144
Pipe tongs                         Pipes meerschaums
Pipes (tobacco)                    Pipes, tobacco


                                           Industry 145
Mineral water water apparatus      Soda water apparatus              Soda-water apparatus


                                           Industry 146
Bottle molds                       Models and patterns               Models and patterns, not in-
                                                                     cluding paper patterns
Candle-molds                       Models and patterns (except
                                   paper patterns)


                                                   90
                         Industry “Aggregate” and Census Industries Included



                                           Industry 147
  Hair work                        Hairwork                           Wigs and hair-work


                                           Industry 148
  Wool carding and cloth-          Wool pulling
  dressing
  Wool cleaning and pulling        Wool-carding        and   cloth-
                                   dressing


                                           Industry 149
  Hooks and eyes                   Needles and pins                   Needles, pins, hooks and eyes,
                                                                      and slide and snap fasteners
  Needles                          Needles, pins, and hooks and       Needle-threaders
                                   eyes


                                           Industry 150
  Fire extinguishers, chemical



C.4   Right Hand Side Variables

For most census years, literacy rates and associated variables come from IPUMS microdata (Rug-
gles et al., 2010). However, no microdata exist for 1890. To address this, we entered the 1890
census tabulations of the size of the literate and total population by city and state (page lvi and
xxxiii, respectively of U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census Office, 1897). For areas
not covered by the list of tabulated cities, we use the state residual literacy rate. That is, we take
the state totals and subtract off the totals in all of the cities we observe, and assign the residual
literacy rate to each of the counties we do not have data on.
   U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census Office (1897) is also the source for the
number of foreign-born by country of origin in 1890, used in the construction of the instrument
(page lxxii). The instrument relies on the interaction of county shares by origin in a base year –
we use 1850 and 1880 – and the national stocks of by origin and literacy. The stocks and literacy
rates of each origin group – with U.S. natives shown for comparison is shown in Table C.6. (The
table is in descending order of the simple average of the size of the group across all years in the
data.) The instrument uses the separate national stocks of literate and illiterates by origin, which


                                                  91
can be calculated from the product of the literacy rates (or 1-literacy rate for illiterate stock) and
the total stock shown above. The stocks in the 1890 table we use are not broken out by literacy,
so we impute the literacy rate in 1890 of each origin group by taking the average of the 1880 and
1900 observed rates of literacy for each origin group (shown in Table C.6).
   In the actual construction of the instrument, natives are further subdivided into their “origins”
– states of birth (not shown in table). The size of the native literate and illiterate population from
each state of birth is imputed as the average of the 1880 and 1900 values.




                                                 92
          Table C.6. Population Stocks and Literacy Shares, by Origin and Year

                                               Stocks                          Share Literate
Origin                       1860       1880            1900     1920     1860 1880 1900 1920
US-Born                    12725000   29491710     40521900    58119000   0.73   0.76   0.89   0.95
German                      1128500    1889690      2632900     1587800   0.88   0.95   0.93   0.96
Irish                       1518600    1861140      1647060     1005800   0.74   0.80   0.88   0.97
Russian/Polish                10000      80390       700440     2667900   0.85   0.79   0.70   0.79
Canadian                     194600     633690      1148700     1126000   0.70   0.84   0.89   0.95
English                      398700     629030       831680      785600   0.87   0.95   0.97   0.99
Italian                       10000      46550       418900     1491100   0.89   0.67   0.53   0.68
Swedish                       17300     178500       589980      604800   0.82   0.91   0.94   0.97
Austrian                       8200      33610       258760      556500   0.91   0.92   0.72   0.81
Norwegian                     33400     169840       343600      352900   0.81   0.86   0.92   0.96
Scottish                      97500     161270       232880      255000   0.91   0.96   0.98   0.99
Mexican                       24300     114440        86640      391100   0.47   0.39   0.38   0.57
Hungarian                       900       9610       129860      344000   1.00   0.90   0.71   0.86
Czech                         10300      76570       153400      372200   0.76   0.88   0.88   0.87
French                       103100     127480        99900      145000   0.87   0.93   0.91   0.95
Danish                        10800      56500       148880      193700   0.94   0.94   0.96   0.99
Other Asian                     700       2640        38820      238600   1.00   0.80   0.76   0.76
Swiss                         43900      84610       112900      116900   0.86   0.96   0.96   0.97
Dutch                         25600      50570        89520      128600   0.83   0.90   0.91   0.96
Chinese                       33500     206090        79680       55300   0.93   0.78   0.72   0.69
Welsh                         37900      76850        92500       73500   0.81   0.85   0.91   0.96
Other European                 5400      16230         8040      182600   0.72   0.91   0.86   0.78
Finnish                                   3000        58880      142800          0.86   0.88   0.90
Greek                           300        780         6720      159800   0.67   0.82   0.71   0.84
Portugeuse                     3500      18270        35580      110400   0.97   0.56   0.48   0.58
Romanian                                   150        12480      101300          0.87   0.75   0.86
West Indies                    6900      23400        23620       70400   0.74   0.86   0.89   0.95
Belgian                        6900      14490        28280       55200   0.78   0.79   0.82   0.88
Spanish                        4000       8860         6180       50700   0.98   0.91   0.90   0.85
Turkish                                    540         7580       20300          0.91   0.73   0.78
South American                 1700       6700         3740       16700   0.82   0.84   0.90   0.94
Australian/New Zealander        600       4250         7160       11300   0.67   0.96   0.97   0.95
African                         100       3370         2880        5000   1.00   0.57   0.79   0.94
Other                           600       2680          460        4100   0.83   0.78   0.91   0.95
Central American                           700          680        4600          0.94   0.97   0.96




                                          93
