NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOMPLETE MARKETS AND AGGREGATE DEMAND
Iván Werning
Working Paper 21448
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21448
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

I thank useful discussions with Adrien Auclert and Emmanuel Farhi. Nathan Zorzi provided valuable
research assistance. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand
Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 21448
August 2015
JEL No. D52,E0
ABSTRACT
I study aggregate consumption dynamics under incomplete markets, focusing on the relationship between
consumption and the path for interest rates. I first provide a general aggregation result under extreme
illiquidity (no borrowing and no outside assets), deriving a generalized Euler relation involving the real
interest rate, current and future aggregate consumption. This provides a tractable way of incorporating
incomplete markets in macroeconomic models, dealing only with aggregates. Although this relation
does not necessarily coincide with the standard representative-agent Euler equation, I show that it
does for an important benchmark specification. When this is the case, idiosyncratic uncertainty and
incomplete markets leave their imprint by affecting the discount factor in this representation, but the
sensitivity of consumption to current and future interest rates is unaffected. An immediate corollary
is that “forward guidance” (lower future interest rates) is as powerful as in representative agent models.
I show that the same representation holds with positive liquidity (borrowing and outside assets) when
utility is logarithmic. I show that away from these benchmark cases, consumption is likely to become
more sensitive to interest rate, and especially future interest rates. Finally, I apply my approach to
a real business cycle economy, providing an exact analytical aggregation result that complements existing
numerical results.
Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E17-234
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand∗
Iván Werning
MIT
August 14, 2015

I study aggregate consumption dynamics under incomplete markets, focusing on
the relationship between consumption and the path for interest rates. I first provide
a general aggregation result under extreme illiquidity (no borrowing and no outside
assets), deriving a generalized Euler relation involving the real interest rate, current
and future aggregate consumption. This provides a tractable way of incorporating incomplete markets in macroeconomic models, dealing only with aggregates. Although
this relation does not necessarily coincide with the standard representative-agent Euler equation, I show that it does for an important benchmark specification. When this
is the case, idiosyncratic uncertainty and incomplete markets leave their imprint by
affecting the discount factor in this representation, but the sensitivity of consumption to current and future interest rates is unaffected. An immediate corollary is that
“forward guidance” (lower future interest rates) is as powerful as in representative
agent models. I show that the same representation holds with positive liquidity (borrowing and outside assets) when utility is logarithmic. I show that away from these
benchmark cases, consumption is likely to become more sensitive to interest rate, and
especially future interest rates. Finally, I apply my approach to a real business cycle
economy, providing an exact analytical aggregation result that complements existing
numerical results.

1

Introduction

Basic macroeconomic models are minimalist. For example, the New Keynesian model is
often described as consisting of two fundamental parts,
1. the Intertemporal Euler equation or ‘Demand block’;
2. the Phillips Curve or ‘Supply block’;
∗ I thank useful discussions with Adrien Auclert and Emmanuel Farhi. Nathan Zorzi provided valuable
research assistance. All remaining errors are my own.

1

this picture may be completed by a description of monetary policy, providing a third
equation. A similar picture holds outside model without nominal rigidities. For example,
the real business cycle model also features the Euler equation and adopts the flexible price
limit as its supply block.
Microfoundations can be provided for both blocks, but these can only be viewed as extremely simplified approximations of a deeper reality. In particular, behind the standard
Euler equation lies an assumption of complete markets or the adoption of a representative
agent. Similarly, behind the New Keynesian Phillips Curve lies the simplifying assumption of Calvo pricing. These assumptions are easily rejected at face value, but it is hard to
deny their usefulness as tractable starting points.
For the New Keynesian model, the Phillips curve ’supply block’ has undergone deep
scrutiny. Empirically, much research has been devoted to documenting and interpreting
facts on price and wage dynamics. Theoretically, the literature has pursued the implications of other forms of nominal rigidities, such as menu costs, incomplete information
or rational inattention. Close attention has also been paid to the structure of marginal
costs, market competition, strategic complementarities, or institutional features such as
inflation indexation.
This paper is instead concerned with the ’demand block’ and asks: What are the effects of market incompleteness on aggregate demand? Given the well-documented importance of idiosyncratic uncertainty and the lack of perfect insurance at the household
level, market incompleteness hardly requires motivation. The existing literature has made
important strides, especially in some particular contexts and applications, but is still far
from offering a comprehensive and general answer to this important question.
I study an economy populated by a continuum of households facing idiosyncratic
uncertainty and incomplete markets. Each household receives income that depends on
an idiosyncratic shock (the microeconomic component) and also depends on aggregate
spending (the macroeconomic component). In equilibrium, consistency requires aggregate consumption to equal aggregate income. The main goal of this paper is to solve for
the path for aggregate consumption, taking into account this general-equilibrium requirement, and relate it to the path for real interest rates. In the standard complete market or
representative agent case this relation boils down to the well-known intertemporal Euler
equation.
When markets are incomplete, characterizing equilibria is known to be challenging. I
first provide a simple result under extreme illiquidity (no borrowing and no outside assets). This case is relatively tractable thanks to the fact that, in equilibrium, no intertemporal trade is possible. However, the allocation for consumption is still endogenously deter2

mined and depends on the interest rate path. I obtain an aggregate relation involving the
real interest rate, current and future aggregate consumption that fully characterizes equilibria. In general, according to this generalized Euler relation, current consumption may
respond more or less than one-for-one with changes in future consumption—a departure
from the standard Euler equation. However, for a benchmark case, where individual income is proportional to aggregate income, the relation specializes to that of a standard
representative-agent Euler equation. This provides a useful as if result, one that should
be interpreted with care.
This ‘as if’ result does not imply that incomplete markets are irrelevant for aggregates.
Idiosyncratic uncertainty, lack of insurance and borrowing constraints all have a level impact on aggregate consumption. In particular, greater uncertainty or greater scarcity of
liquidity tend to depress consumption, as one may expect. This level effect materializes in my result by the fact that market incompleteness affects the subjective discount
factors of ‘as if’ representative agent. Indeed, the equilibrium consumption allocation
may involve rich dynamics as in the deleveraging episodes modeled by Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), which emphasize market incompleteness and borrowing constraints. As far as aggregates are concerned, all these effects
can be captured by a sequence of discount factors and a representative agent representation. Indeed, my results show that these may be interpreted as providing foundations for
“aggregate demand shocks” for a representative agent model, which is convenient since
working with an incomplete market model directly may be onerous.
Although the ‘as if’ result does not imply that market incompleteness is irrelevant,
it does imply is that the sensitivity of aggregate demand to interest rates is unaffected.
Thus, when the conditions for this representation hold, aggregate consumption reacts to
changes in the path of interest rates in the same manner as in representative agent models.
I shall come back to this point below.
Next, I turn to the case with a positive supply of liquidity: situations where an outside
asset in positive net supply is available or when households can borrow positive amounts
from other households. With positive liquidity the allocation no longer coincides with
financial autarky and households manage to smooth their consumption somewhat. In
principle, one would expect such a scenario not to lend itself easily to analysis or aggregation. After all, the allocation is non-trivial and may depend in non-trivial ways on
the path for interest rates. However, I am able to show that when utility is logarithmic
the previous results carry over to the case of positive liquidity: when individual income
and borrowing constraints are proportional to aggregate income, there is an aggregate
representative-agent Euler equation representation.
3

There are important and immediate corollaries of these results for “forward guidance”, a commitment to lower future interest rates. These policies have been advocated
as a way to stimulate aggregate demand in “liquidity trap” situations—when current
interest rates are against the zero lower bound. Applying the above results, when the
conditions for the the representative-agent representation hold, forward guidance is exactly as effective as in representative agent models. This result may be contrasted with
those reported in McKay et al. (2015).
I also explore situations that depart from conditions for the representative-agent representation. In the case of zero liquidity this is easily done with relative generality. The
results suggest that if one departs from the assumption that income is proportional to
aggregate income, adopting assumptions where uncertainty is countercyclical then this
tends to make aggregate demand more sensitive to interest rates. The assumption of
countercyclical risk is widely used in the asset pricing literature to help explain the high
average equity premium, at least since Mankiw (1986), and has received empirical support (Storesletten et al., 2004; Guvenen et al., 2014).1 To see this most clearly, I consider
in detail an application with a varying extensive margin for employment. Aggregate
income increases earnings of the fully employed, but also decreases the probability of being underemployed. In this case, aggregate demand is shown to react more strongly to
current interest rates, and even more strongly to future interest rates. Intuitively, lower
interest rates in the future increase future aggregate income, this then lowers uncertainty,
which lowers the desire for precautionary savings. This amplifies the usual consumption
smoothing effect. Note that for this result to hold, it is crucial that the probability of being
underemployed varies with aggregate income.
With positive liquidity, I show that a crucial statistic is the value of assets relative to
income. When utility is logarithmic this statistic is constant. When the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution is less than one, I show that interest rate changes make asset
value relatively more volatile than income. A lowering of the interest rate makes the ratio
of asset value to aggregate income rise. This endogenously increases the availability of
liquidity, which in turn stimulates consumption. Consumption in earlier periods is stimulated even further because the extra liquidity decreases the sensitivity of consumption
to income shocks, lowering uncertainty, which lowers the precautionary savings motive.
These last two points suggest that if one departs in plausible directions from the as1A

large literature in asset pricing investigates the implications of incomplete markets for asset pricing,
as compared to a representative agent model. A partial list of papers includes Heaton and Lucas (1996),
Constantinides and Duffie (1996), Krusell and Smith (1997), Alvarez and Jermann (2001), , Krueger and
Lustig (2010), Krusell et al. (2011). Some of these papers approach the problem numerically or analytically
by studying benchmarks, such as cases where the equilibrium involves autarky.

4

sumptions that deliver the representative-agent representation one may actually obtain
greater sensitivity of consumption to interest rates. Moreover, since this is particularly
true of future interest rate it strengthens the power of forward guidance policies. Of
course these suggestive results are not definitive, and any conclusions ultimately depends
on the particular assumptions one makes, especially those regarding household income
and its dependence on aggregate income. The main contribution of this paper is to provide guidance regarding the different possibilities and isolate the main assumptions.
All of these results have obvious implications in models with nominal rigidities, where
monetary policy may be seen as affecting the path for real interest rates. However, my
methods and results transcend such a setting. To illustrate this, towards the end of the
paper I consider a real economy with capital and productivity shocks, a real business
cycle model. I show that the representative agent representation holds for a particular
case. Admittedly, the particular case requires full depreciation which is rather special
and not plausible, yet it complements existing numerical results, such as Krusell and
Smith (1998), with an exact analytical aggregation result. This may help interpret prior
numerical results in a new light. For example, the literature has mostly stressed that
approximate aggregation holds when households are able to smooth their consumption
effectively. However, my aggregation result holds no matter how large or persistent the
idiosyncratic uncertainty faced by households. Thus, household consumption may experience violent fluctuations and yet my exact aggregation result holds. This points to
a new rationale for aggregation, other than the notion that the incomplete markets may
not bite if agents are able to smooth their consumption sufficiently and approximate the
complete market allocation.
This paper belongs to a vast literature in macroeconomics exploring the implications
of relaxing the representative agent assumption and adopting an incomplete markets
model. A very partial list includes Krusell and Smith (1998), Heathcote et al. (2009), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), Kaplan and Violante (2011), Ravn and Sterk (2012), Sterk and
Tenreyro (2013), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Sheedy (2014) and McKay et al. (2015).
All of these efforts have contributed to our understanding, often focusing on different issues. One distinguishing feature of the present paper is the goal to provide an aggregate
relation under relatively general conditions, rather than working and solving a full particular model. Another difference is the effort to provide conditions under which there
exists a tractable representative-agent representation.

5

2

A General Incomplete Market Setting

This section introduces the incomplete market setting where households are assumed to
make consumption and savings decisions. The setup is fairly general and will be specialized in different directions later on.
My main goal is to understand how incomplete markets affect the behavior of macroeconomic aggregates. Ideally, one wishes to obtain something like the standard representative Euler equation for the incomplete-market model. These goals turn out to be attainable
in some interesting cases.
The focus will be on households, with firms and the government largely relegated
to the background. However, my analysis is not partial equilibrium since it imposes
the general equilibrium feedback between aggregate consumption and aggregate income.
Of particular interest is the relationship between the paths for household spending and
interest rates. To close the model, this “demand block” of the model can be combined
with a “supply block”, of any variety, together with a specification for government policy
including monetary interest rate policy.2 For our purposes, it is more useful not to commit
to one particular way of doing this. This can be avoided by focusing on the “demand
block” of the model only.

2.1

Economic Environment

To simplify and focus on idiosyncratic uncertainty, the model abstracts, for now, from
aggregate uncertainty. Aggregate shocks can be included at a later stage, but they are not
essential to the relationship between aggregate spending and real interest rates, which
can be addressed by examining aggregate deterministic dynamics.
The framework I develop below is based on the standard Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari
incomplete market setup. The horizon is infinite, with periods are t = 0, 1, . . . There is a
single final consumption good and a unit measure of infinitely-lived households. Households are subject to idiosyncratic uncertainty, undergoing fluctuations in their labor income and suffering from shocks to their spending needs. Markets are incomplete preventing insurance of idiosyncratic shocks and credit is subject to borrowing constraints.
As a result, at the household level income and consumption may fluctuate significantly.
2 The

demand block can be studied fruitfully in separation from the rest of the model because it is block
recursive, in the sense that only the path for real interest rates matter. For example, the breakdown between
nominal interest rates and inflation is not required.

6

Household heterogeneity. There is a finite set of households types i ∈ I with fraction
µi > 0 in the population, satisfying the adding up condition ∑i∈ I µi = 1. Types may differ
with respect to their preferences, including discounting. They may also have different
labor earnings process and different degrees of access to credit, i.e. borrowing constraints.
Consumption Preferences. Household of type i ∈ I has preferences over consumption
given by the utility function
∞

∑ βi,t E0 [uit (c(st ), st )]

(1)

t =0

where ct denotes consumption of the single final good, st ∈ Si denotes an idiosyncratic
state of nature that follows a stochastic process, discussed further below. Shocks to utility
are included for both generality and realism. They may capture important lifetime events,
such as health shocks or family size changes, that affect the relative desirability of current
spending.
Because the focus on consumption and savings choices, I first directly postulate a labor
income process directly, instead of deriving it from labor supply choices. This keeps us
closer to the incomplete markets literature, which studies consumption and savings while
taking the income process as given. With this in mind, there is no need at this stage to
describe preferences over leisure or labor. However, later I will derive labor income and
when I do I shall assume that utility from consumption and labor are additively separable.
Budget Constraints.

Households of type i faces the budget constraints

c ( s t ) + q t · a ( s t ) + b ( s t ) ≤ y i ( s t ) + ( q t + d t ) a ( s t −1 ) + R t −1 · b ( s t −1 )

(2)

for all t = 0, 1, . . . and histories st ∈ St+1 ; here a(st ) and b(st ) denote savings in the
outside asset and riskless one-period bonds, respectively; qt is the price of the outside
asset and dt is its dividend; Rt denotes the interest rate on riskless bonds, in real terms; yit
is income from labor.
Labor income depends on household state and aggregate income according to
yi (st ) = γti (st , Yt ),

(3)

for some function γti . The nature of the relationship between household and aggregate
income encapsulated by γti , will turn out to be crucial.

7

Borrowing Constraints.
straints

Households of type i ∈ I are also subject to borrowing conb(st ) + qt · a(st ) ≥ − Bi (st , Yt ),

(4)

limiting how negative their wealth is allowed to become. Here Bi is a nonnegative borrowing limit, determined as a function of the current household state and aggregate income. The constraint on borrowing is specified in terms of total wealth; alternatively, one
can impose separate constraints for assets and bonds, b(st ) ≥ − Bi (st , Yt ) and a(st ) ≥ 0,
and the results would be similar.
Idiosyncratic Uncertainty. For each household type i ∈ I, the exogenous state {st } follows a stochastic process. An important case is when st follows a Markov process, although this assumption is not required for most of my analysis. Uncertainty is purely
idiosyncratic: the realization of states are independent across agents and for each type
i ∈ I the probability of a certain set of histories st equals the fraction of agents in the
cross section experiencing this history. I also assume that, for each household type i ∈ I,
the stochastic process for household states {st } is independent of the path for aggregate
income {Yt }. This assumption is essentially a normalization, since we have not placed
restrictions on the functions γti and Bti .
Initial Conditions. At t = 0 the economy inherits, for each household type i ∈ I, a joint
distribution over initial states and initial asset and bonds Λ0i (s0 , a0 , b0 ). The stochastic process then induces a joint distribution of histories st and ( a0 , b0 ) denoted by Λit (st , a0 , b0 ).
Outside Asset. The outside asset is in fixed supply, normalized to unity, providing a
dividend stream that is a function of current aggregate income,
dt = Dt (Yt ).

(5)

To capture the case with zero outside assets simply set dividends to zero: Dt (Yt ) = 0 for
all t.3
In this formulation the outside asset is in fixed supply. However, Section 6 extends the
techniques and results to consider a model with capital and investment.
3 When

D = 0 there always exists an equilibrium where the asset price is zero. In some cases there
may be other equilibria, akin to monetary equilibria where fiat money has value, I shall not consider these
equilibria.

8

To ensure that Yt can be interpreted as aggregate income from labor and capital, we
require that the functions γt and Dt satisfy the identity

∑µ

ˆ
i

γti (st , Yt ) dΛit + Dt (Yt ) = Yt ,

(6)

i∈ I

for all Yt . Note that given {γti } the dividend function Dt (Yt ) can be backed out from this
identity.

2.2

Equilibrium

I now introduce a natural equilibrium concept for this framework and provide a simple
characterization, reducing the conditions to a few equations.
Equilibrium Definition. An equilibrium specifies interest rates and consumption decisions that are required to be optimal as well as consistent with aggregate income. Formally, given initial conditions R−1 and Λ0i , an equilibrium is a path for aggregates

{Ct , Yt , At , Bt , Rt , qt },
and household choices, conditional on initial conditions,

{ci (st ; a0 , b0 ), ai (st ; a0 , b0 ), bi (st ; a0 , b0 )},
satisfying the following:
1. household optimization: taking as given the path for aggregate income and interest
rates {Yt , Rt }, household choices maximize utility (1) subject to (2), (3) (4) and (5);
2. market clearing: for all t = 0, 1, . . . the good, asset and bond markets clear,
Ct = Yt ,
At = 1,
Bt = 0;

9

3. aggregation: the aggregate quantities are consistent with household quantities,
Ct =

ˆ

∑µ

i

∑µ

i

∑µ

i

i∈ I

At =

ˆ

i∈ I

Bt =

ci (st ; a0 , b0 ) dΛt (st , a0 , b0 ),
ai (st , a0 , b0 )dΛt (st , a0 , b0 ),
ˆ
bi (st , a0 , b0 )Λt (st , a0 , b0 ).

i∈ I

Given a path for interest rates, one may seek a path for aggregate consumption that forms
part of an equilibrium. It is important to understand that this aggregate perspective goes
beyond the pure aggregation of household consumption choices, no small task in itself.
In particular, the equilibrium notion incorporates general equilibrium feedback effects
between consumption and income, through the fact that yit = γti (st , Ct ).4
Implementability Conditions. The equilibrium requirements can be reduced to a small
set of conditions as follows. First, the two riskless assets must satisfy a no-arbitrage condition equating returns,5
q t +1 + d t +1
= Rt .
qt
This no-arbitrage condition is implied by imposing that the asset price equal the present
value of its dividends,
∞
1
Dt+s (Yt+s ).
(7)
qt = ∑
s =0 R t R t +1 · · · R t + s
Household optimality requires budget constraints to hold with equality. Defining total
wealth âi (st−1 ; a0 , b0 ) ≡ qt · ai (st ) + bi (st ), this requires for t ≥ 1
ci (st ; a0 , b0 ) + âi (st ; a0 , b0 ) = γti (st , Yt ) + Rt−1 · âi (st−1 ; a0 , b0 ),

(8a)

Similarly, the budget constraint at t = 0 requires
ci (s0 ; a0 , b0 ) + âi (s0 ; a0 , b0 ) = γ0i (s0 , Y0 ) + (q0 + D0 (Y0 )) a0i + R−1 · b0i ,
4 This perspective can be contrasted with some well-known aggregation exercises.

(8b)

For example, Huggett
(1993) and Aiyagari (1994) aggregate consumption and savings for given interest rates, but taking the income process as given. They then employ this aggregate relationship graphically to determine an equilibrium that clears the market.
5 Strictly speaking, when borrowing is completely ruled out, so that Bi = 0, an equilibrium requires only
that Rta ≥ Rt . However, in such cases, the equilibrium with Rta > Rt is not robust to the introduction of
vanishingly small amounts of borrowing.

10

which cannot be reduced to wealth âi only; we must condition on initial asset and bond
positions, a0i and b0i , as well as the asset price q0 . Wealth must satisfy the borrowing
constraints
âi (st ; a0 , b0 ) ≥ − Bti (st , Yt ).
(9)
Household optimization reduces to the Euler condition,
uic,t (ci (st ; a0 , b0 ), st ) ≥ βit Rt Et [uic,t+1 (ci (st+1 ; a0 , b0 ), st+1 )],

(10)

with the complementary slackness requirement that this condition hold with equality in
period t whenever the borrowing constraint (9) in period t holds with strict inequality.
Finally, we impose the market clearing condition Ct = Yt and the aggregation condition
for Ct . All the other market clearing conditions are then implied.
To summarize, an equilibrium can be reduced to aggregates

{Ct , Rt }
and household consumption and wealth {c(st ; a0 , b0 ), â(st ; a0 , b0 )} satisfying aggregation
´
Ct = ∑i∈ I µi c(st ; a0 , b0 )dΛ(st , a0 , b0 ), the budget constraints (8), borrowing constraints
(9) and Euler condition (10) with complementary slackness. In these conditions we obtain
q0 by (7) and Yt = Ct .
When these conditions hold, one can find the remaining equilibrium objects as follows. The asset price in all periods is given by (7). Asset and bond holdings, however, are
indeterminate: any portfolio split satisfying âi (st−1 ; a0 , b0 ) = qt · ai (st ) + bi (st ) constitutes
an equilibrium.

2.3

Pitfalls of Aggregation under Partial Equilibrium

Before stating my aggregation results, it is worth briefly reviewing common pitfalls of
aggregation under partial equilibrium. This discussion will help underscore how my
results rely on general equilibrium considerations.
The Euler condition is nonlinear, but absent uncertainty, absent borrowing constraints
and assuming homogeneous discounting and power utilities (u(c) = 1−1 σ c1−σ ) it can be
transformed into a linear relationship and aggregated. To see this, note that the household
Euler equation then implies
1
ci (st ) = ( βRt )− σ ci (st+1 )

11

and thus, aggregating,
1

C (st ) = ( βRt )− σ C (st+1 )

(11)

Unfortunately, this aggregation is delicate and easily upset by idiosyncratic uncertainty
and borrowing constraints, among other things. I discuss these two issues in turn.
In the presence of idiosyncratic uncertainty and assuming no binding borrowing con− 1
1
straints, we start from ci (st ) = ( βRt )− σ · Et [ci (st+1 )−σ ] σ , so that aggregating and using Jensen’s inequality gives
1

C (st ) > ( βRt )− σ C (st+1 ).
The magnitude of the departure from (11) varies with the degree of uncertainty in ci (st+1 ).
When borrowing constraints bind and abstracting from uncertainty, we start from
1
i
c (st ) < ( βRt )− σ ci (st+1 ), implying
1

C (st ) < ( βRt )− σ C (st+1 ).
The departure from (11) now goes in the opposite direction. Of course, by combining
uncertainty with binding borrowing constraints there is no telling in which direction the
departure from (11) goes.6
These difficulties in aggregation are overcome below, but by taking a different route:
rather than simply aggregating Euler equations, I use additional information by imposing
an additional equilibrium condition, using it to pinpoint an exact aggregate equilibrium
relation. In particular, an equilibrium requires the equality of aggregate income and consumption. Imposing this condition turns out to be crucial. Indeed, I do not uncover any
novel aggregation result for consumption when taking the income process as given. I find
tractable aggregate relations only when imposing the equality of aggregate consumption
and income. The aggregate relations I obtain in this way do not always take the form in
(11) and even in the cases that it does admit such a representation the discount factor β is
different and possibly time varying.
To sum up, my results do not rely on cleverly overcoming standard microeconomic aggregation problems. Instead, I solve for aggregate consumption by exploiting its general
equilibrium relation with aggregate income.7
6 This discussion shows that one cannot expect equation (11) to hold. While it does not prove, it is suggestive that there is no other stable relationship, such as equation (11) with a modified discount factor. The
reason this is generally impossible is that the departures from (11) depend on forces such as precautionary
effects and binding borrowing constraints, which are not stable. They do not depend only on t and t + 1
variables, but also on the entire future.
7 By the same token, my results are designed for comparative static exercises, e.g. changing the interest

12

3

Vanishing Liquidity

A necessary condition for incomplete markets to matter at the aggregate level is that it
make a difference at the household level. The market imperfection must generate significant departures from the complete market outcome. Clearly, risk sharing is impaired
and the perfect insurance outcome characteristic of complete markets is generally impossible. However, as has been widely noted, due to the households’ incentive to smooth
consumption and their precautionary motives to accumulate assets, the outcome with incomplete markets may achieve significant improvements over autarky and in some cases
approximate the complete market outcome.
The extent to which this is true depends on the capacity of the market to self insure
agents. This in turn depends on the amount of liquidity, the value of available assets and
the amount of borrowing permitted. When liquidity is plentiful, the outcome is closer to
complete markets; when liquidity is scarce, the allocation may be greatly affected by the
imperfection in financial markets.
My strongest and simplest characterization obtains under the extreme assumption of
absolute illiquidity, where liquidity is completely absent: no borrowing is allowed and
there are no outside assets in positive net supply. This situation is best thought of as a
limiting case of extreme scarcity of liquidity, with very limited borrowing and small asset
values. While extreme, economies with zero or vanishing liquidity are on the opposite
side of the spectrum from complete markets. Thus, a priori, they are the poster child for
studying the effects that financial market imperfections have on aggregate demand.

3.1

A General Euler Relation

I now study situations with zero liquidity, that is, assuming
Dt (Yt ) = 0,
Bti (st , Yt ) = 0,
and initial conditions b0i = 0 for all agents.
Since savers can only save with borrowers and borrowing is ruled out, it follows immediately that in equilibrium no intertemporal trade is possible and the allocation coincides with autarky,
ci (st ) = yi (st ) = γti (st , Ct ),
rate path. They may not resolve the empirical problem faced by microeconomic tests (e.g. Attanasio and
Weber, 1993).

13

where I have substituted the equilibrium condition Ct = Yt . The equilibrium interest rate
path that sustains this equilibrium must, in each period, ensure that no household has an
incentive to save. This in turn requires
"
Rt ≤ R∗t = min
i ∈ I,st

βit E

uc,t+1 (γti +1 (st+1 , Ct+1 ), st+1 )
uc,t (γti (st , Ct ), st )

#!−1

| st

.

(12)

Equilibrium interest rates are not uniquely determined: interest rates below R∗t imply
that agents find the corner solution, with bti = 0, optimal. However, interest rates strictly
below R∗t are not robust to the introduction of small amounts of liquidity. Positive but
vanishing levels of liquidity require Rt = R∗t , since the Euler equation must hold with
equality for some agents when Dt (Y ) > 0 and Bti (s, Y ) > 0. Given to this refinement,
which I henceforth adopt, the equilibrium is unique. The next proposition summarizes
this characterization.
Proposition 1. A path for aggregate consumption and interest rates {Ct , Rt } is part of an equilibrium with vanishing liquidity if and only if
gt ( Rt , Ct , Ct+1 ) = 0,

(13)

where the function gt is given by
"
gt ( R, C, C 0 ) ≡ log R + log max βit E
i ∈ I,st

uic,t+1 (γti +1 (st+1 , C 0 ), st+1 )
uic,t (γti (st , C ), st )

#!

| st

.

This proposition provides a simple and condensed way of exploring the aggregate
consequences incomplete market. It all boils down to a single relation involving the same
variables as in the standard representative-agent Euler equation; namely, the current interest rate, Rt , present and future consumption, Ct and Ct+1 . Whatever the form taken by
the function gt , even if it does not coincide with the standard Euler equation, Proposition
1 offers a similar tractability for investigating the dynamics of aggregate consumption. In
particular, a relation like (13) can be handled, alongside other equilibrium conditions, as
easily as the standard Euler equation in positive or normative equilibrium analyses.
The familiar complete-market representative-agent Euler equation, with time-invariant
discounting and utility function, is then a special case with
g( R, C, C 0 ) = log R + log β + log u0 (C 0 ) − log u0 (C ).

14

While the more general Euler condition (13) does not necessarily take this particular functional form, it is nevertheless a simple condition involving only aggregates, and in that
sense, much like the standard Euler condition. Due to this property, despite incomplete
markets, the aggregate equilibrium conditions are tractable. Indeed, they are equally
tractable to the representative agent case. In particular, computing an equilibrium does
not require carrying a large endogenous state and confronting the curse of dimensionality,
as Krusell and Smith (1998) did. Indeed, the simplifying assumption of zero liquidity ensures that wealth is zero for all agents, at all times, so that there is no wealth distribution
to keep track of. Moreover, given this assumption, no additional simplifying assumptions
are needed to keep the model tractable.
In general the function gt varies over time. This is not surprising, since no stationarity
assumptions have been placed on any primitives, such as utility functions, discounting,
the stochastic process, the income function γti . As we discuss further below in the context of our next result, this may help capture interesting situations, such as temporary
episodes with heightened idiosyncratic uncertainty. Even when primitives are stationary,
the function gt may vary simply because the cross-section of states st is not at an invariant
steady-state distribution. This time dependence, however, vanishes in the long run if the
Markov process is ergodic, since the cross section of states then converges to its invariant
distribution in the long run.

3.2

Standard Euler Equation

I now apply the general characterization obtained above to an important benchmark specification. In the benchmark, utility functions are power function and taste shocks are
multiplicative,
i

uit (c, s)

=

θti (s) · U i (c)

with

c 1− σ
,
U (c) =
1 − σi
i

(14)

for σi > 0; household income is proportional to aggregate income,
γti (s, Y ) = γ̃ti (s)Y,

(15)

for some function γ̃ti .
The next result shows that aggregate consumption and interest rates are related by a
standard Euler equation, just as in complete-market or representative-agent economies.
Proposition 2. Suppose utilities satisfy (14) and household income satisfy (15). Then a sequence
15

{Ct , Rt } is part of a equilibrium with vanishing liquidity if and only if
U 0 (Ct ) = β t Rt U 0 (Ct+1 ),
with the discount factors given by
"
β t = max βit · E U 0

γ̃ti +1 (st+1 )θti +1 (st+1 )
γ̃ti (st )θti (st )

i ∈ I,st

!

#

| st .

(16)

According to this proposition, aggregate demand is determined as if the economy
were populated by a single representative agent with discount factor β t . By implication,
changes in the path for interest rates have the same effect on the aggregate consumption
path as they do in the representative-agent benchmark. In this sense, the response of
consumption to interest rates, is not affected by incomplete markets.
Are Incomplete Markets Irrelevant? No, not at all. In fact, Proposition 2 not only implies that market incompleteness is not irrelevant, it identifies very clearly the influence.
Due to market incompleteness the discount factor β t is a function of idiosyncratic uncertainty, as shown in (16). For instance, in periods with greater uncertainty or downward
tail risk (for the growth rate of household income) we can expect the discount factor to be
higher; given interest rate and future consumption, Rt and Ct+1 , this implies lower current consumption, Ct . In contrast, with complete markets the aggregate Euler equation
holds with a discount factor that does not depend on idiosyncratic uncertainty (just as in
(11)) implying that idiosyncratic uncertainty has no effect on current consumption.
This discussion underscores that incomplete markets matters, affecting the level of
demand, even if according to Proposition it does not affect the responsiveness of demand
to current and future interest rates.

3.3

Departures from Standard Euler Equation

It is useful to recast Proposition 2 as providing conditions for
gt ( Rt , Ct , Ct+1 ) = log Rt + log β t + σ log Ct − σ log Ct+1 ,
so that gt is exactly log linear, with equal coefficients in absolute value on log Ct and
log Ct+1 given by σ, the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. This

16

implies the exact relationship for the log changes,
d log Rt + σd log Ct − σd log Ct+1 = 0.
Below I investigate departures from this representation by characterizing the analog firstorder expansion.
I now depart from this baseline and characterize gt by considering the coefficients in
the expansion
d log Rt + αC,t d log Ct − αC0 ,t d log Ct+1 = 0.
I will not study this as an approximation, but rather as an exact relation characterizing
the derivatives of gt ; thus, the coefficients αC0 ,t depend on the position where they are
evaluated.
Define the elasticity of γti by
εit (s, Y ) ≡

γti (s, Y )Y
.
γti (s, Y )

This elasticity measures the responsiveness of individual income to aggregate income.
Then next result shows that the coefficients depend can be expressed in terms of this
elasticity.
Proposition 3. Suppose utilities satisfy (14) without taste shocks, i.e. θti (s) = 1. Then
αC,t = CgC,t ( R, C, C 0 ) = σeti ,
0

0

αC0 ,t = −C gC0 ,t ( R, C, C ) = σ

Et [uic,t+1 eti +1 ]
Et [uic,t+1 ]

.

for the household type i ∈ I and history st that attains the maximum in (16).
Note that
d log Ct
d log Ct+1

d log Rt =0



uic,t+1
εit+1
αC0 ,t
=
= Et
·
αC,t
Et [uic,t+1 ] εit


 i 
ε t +1
λit+1
εit+1

, i .
+ Covt
= Et
εit
E λit+1 | st
εt

Under the conditions for Proposition 2 this ratio equals 1, so that current consumption,
Ct , varies proportionally with future consumption, Ct+1 . One can see this by observing
that these conditions ensure that εit = 1, so that the first term is 1 while the covariance
17

term is zero.
Implications for Forward Guidance. Away from this neutrality case, what are the plausible possibilities? Consider a simple, but telling, example. Assume γti is independent of
the period t and st is a Markov chain, with finitely many values for st , that is mean reverting. Suppose further that γi is an increasing function of st , so that a higher state st
is associated with a higher income level. Suppose, as is plausible, that the agent most
willing to save, the agent pinning down the interest rate, the household type i ∈ I and
history st that attains the maximum in (16), has the highest value of st . This implies that
st+1 is expected to be lower, st+1 < st , due to mean reversion.
Now suppose εit+1 is a decreasing function. Then the first term must be be greater
than 1, due to the mean reversion. The second, covariance term, is positive. Together,
this implies that the ratio is strictly greater than 1. The converse is also true. Thus, in this
example, when income at the bottom is more sensitive to aggregate income, we find that
current consumption is more sensitive to future consumption than one-for-one.
This implies that changes in interest rates into the future have stronger effects on current consumption than changes in current interest rates. Thus, in this sense, forward
guidance is more powerful.
Income Growth Rate Perspective. The characterization above was performed using the
income function γ and its elasticity ε. In other words, the perspective was a description
of primitives in terms of levels of income. Another useful perspective is to think in terms
of growth rates of income. After all, it is the growth rate of income that enters individual
household Euler equations and the formula for β t in (16).
To pursue this define the growth rate
Γit (s, s0 , Y, Y 0 ) =

γti +1 (s0 , Y 0 )
γti (s, Y )

Then we obtain

αC,t

αC0 ,t

h
i
E uic,t ΓΓC C
h i ,
= −σ
E uic,t
h
i
Γ
E uic,t ΓC0 C 0
h i .
=σ
E uic,t

18

.

for the household type i ∈ I and history st that attains the maximum in (16).
By implication



ΓC0 0 ΓC
i
C +
C
.
αC0 ,t − αC,t = −σE uc,t
Γ
Γ
This last expression says that what matters is the sum of the two elasticities (which are,
naturally, of opposite signs). In words, suppose we increase consumption in the current
and next period proportionally. Then we ask, how does this affect the growth rate for
consumption of households that price bonds? If higher aggregate income in both periods lowers the mean reversion, uncertainty and downside risk in consumption, as seems
natural, then we should expect
d log Ct
d log Ct+1

=
d log Rt =0

αC0 ,t
> 1,
αC,t

so that, in proportional terms, current consumption reacts more than one-to-one to increases in future consumption.

3.4

An Example Based with Varying Employment Probabilities

To illustrate the previous results, consider the following example, where the income process is motivated by employment risk, intensive and extensive margins. The probability
of being employed potentially varies with the level of aggregate demand, Y.
All workers are identical ex ante, so there is a single household type. There are no taste
shocks and utility is iso-elastic U (c) = c1−σ /(1 − σ ). Income shocks are due to employment fluctuations. Each period households may or may not be fully employed. When
they do, they earn ȳY γ ; otherwise, they earn yY γ < ȳY γ . We assume underemployed
households earn nonzero, to avoid zero consumption. This can be motivated by supposing unemployment shocks hit only a fraction of household members, or by extending the
model to include an unemployment insurance payment.8
The parameter γ controls how much of the adjustment in income takes place along the
intensive margin; if γ = 1 then all the adjustment is along the intensive margin; if γ = 0
then all adjustment is along the extensive margin.9
8 Indeed,

in this zero liquidity environment introducing an unemployment insurance system requires
balancing the budget: taxing employed workers and rebating the proceeds to unemployed workers. One
can then consider a tax system where income of each unemployed is guaranteed to be a proportion o the
income of each employed household.
9 We have assumed the intensive margin sensitivity γ is the same for employed and underemployed
workers. Similar results obtain if we assume instead that the underemployed earn a fixed income, independent of aggregate income Y, as long as the intensive margin sensitivity of the fully employed is not

19

Define the fraction of underemployed λ(Y ) households so that we satisfy the income
identity
Y ≡ (1 − λ(Y ))ȳY γ + λ(Y )yY γ .
We limit attention to values of Y that imply λ ∈ (0, 1).10 If γ = 1 then λ is constant, set
so that 1 = (1 − λ)ȳ + λy. As long as γ < 1 then λ(Y ) is a strictly decreasing function
of Y. We assume that λ(Y ) also represents the probability each household faces of being
unemployed.11
The bond is priced by those currently employed, i.e. the optimum in (12) is attained
by any household that is employed. Their Euler equation can be written as
0



0

0

0γ

0

0

0γ



U (ȳY ) = βR (1 − λ(Y ))U (ȳY ) + λ(Y )U (yY ) .
γ

This reflects the fact that their current consumption and income is c = ȳY γ while their
consumption next period is either ȳY 0γ , with probability 1 − λ(Y 0 ), or yY 0γ , with probability λ(Y 0 ). Using the fact that U 0 (c) = c−σ this condition can be rewritten more usefully
as follows.
Proposition 4. In the intensive-extensive margin example economy with varying underemployment we have
1
U 0 (Y 0 ) = β̂(Y 0 ) R γ U 0 (Y 0 ),
where the discount rate function is decreasing in Y 0 and given by
 1
 
γ
.
β̂(C 0 ) ≡ β 1 − λ(C 0 ) + λ(C 0 )U 0 (y/ȳ)
There are two implications of Proposition 4. We achieve a relation similar to a standard
Euler equation, but with two important differences. First, the power on the interest rate
is γ1 instead of 1. As a result, whenever γ < 1 consumption is more sensitive to changes in
the current interest rate, for a given value for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
1
σ . Second, note that when γ = 1 the conditions for Proposition 2 are met and so the
discount factor β̂ comes out to be constant; however, as long as γ < 1 the discount factor
β̂(C 0 ) is strictly decreasing. By implication, current aggregate consumption C becomes
more sensitive to changes in future aggregate consumption C 0 .
Intuitively, when γ < 1 we are departing from the neutrality result by assuming that
strong.
10 For high enough values λ = 1 and household income must be proportional to aggregate income Y.
11 To fit this into our notation, we may assume s ∈ [0, 1] is uniformly distributed and that γ is a step
function with an upward discontinuity at s = λ(Y ).

20

lower aggregate income increases individual income risk. For a given interest rate, heightened uncertainty then leads households to desire precautionary savings for any given
current income, depressing aggregate consumption and income (so that in equilibrium
savings are zero). The assumption that labor income risk is countercyclical is standard in
the asset pricing literature seeking to explain high values of the equity premium puzzle
(Constantinides and Duffie, 1996; Alvarez and Jermann, 2001) and has been supported by
empirical studies (Storesletten et al., 2004; Guvenen et al., 2014).12
This same feedback between the level of spending and uncertainty lies at the heart
of Ravn and Sterk (2012). They outline a full macroeconomic model, calibrate it to the
US and show that this mechanism is capable of inducing deep recessions. Notably, their
paper also exploits the tractability afforded by the zero liquidity assumption. However,
their approach is quantitative and requires working with a fuller model. As a result, they
do not represent this feedback mechanism in terms of a general aggregate Euler relation,
as I have done here.

4

Positive Liquidity

Incomplete markets are likely to have more bite when liquidity is scarce, since this makes
it harder for households to smooth transitory income fluctuations or cushion permanent
labor income shocks using their savings. Thus, the extreme case without liquidity studied
in the previous section may isolate the strongest case for incomplete markets. Nevertheless, it is interesting to investigate situations with positive liquidity.

4.1

Standard Euler Equation

With positive liquidity obtaining sharp results is more challenging, because the allocation
does not coincide with autarky. Liquidity allows agents to smooth their consumption
and the resulting equilibrium allocation departures nontrivially from autarky. Despite
these challenges, I now show that with logarithmic utility aggregate implications can be
worked out. Indeed, I obtain a standard representative agent Euler equation condition.
12 Earlier literature specified and found support for income processes with a countercyclical variance for
the shocks e.g. Storesletten et al. (2004). Recent work with administrative data has instead found support
for a different specification. In particular, Guvenen et al. (2014) find that it is the left-skewness of shocks that
is strongly cyclical. For our purposes downside risk is likely to be what matters most and their evidence
supports strong countercyclicality of this risk.

21

Utility is given (14) with σi = 1 so that the utility function is logarithmic
U i (c) = log(c).
As before household labor income satisfies (15), so that it is proportional to aggregate
income. It then follows from identity (6) that
Dt (Yt ) = dt · Yt ,
for some {dt }, so that dividends are also proportional to total income. Finally, we also
assume that borrowing constraints are proportional to aggregate income
Bti (s, Y ) = B̃ti (s)Y,

(17)

for some function B̃ti (s).
When dt = 0 and B̃ti (s) = 0 we are back to the case zero liquidity studied in the
previous section. We say there is positive liquidity if the asset’s dividend is positive or if
borrowing is allowed, if dt > 0 or B̃ti (s) > 0 for some t and s.13
Revaluation Effects. As it turns out, when studying comparative statics of equilibria
with given initial conditions, the initial portfolio households hold matters due to revaluation effects. Recall, at t = 0 the budget constraint features initial wealth q0 a0 + R− b0 ; this
is the only period where the asset price enters the budget constraint. The interest rate R−
is predetermined and fixed, but q0 is endogenous. Different interest rate paths { Rt } imply
different q0 affecting the value of initial wealth. The redistribution channel is the focus of
Auclert (2015), who gives a detailed analysis of the different possibilities. In the present
paper, these revaluation effects are present, but will play out in the background. I will
consider two cases depending on the initial asset and bond holdings. In the first case, the
revaluation effect is proportional to output, leading to the standard Euler representation.
4.1.1

Zero Initial Bond Holdings

It is convenient to first consider the case where initial bond holdings are zero for all households,
b0i = 0.
speaking, when dt = 0 and B̃ti (s) > 0 for some s, then in some cases the equilibrium coincides
with autarky. This is the case if borrowing is only allowed for the agent setting the interest rate.
13 Strictly

22

Formally, the initial distribution Λ0i has full mass over b0i = 0. Note that this initial condition does not rule out or even constrain borrowing. It restricts initial bonds holdings to be
zero, but as long as B̃ti (s) > 0 future borrowing and saving in bonds, bti 6= 0 for t > 0, is
permitted. Indeed, even initial indebtedness is possible if it takes the form of negative positions in the asset, so that a0i < 0. Recall that, along an equilibrium, bonds and assets are
perfect substitutes and households are indifferent to borrowing and saving in one or the
other. As a result, the equilibrium is indeterminate and for any equilibrium with bti 6= 0
there is another equilibrium with bti = 0 and identical interest rates and allocations.
The next result shows that under these conditions we recover the standard Euler equation.
Proposition 5. Suppose utilities satisfy (14), household income satisfies (15) and borrowing constraints satisfy (17). In addition, suppose initial bond holdings are zero b0i = 0 for all households.
Then {Ct , Rt } is part of an equilibrium if and only if
U 0 (Ct ) = β t Rt U 0 (Ct+1 )

(18)

for some given sequence of discount factors { β t }, independent of both { Rt } and {Ct }.
Proposition 2 obtained with zero liquidity and the analysis was simplified because
the equilibrium allocation was autarkic. In contrast, Proposition 5 applies to situations
with positive liquidity with nontrivial allocations that are not autarky. In equilibrium,
households smooth their consumption by saving and borrowing, to an extent that depends on the availability of liquidity. Indeed, the consumption and saving allocation
may involve rich dynamics as in the deleveraging episodes modeled by Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011).
How is it that all these nontrivial individual decisions under uncertainty can be subsumed in as simple an aggregate relation as (18)? Indeed, the underlying allocation is
not simple and cannot generally be solved in closed form—it is well known that BewleyAiyagari models quickly require a numerical approach for their solution. The key is that
Proposition 5 does not rely on solving for the entire equilibrium. Instead, I obtain relation
(18) by studying the more manageable problem of understand how a given equilibrium
adjusts to changes in interest rates. In a nutshell, although individual household allocations are nontrivial, as in any Bewley-Aiygari model, I show that across equilibrium with
different interest rate paths these allocations scale up and down in a simple manner with
aggregate consumption.
To see this more clearly, it is useful to spell out the argument behind the result in
some detail. The discount factors β t and the household allocation behind this result are
23

obtained as follows. Consider a normalized economy with constant income Ỹt = 1 and
its associated equilibrium, including the interest rate { R̃t }, household consumption and
−1
wealth {c̃(st ; a0 ), ã(st ; a0 )} and asset prices q̃t = ∑∞
s=0 ( R̃t R̃t+1 · · · R̃t+s ) dt+s . Define β t ≡
1
, then by construction, the aggregate Euler equation 18 holds for Ct = Yt = 1.
R̃t
Now, for any other sequence {Ct , Rt } satisfying the aggregate Euler equation (18), construct the rest of the equilibrium objects as follows. Renormalize household consumption
and wealth proportionally
c(st ; a0 ) = c̃(st ; a0 )Ct

and

â(st ; a0 ) = ã(st ; a0 )Ct

and adjust the interest rate and asset prices by
qt Rt = R̃t

Ct+1
Ct

and

qt = q̃t Ct .

With this guess, one can verify all equilibrium conditions. The crucial observation is
that the Euler equation, the budget constraints and borrowing constraints are all linear
homogeneous in Yt = Ct . Notably, the t = 0 budget constraint is
ci (s0 ; a0 ) + âi (s0 ; a0 ) = γ̃0i (s0 )C0 + (q̃0 + d0 ) a0i C0 ,
which is homogenous in C0 by virtue of the auxiliary assumption that b0i = 0.
Does the Level of Liquidity Matter? Yes and no. As Proposition 5 makes clear, the
amount of liquidity has absolutely no effect on the response of consumption to current
and future interest rates. Indeed, the response is identical to that of a representative agent
with the same preferences. The response of current consumption Ct to changes in the
interest rate Rt or changes in future consumption is identical to those implied by a representative agent.
Liquidity is still important at the microeconomic level, with greater liquidity allowing
greater consumption smoothing. In the representative-agent Euler equation representation, this shows up by affecting discounting. In this way, the level of liquidity does have
a macroeconomic effect in levels: it affects interest rates for a given consumption path or
consumption for a given interest rate path. However, these level effects do not affect the
response of aggregate consumption to changes in the interest rate path, which is independent of the amount of liquidity.

24

Discounting and Natural Interest Rates.
When primitives are stationary (i.e. st is a
Markov process) and the economy is initialized with an invariant distribution for (s0 , a0 )
then the discount factor is constant β t = R̃1 , where R̃ is the steady state interest rate. As
shown by Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994) steady states require β R̃ < 1, implying that
a higher discount factor appears in the representation, compared to the true subjective
discount factor.
In general, the discount factors β t may not be constant, but this is a feature, not a bug.
For example, periods of higher idiosyncratic uncertainty are likely to increase β t temporarily. Likewise, deleveraging episodes—situation where some household start with
high initial debt but must lower their debt over time—as modeled, for example, by Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), may also increase the
discount factor temporarily. A higher discount factor β t is associated with a lower natural interest rate, in the New Keynesian model. Indeed, the economy may be pushed up
against the zero interest rate bound if β t is high enough, as stressed by the liquidity trap
literature.
4.1.2

Arbitrary Initial Bond Holdings

I now allow any initial distribution for initial bonds holdings, b0i . The main result is a
similar characterization to that obtained when initial bonds holdings are zero, except for
an adjustment to the discount factors that depends on initial consumption.
Proposition 6. Suppose utilities satisfy (14), household income satisfies (15) and borrowing constraints satisfy (17). Then {Ct , Rt } is part of an equilibrium if and only if
U 0 (Ct ) = β t Rt U 0 (Ct+1 )

(19)

for some a sequence of discount factors { β t } that depends on C0 , i.e. β t = β̂ t (C0 ).
According to this result, a standard Euler equation continues to hold, except that now
the relevant discount factors are endogenous. Conveniently, these new effects are entirely
summarized by the initial aggregate consumption level, C0 . Thus, the aggregate dynamics for consumption remains tractable and tied to a standard Euler equation.
Why are the discount factors dependent on initial consumption? When output expands in the first period, this diminishes the relative value of bonds. In this relative
sense, the distribution of bond holdings contracts towards zero. In contrast, the asset’s
price and dividends expand proportionally with output, and that wealth held in the form

25

of assets remains in proportion to output. This explains why Proposition 6 requires an
adjustment relative to Proposition 5.
Indeed, by a simple extension of the argument provided above, the discount factors
are now precisely β t = R̃1 , the reciprocal of the equilibrium interest rates R̃t for a nort
malized economy featuring constant output, but with initial bond holdings rescaled to
b̃0i = C10 b0i . This works since then the budget constraint at t = 0 becomes
ci (s0 ; a0 ) + âi (s0 ; a0 ) = γ̃0i (s0 )C0 + (q̃0 + d0 ) a0i C0 + R− b̃0i C0 ,
which is homogeneous in C0 .
Implications. How is the dependence of β t on C0 likely to play out? What are the implications of this adjustment? I offer a few tentative, but informed, speculations.
As I just argued, a higher C0 diminishes the dispersion in bond holding levels relative
to output, scaling it down towards zero. For given interest rates, it is reasonable to expect
lower dispersion in initial bond holdings to increase consumption (since consumption
functions are concave as a function of wealth), at least in earlier periods. This pushes the
interest rates R̃t upward to reestablish equilibrium with constant unitary output. This
argument suggests that the discount factors β t = R̃1 decrease with C0 . The effects on β t
t
are likely to die out in later time periods t, since R̃t is likely to converge to a common
steady state R̃, regardless of initial conditions.
If, as seems likely, discount factors are decreasing in consumption, then interest rate
paths that increase consumption, e.g. lower interest rates, are likely to have an additional
effect, especially in earlier periods. In other words, non-zero initial bond holdings are
likely to amplify the effects of interest rate changes.

4.2

Departures from Standard Euler Equation

With positive liquidity, away from the baseline case studied in the previous subsection
no aggregation result appears immediately available. This makes studying the effects of
interest rate changes more challenging. For each interest rate path, one must solve the
individual allocations that are part of an equilibrium and, unlike the previous section,
there is no obvious relation across these equilibria. One possibility is to turn to a numerical analysis, but this may not uncover the forces at work transparently. Fortunately, one
can work out a few simple cases analytically that shed light on the mechanism and help
understand the expected direction of departure from the previous results.

26

Consider a three period economy, with t = 0, 1, 2; one should think of period t = 2
as collapsing the entire future in the infinite horizon setting. Agents are ex ante identical.
There is no uncertainty at t = 0 nor t = 2, so that y0 = (1 − d0 )Y0 and y2 = (1 − d2 )Y2 .
At t = 1 households experience an idiosyncratic shock s1 with c.d.f. F and collect labor
income y1 = s1 (1 − d1 )Y1 . Agents cannot borrow: Bt (s) = 0. The asset pays Dt (Yt ) = dt Yt
and for simplicity we set d0 = d1 = 0. All agents start with one unit of the asset.
In equilibrium, households are identical at t = 0, so they all carry the asset into t = 1.
In that period, households are hit with a temporary income shock. Those with a negative enough shock sell the asset, while those with a positive enough shock buy the asset.
Intuitively, this helps households smooth consumption between t = 1 and t = 2; this
mitigates the dispersion or uncertainty in consumption at t = 1.
I now consider the sensitivity of aggregate consumption to changes in R0 and R1 . The
experiment fixes Y2 at a constant and solves for C1 = Y1 and C0 = Y0 .14
Slack Liquidity Constraint Case. If first consider the case where no agent sells off their
entire asset holdings, so that no agent is liquidity constrained.
Proposition 7. Consider the three-period economy with uncertainty at t = 1. Suppose borrowing
constraints are never binding, so that the Euler condition holds with equality for all agents. If
σ > 1,
d log C1
d log C0
1
d log C0
<
=
=− ;
d log R1
d log R1
d log R0
σ
the inequality is reversed if σ < 1. Finally, we have

d log C1
d log R0

= 0.

The effect of the interest rate on current spending at t = 1 is standard, exactly as
in the representative agent case: a one percent drop in the interest rate R1 leads to a
rise in consumption of σ1 percent. The effects on earlier periods, however, depends on
the value of σ. When σ > 1 this interest rate drop makes consumption at t = 0 rise
by a greater percentage; when σ < 1 the effect is smaller. The borderline logarithmic
case, σ = 1, was covered earlier and boils down to the standard representative agent
case, with consumption rising by the same percentage in both periods, i.e. the standard
consumption smoothing property.
Underlying these results and their dependence on σ is the asset price relative to income, which affects the amount of liquidity, which in turn affects how much agents are
14 Consumption

in all periods scales proportionally with Y2 , given interest rates R0 and R1 . One interpretation for fixing Y2 in a monetary economy is when prices are assumed flexible at t = 2 or when monetary
policy is able to achieve the flexible price equilibrium; in this case, output is at the flexible price at t = 2,
but we are interested in aggregate demand in the short and medium run, t = 0, 1.

27

able to smooth consumption in the intermediate period. To see this, note that the asset
price at t = 1 rises in proportion to the fall in R1 , yet, output rises by σ1 < 1. Thus, if
σ > 1, the asset value rises relative to output relative to output, increasing the supply of
liquidity in this sense. This lowers the dependence of consumption on the current income
shock. Consumption at t = 0 then rises for two reasons: the higher level of consumption
at t = 1 and the lower uncertainty at t = 1. When σ < 1 this effect is reversed, since
consumption at t = 1 expands more than the asset value.
This result underscores the importance of the response of asset prices to interest rate
changes. It is worth clarifying that there are revaluation effects from the change in the asset value for any value of σ, regardless of whether σ > 1, σ < 1 or σ = 1. Instead, whether
or not these revaluations effects increases or decreases the sensitivity of consumption to
interest rate changes depends on σ because this determines the relative strength of the
standard substitution channel. In effect, what is relevant is whether the asset value rises
relative to output. Finally, the revaluation effects I focus on here work through outside
assets that are in net positive supply with their own stream of dividends. Thus, these
effects are distinct from the redistribution effects between creditor and debtors focused
on in Auclert (2015) or Sheedy (2014).
Binding Liquidity Constraint Case. Next I consider the case where some agents sell
off all their assets at t = 0. These agents find themselves liquidity constrained and their
Euler equation hold with strict inequality.
Proposition 8. Consider the three-period economy with uncertainty at t = 1. Suppose borrowing
constraints bind at t = 1 for some households. equality for all agents. Then if σ > 1 we have that
d log C1
d log C0
1
d log C0
<
<
=− ;
d log R1
d log R1
d log R0
σ
the inequalities are reversed if σ < 1. Finally, we have

d log C1
d log R0

= 0.

When households find themselves liquidity constrained, the asset value relative to
income determines the degree to which this constraint binds. When σ > 1, the asset value
rises relative to output. The increase in the asset value has a direct one-for-one impact on
the consumption at t = 1 for those households that are constrained; these households
have a marginal propensity to consume out of wealth of unity. This amplifies the effect of
R1 on C1 .

28

5

Labor Markets, Nominal Rigidities and Supply Side

Up to this point I have worked with the incomplete market setting underlying the consumption and savings problem faced by households. I have taken household labor income as well as asset dividends as given functions of aggregate income Yt . This way of
compartmentalizing proved fruitful, since it allowed us to focus on aggregate demand
and to judge the assumptions needed for various results more easily, without the details.
In this section I now briefly sketch how one can fill in the supply side of the model. I
consider a few variants of the New Keynesian model. This is a well known model, so I
will describe the main elements and omit the details.
I start with the common elements across the different variants. There is a single final
good that is produced by a continuum of varieties according to a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator
ˆ
Yt = At

Bt (i )Yt (i )

1− 1ε

 1− α t
1− 1ε

Ktαt

where At is total factor productivity, Bt (i ) are taste shifters across varieties„ and ε > 1 is
the elasticity and α is the capital share. Capital is in fixed supply, representing the outside
asset held by households. The Cobb-Douglas specification implies that capital’s rents are
proportional to output, with dt = αt .
Each variety i is produced one-for-one from labor
yt (i ) = Nt (i )
Utility is additively separable between consumption and labor
∞

∑ βi,t E0 [uit (c(st ), st ) − v(n(st ))].

t =0

Households are subject to shocks to the labor productivity: if they work n(st ) then they
supply N (st ) = st n(st ) units of quality adjusted labor.
The market is organized as follows. The final good is produced competitively, earning
zero profits. The varieties are produced by monopolists and will generally earn positive
profits. Nominal rigidities may prevent the immediate adjustment of prices or wages.
The exact nature of this rigidity will not be described here, as it is not crucial.
The different variants make different assumptions regarding the functioning of the
goods and labor market.

29

Yeomen Farmers: Collapsing the Goods and Labor Market. In the first variant, intermediate goods are produced by households themselves. Each household owns a particular variety. In other words, there is no labor market; or alternatively, the labor market
coincides with the goods market. Households set the price for their variety (or their wage
in the alternative labor-market interpretation).
With zero liquidity households will consume their income. As a result, their optimization will lead to income that depends on their productivity shock as well as the taste
shock for their variety. These are the idiosyncratic shocks.
Sticky Prices and Flexible Labor Market. The standard New Keynesian model instead
assumes the existence of firms that set prices and hire labor in a competitive labor market,
with a flexible wage. Assume profits of these firms are taxed 100% with the proceeds
rebated by way of a labor subsidy to households. This assumption plays two roles. First, it
is a standard way to obtain the efficient allocation, by undoing the monopolistic markup.
Second, it implies that profits and dividends from the ownership of firms is zero. As a
result, it has the convenient property that the only outside asset with positive income
flow is capital.15
Sticky Wages and Rationing in the Labor Market. Assume now that varieties are produced competitively, earnings zero profits. However, the nominal wage is rigid and may
require rationing. Prices are flexible and set to marginal cost. Note that, since the wage is
rigid, marginal costs are rigid and so prices inherit this rigidity. We assume wages are set
above the market clearing wage, implying that labor equals labor demand, which in turn
equals the demand for goods.
When aggregate demand is low, labor demand is low and employment is rationed.
One may make various assumptions about this rationing. But it may also include an
extensive and intensive margin, lending an interpretation to the specification in Section
4.2.
15 Relaxing

this assumption lead to profits from monopolistic producers that endogenously vary with
output, but this does not necessarily affect the results in any one direction. First one must decide whether
firm ownership is transferable, whether firms are modeled as public or private firms; in the former case the
stream of profits is effectively part of the outside asset in our notation; in the latter case, profits are just a
component of labor income γt in our notation. Profits in the standard New Keynesian may be countercyclical (due to the procyclical wage) or procyclical (due to the scale effects) depending on the calibration.

30

6

Exact Aggregation in a Real Business Cycle Model

Up to this point, I have considered economies with a fixed or mechanical supply of liquidity.16 In addition, consumption has been assumed to be the only component of demand,
since the model lacked investment. Finally, although the results apply more generally
and make no explicit assumptions regarding nominal rigidities, their natural application
is the study of monetary policy in the presence of nominal rigidities.
The purpose of this section is to show that the results can be generalized and applied
in a very different setting. To this end, I now consider a real business cycle model where
capital is accumulated by investment and as the outside asset. This real economy is assumed to operate under flexible prices and perfect competition.
My main result assumes utility is logarithmic and supposes full depreciation of capital, a well-known case referred to as Brock-Mirman. Under these conditions, aggregate
dynamics behave exactly as those obtained in representative agent or complete market
version of the model. This occurs despite potentially arbitrarily large departures at the
microeconomic household level in the allocation.
Krusell and Smith (1998) studied a similar real business cycle model numerically, but
without the restriction to full depreciation. Their main conclusion was approximate aggregation. My result complements theirs, providing conditions for exact aggregation.

6.1

Economic Environment

The economic environment is a standard real business cycle model, augmented to include
idiosyncratic uncertainty and incomplete markets. Because most of it is well known, I will
keep the description brief.
Preferences.

All households have utility
E0

∞

∑ βt (log ct − v(nt ))

t =0

where
v(n) = v̄

n 1+ γ
1+γ

with v̄ > 0 and γ ≥ 0.
16 Even with a fixed supply of assets, liquidity is arguably not exogenous, since dividends are a function
on aggregate income, an endogenous variable, and the asset price is determined endogenously.

31

Uncertainty. Agents are subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks so that if they work
nit they supply zit · nit to the market. Denote the history of idiosyncratic shocks by zt , and
the history of aggregate shocks by st . Let Λt denote the cross sectional distribution of
history of shocks for households of type i.
Technology.
function,

Output is given by a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production
Y (st ) = A(st ) F (K (st−1 ), N (st )) = A(st )K (st−1 )α N (st )1−α .

The resource constraint is
C (st ) + Kt+1 (st ) ≤ A(st ) F (Kt (st−1 ), Nt (st )) + (1 − δ)K (st ).
We shall focus on the case with δ = 1.
Budget Constraints.

Households are subject to the budget constraints

ci (zt , st ) + ki (zt , st ) ≤ Wt (st )ni (zt , st ) + ki (zt−1 , st−1 ) Rt (st )
To simplify, I have assumed no borrowing. The results are robust to the introduction of
borrowing, as long as the borrowing constraints are proportional to output.
Equilibrium Conditions. The equilibrium conditions are standard and we relegate the
details to the appendix. Households maximize utility subject to the budget constraints.
Aggregate variables must be consistent with individual household choices. Firms maximize. Finally, the market for goods (consumption and investment), the market for labor
and the market for capital must clear.

6.2

Main Result: Exact Aggregation

The next proposition states the main result of this section.
Proposition 9. Consider the Real Business Cycle model with δ = 1. Then the aggregate dynamics
of capital and labor are equivalent to their counterparts in the complete market, or representative

32

agent economy. Namely,
C ( s t ) = (1 − ω t ) Y ( s t )
K ( st ) = ωt Y ( st )
N (st ) = N̄t ,
for some deterministic sequence of saving rates {ωt } and labor { N̄t }. Saving rates ωt are constant
if the initial distribution of wealth is at an invariant steady state.
Individual household consumption and labor are given by
c i ( z t , s t ) = c i ( z t ) C ( s t ),
n i ( z t , s t ) = n i ( z t ) N ( s t ),
where ci (zt ) and ni (st ) is computed from an incomplete market equilibrium for a normalized
economy with C (st ) = 1 and N (st ) = 1.

7

Conclusion

This paper studies the effect of financial market imperfections on aggregate consumption.
Idiosyncratic uncertainty, incomplete markets and borrowing constraints may affect the
level of aggregate demand as well as its sensitivity to the path of current and future interest rate. In terms of the level, greater uncertainty or more stringent borrowing constraints
typically depress consumption, as one would expect. In terms of sensitivity, I provided
a benchmark cases where the response of aggregate consumption to interest rates is exactly identical to that of a standard representative-agent model. Outside these benchmark
cases there are many other possibilities, but consumption becomes more sensitive to current and future interest rate changes in plausible cases. Indeed, I discussed a number
of cases where consumption may react more to future interest rate changes, relative to
current interest rate changes.

References
Aiyagari, S. Rao, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (3), 659–684.

33

Alvarez, Fernando and Urban J Jermann, “Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications of
Endogenous Solvency Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 14 (4), 1117–51.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, “Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate
and Aggregation,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 631–649.
Auclert, Adrien, “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” May 2015.
Constantinides, George M. and Darrell Duffie, “Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers.,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1996, 104 (2), 219.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–
1513.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
the Liquidity Trap,” Working Paper 17583, National Bureau of Economic Research
November 2011.
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song, “The Nature of Countercyclical Income
Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (3), 621 – 660.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Quantitative
Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Households,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009,
1 (1), 319–354.
Heaton, John and Deborah J Lucas, “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on
Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1996, 104 (3), 443–87.
Huggett, Mark, “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance
economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1993, 17 (5–6), 953–969.
Kaplan, Greg Warren and Giovanni Luca Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” CEPR Discussion Paper No 8562, September 2011.
Krueger, Dirk and Hanno Lustig, “When is market incompleteness irrelevant for the
price of aggregate risk (and when is it not)?,” Journal of Economic Theory, January 2010,
145 (1), 1–41.
Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio
Choice, and Equilibrium Asset Returns,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1997, 1 (02), 387–
422.
34

and , “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political
Economy, October 1998, 106 (5), 867–896.
, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and Anthony A. Smith Jr., “Asset prices in a Huggett economy,” Journal of Economic Theory, May 2011, 146 (3), 812–844.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, “The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate shocks,”
Journal of Financial Economics, September 1986, 17 (1), 211–219.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, “The Power of Forward Guidance
Revisited,” Working Paper 20882, National Bureau of Economic Research January (revised July 15) 2015.
Ravn, Morten O. and Vincent Sterk, “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” Discussion
Papers 1501, Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM) June 2012.
Sheedy, Kevin D., “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP
Targeting,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014, 48 (1 (Spring)), 301–373.
Sterk, Vincent and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Transmission of Monetary Policy Operations
through Redistributions and Durable Purchases,” CEP Discussion Papers dp1249, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE December 2013.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron, “Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor Market Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (3), 695–717.

A

Proof of Proposition 7

The economy is described by the following primitives. At t = 0
γ0 (Y ) = Y
d0 = 0
At t = 1
γ1 (Y ) = y(s)Y
d1 = 0
At t = 2
γ2 (Y ) = (1 − d2 )Y
35

d2 > 0
Finally, no borrowing is allowed: Bt (s) = 0 for all s and t. Thus, all liquidity is provided
by the outside asset. Fix Y2 at a constant.
The asset price is given by
1
d2 Y2 .
(20)
q1 =
R1
The present value budget constraint at t = 1 is
c1 ( s ) +

1
(c2 (s) − (1 − d2 )Y2 ) = sY1 + q1 .
R1

(21)

Assuming borrowing constraints do not bind, the Euler equation between t = 1 and t = 2
gives
1
(22)
c1 (s) = ( βR1 )− σ c2 (s)
Substituting (20) and (22) into (21) gives
1

1

c1 (s) + β σ R1 σ −1 c1 (s) = sY1 +

1
Y2
R1

Solving gives
c1 ( s ) =

sY1 +

1
R1 Y2
1

1

1 + β σ R 1 σ −1

Setting C1 = Y1 gives the relation
ˆ
Y1 =

Y1 +

c1 (s)dF (s) =

1

1
R1 Y2
1

1 + β σ R1σ
and solving for Y1 gives

1

1

Y1 = R− σ β− σ Y2
Returning to individual household consumption we write
c1 (s) = ĉ(s; R)Y1
where
ĉ(s; R) = ω ( R)s + 1 − ω ( R)
1

ω ( R) =

1

β − σ R 1− σ
1

1

β − σ R 1− σ + 1
36

−1

for σ = 1 we have that c(s) is a proportion ĉ(s; R) of aggregate income Y1 that varies with
s but is independent of the interest rate R. However, for σ > 1 this proportion does vary
with R. In particular, an increase in R leads to an increase in ĉ for y > 1 and a decrease
in ĉ for y < 1. This increases the relative spread of consumption. Conversely, a lower R
decreases the spread. For σ < 1 the reverse is true.
Turning to t = 0 we have
c0 = Y0 = ( βR0 )
and by Jensen’s inequality

ˆ

− σ1

·

ĉ(s; R)

ˆ
ĉ(s; R1 )

−σ

−σ

− 1

σ

dF (s)

− 1

σ

dF (s)

is decreasing in R if σ > 1. This implies that Y0 increases proportionally more than Y1 .

B

Proof of Proposition 8

The argument is similar to proof of Proposition 7, so I only sketch a proof of the arguments
that are different.
We now impose the borrowing constraint
c1 (s; Y1 ) ≤ sY1 + q1
and suppose it is binding for some households, but not everyone. It follows that

c1 (s) = min


 sY1 +


1
R1 Y2

1
σ

1
σ −1

, sY1 +

1 + β R1




1
d2 Y2

R1

or equivalently
c1 (s; Y1 , ŝ) =



sY1 +

1
R1 d2 Y2
sY1 + R1 Y2




1

1
1 −1

s ≤ ŝ
s > ŝ

1+ β σ R1σ

where the cutoff ŝ is defined by the equality
ŝY1 + R1 Y2
1
σ

1 + β R1

1
σ −1

= ŝY1 +

37

1
d2 Y2 ,
R1

(23)

This provides a strictly decreasing relation between Y1 and ŝ, given R1 .
Aggregating,
ˆ
Y1 = min

c1 (s; Y1 ; s̃)dF (s)
!

ˆ
ˆ ŝ 
sY1 + R11 Y2
1
d2 Y2 dF (s)
=
sY1 +
dF (s) +
1
1
R1
ŝ
1 + β σ R 1 σ −1
´
ˆ ŝ
Y1 ŝ sdF (s) + R11 Y2 (1 − F (ŝ))
1
=
+ Y1
sdF (s) +
d2 Y2 F (ŝ)
1
1
R1
1 + β σ R 1 σ −1
s̃

The first equality follows from (23). It implies, by an Envelope condition argument, that
we can compute the equilibrium derivative of Y1 and R1 without considering the change
in ŝ. Rearranging, for given ŝ, we obtain
1

1

β− σ R1 − σ (1 − F (ŝ) + d2 F (ŝ)) +
´
Y1 = Y2
ŝ s dF ( s )

1
R1 d2 F ( ŝ )

For fixed ŝ, this implies that Y1 is proportional to Y2 . In addition, because of the second
term in the numerator we see that when σ > 1 the response to changes in R1 are larger
when F (ŝ) > 0. This implies that aggregate consumption at t = 1 is more sensitive to
change in R1 .
The implications for C0 are again amplified relative to the effects on C1 for the same
reason as before, due to the reduction in consumption spread at t = 1.

C

Proof of Proposition 9

The required equilibrium conditions are
ci (zt , st ) + ki (zt , st ) = Wt (st )ni (zt , st ) + ki (zt−1 , st−1 ) Rt (st )
v0 (ni (zt , st ))
= zt Wt
u0 (ci (zt , st ))
h
i
0 i t t
0 i t t
t t
u (c (z , s )) ≥ βEt Rt+1 u (c (z , s )) | z , s
with equality whenever ki (zt , st ) > 0. The aggregate conditions are
C (st ) + Kt+1 (st ) = A(st ) F (Kt (st−1 ), Nt (st )) + (1 − δ)K (st )

38

R(st ) = A(st ) Fk (K (st−1 ), N (st )) + 1 − δ
W (st ) = A(st ) FN (K (st−1 ), N (st ))
with aggregates consistent with household choices
ˆ

t

C (s ) =

∑µ

i

t

N (s ) =

∑µ

i

t

∑µ

i

K (s ) =

ˆ
ˆ

ci (zt , st )dΛ(zt ),
ni (zt , st )dΛ(zt ),
ki (zt , st )dΛ(zt ).

Guess and verify that the equilibrium satisfies
ci ( z t , s t ) = ci ( z t )C ( s t )
ni ( z t , s t ) = ni ( z t ) N ( s t )
For each period t and aggregate history st such a decomposition is without loss of generality; define ci (zt ) and ni (zt ) to be the household decomposition of the allocation associated with some aggregate history st for each period. I now verify that this decomposition
works for all other histories.
Substituting we obtain
c i ( z t ) C ( s t ) + k i ( z t ) K ( s t ) = W ( s t ) N ( s t ) n i ( z t ) + k i ( z t −1 ) K ( s t −1 ) R ( s t )
ci ( z t ) 0  i t  0
v n (z ) v ( N (st )) N (st )C (zt ) = W (st ) N (st )
v̄zt
 0 i t +1
!
t
βE
u
(
c
(
z
))
|
z
u0 (C (st )) ≥
· E[ R(st+1 )u0 (C (st+1 )) | st ]
u0 (ci (zt+1 ))
By definition these equations hold for one history st ; to check whether these conditions
hold for other histories, rewrite them as
ci ( z t )

t
C (st )
W (st ) N (st ) i t
K ( s t −1 ) R ( s t ) i t −1
i t K (s )
+
k
(
z
)
=
n
(
z
)
+
· k (z )
Y (st )
Y (st )
Y (st )
Y (st )

v̂v0 ( N (st )) N (st )

C (st )
W (st ) N (st )
=
Y (st )
Y (st )

u0 (C (st )) = β̂ t · E[ R(st+1 )u0 (C (st )) | st ]
39

where

ˆ

ci ( z t ) 0  i t 
v̂t ≡
v n (z )
v̄zt


βE u0 (ci (zt )) | zt
β̂ t ≡ max
u0 (ci (zt ))
zt

The first equation will hold as long as the terms
C (st )
Y (st )

K (st )
Y (st )

W (st ) N (st )
Y (st )

K ( s t −1 ) R ( s t )
Y (st )

are independent of history st ; the last two ratios are guaranteed to be constant by the
Cobb-Douglas assumption. The second ratio is implied by the first. Thus, we require
C ( s t ) = (1 − ω t ) Y ( s t )
for some saving rate ωt that does not depend on the history st . Turning to the second
equation, we determine N (st ),
v̂v0 ( N (st )) N (st ) =

1−α
1 − ωt

Finally


1
αY (st+1 )
1
t
= β̂ t E
|s
C (st )
k ( s t ) C ( s t +1 )
1
1
α
= β̂ t t
t
( 1 − ω t )Y ( s )
k ( s ) 1 − ωt
ωt
α
= β̂ t
1 − ωt
1 − ωt
Note that at with a steady state invariant distribution we have β̂ t constant, so we obtain
ωt = α β̂ as in the standard Brock-Mirman solution.

40

