                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             NOT SO DISCONNECTED:
                      EXCHANGE RATES AND THE CAPITAL STOCK

                                     Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                        Thomas Mertens
                                           Tony Zhang

                                       Working Paper 21445
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21445


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2015




Prepared for the International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2015. We thank Charles Engel, Luca Fornaro,
Tommaso Monacelli, Brent Neiman, Anna Pavlova, Hélène Rey, and Robert Richmond for helpful
comments. Hassan is grateful to the Fama-Miller Center at the University of Chicago for providing
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Tarek Alexander Hassan, Thomas Mertens, and Tony Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Not so Disconnected: Exchange Rates and the Capital Stock
Tarek Alexander Hassan, Thomas Mertens, and Tony Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 21445
August 2015
JEL No. F3,G0

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the link between stochastic properties of exchange rates and differences in capital-output
ratios across industrialized countries. To this end, we endogenize capital accumulation within a standard
model of exchange rate determination with nontraded goods. The model predicts that currencies of
countries that are more systemic for the world economy (countries that face particularly volatile shocks
or account for a large share of world GDP) appreciate when the price of traded goods in word markets
is high. These currencies are better hedges against consumption risk faced by international investors
because they appreciate in "bad" states of the world. As a consequence, more systemic countries face
a lower cost of capital and accumulate more capital per worker. We estimate our model using data
from seven industrialized countries with freely floating exchange rate regimes between 1984-2010
and show that cross-country variation in the stochastic properties of exchange rates accounts for 72%
of the cross-country variation in capital-output ratios. In this sense, the stochastic properties of exchange
rates map to fundamentals in the way predicted by the model.


Tarek Alexander Hassan                                Tony Zhang
Booth School of Business                              University of Chicago
University of Chicago                                 5807 S Woodlawn Ave
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                            Chicago IL 60657
Chicago, IL 60637                                     tony.wtz@gmail.com
and NBER
tarek.hassan@chicagobooth.edu

Thomas Mertens
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 W Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
thomas.mertens.official@gmail.com
1     Introduction
A large literature links variation in capital-output ratios across countries to differences in
the cost of capital and technology. Such differences have been attributed to heterogeneity
in the protection of property rights (Hall and Jones, 1997), taxation rates (Jorgenson,
1996), depreciation rates, the capital share of output (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014),
and distortions in the allocation of resources (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). In this paper, we
argue that differences in the stochastic properties of countries’ real exchange rates may
be another important driver of variation in capital-output ratios across countries.
    If firms are price-takers and use a Cobb-Douglas production technology, we can sum-
marize the various drivers of heterogeneity across countries in capital-output ratios by
equating the expected marginal product of capital to its marginal cost and writing

                                                 (E[r̃i ] + δ i ) τ i
                                 E (Yi /Ki ) =                        ,
                                                         νi

where E (Yi /Ki ) is the expected output per unit of capital installed in country i, δ i is the
depreciation rate, ν i is the capital share of output, and τ i summarizes distortions that
may be caused by variation in tax rates, the protection of property rights, or dysfunc-
tional markets. In contrast to these well-established factors, cross-country variation in
the required net rate of return to capital, E[r̃i ], has received relatively little attention as
a potential driver of differences in capital accumulation across countries.
    Nevertheless, there are good reasons to believe that E[r̃i ] varies systematically across
countries. The required rate of return to capital installed in a given country consists of
two parts, the country’s risk-free rate of interest and a risk premium. A growing litera-
ture in international asset pricing argues that heterogeneity in the stochastic properties
of countries’ real exchange rates generates differences in the former. In particular, a
common theme in this literature is that countries whose currencies tend to appreciate in
“bad” times have lower risk-free interest rates (Hassan, 2013; Martin, 2012) and pay lower
expected returns (Lustig and Verdelhan, 2007).
    In this paper, we endogenize capital accumulation within a canonical model of ex-
change rate determination and show that countries whose currencies appreciate when the



                                                 1
shadow price of traded goods is high also have a lower required rate of return to capital
installed in their non-traded sectors. As a result, these countries install higher capital-
output ratios in equilibrium. When we calibrate our model to match data for seven OECD
countries with freely-floating exchange rates, we find that heterogeneity in the stochastic
properties of their exchange rates can account for 72% of the variation in their relative
capital-output ratios.
   Our model builds on the canonical model of exchange rate determination: households
consume a bundle of a freely traded good and a country-specific nontraded good. The
nontraded good is produced using capital and labor as inputs, subject to a country-specific
productivity shock. This productivity shock induces variation in output of nontraded
goods that allows the consumption price index to differ across countries and, as a result,
induces variation in the real exchange rate. In addition, country-specific shocks to the
inflation rate affect real exchange rates because a subset of households can only hold
nominal bonds that make fixed payments in terms of the currency of the country in
which they reside. The remaining households have access to complete international asset
markets. In equilibrium, the real exchange rate thus responds to (real) shocks to the
productivity in production of nontraded goods across countries and to (monetary) shocks
to the inflation rates of national currencies.
   Our most important addition to this canonical setup is heterogeneity across countries
in volatility and size: some countries are affected by more volatile productivity or inflation
shocks than others and some countries account for a larger share of world GDP than others
(they comprise more or wealthier households).
   Heterogeneity in volatility and size generates differences in the stochastic properties
of countries’ exchange rates. First, countries that experience more volatile productivity
and inflation shocks tend to have more volatile exchange rates. Second, the currencies of
larger and more volatile countries tend to appreciate in “bad” times: households react to
shocks by shipping traded goods across countries in an effort to share risk across borders.
However, the shocks that affect larger or more volatile countries (for ease of reference, we
refer to them as more “systemic” countries) are harder to diversify internationally. For
example, when a country has a low per capita output of nontraded goods, its nontraded
good becomes relatively more expensive and its real exchange rate appreciates. In order

                                                 2
to compensate for the shortfall of nontraded goods the country imports additional traded
goods from the rest of the world. However, a low output of nontraded goods in a large
country simultaneously triggers a rise in the world market price of traded goods, while
a low output of nontraded goods in a small country does not. As a consequence, the
currencies of more systemic countries tend to appreciate when the world market price of
traded goods is high.
   These differences in the stochastic properties of real exchange rates in turn are in-
dicative of differential incentives for capital accumulation. Households around the world
worry about states of the world in which more systemic countries suffer bad productiv-
ity shocks because these shocks are transmitted to the rest of the world in the form of
higher prices of traded goods. Although households cannot prevent these states from
occurring, they can partially insure against them by accumulating more capital and thus
raising the mean level of output of nontraded goods in systemic countries across all states.
Accumulating more capital in the nontraded sector of more systemic countries thus soft-
ens the impact of adverse shocks in these countries and represents a good hedge against
world-wide consumption risk. In other words, large countries and countries with volatile
exchange rates have a low required rate of return on capital in the nontraded sector and
attract investment because they have “safe” currencies that appreciate in “bad” times.
   As documented in earlier work (Hassan, 2013), this insurance property of the currencies
of systemic countries also allows the model to match a number of stylized facts documented
in the recent empirical literature on international asset prices: (i) countries that are either
large or have more volatile non-traded sectors have lower risk-free and nominal interest
rates, (ii) stocks in the nontraded sector of larger countries pay lower expected returns,
(iii) high interest rate currencies tend to depreciate when US consumption growth is low,
and (iv) a portfolio that is long high interest rate currencies and short low interest rate
currencies is a priced factor in international currency markets (Lustig and Verdelhan,
2007; Lustig et al., 2011; Hassan, 2013; Tran, 2013). Our main theoretical contribution
is thus to show that these predictions about cross-currency variation in asset returns also
produce differential incentives for capital accumulation across countries.
   An important detail in the predictions of our model is that the link between capital
accumulation and stochastic properties of exchange rates is specific to the nontraded

                                               3
sector and does not affect the incentive to accumulate capital for the purposes of the
production of traded goods. The reason is that shocks affecting the traded sector are
fully shared internationally and thus have no effect on the relative price of consumption
in different countries and on real exchange rates. As a result, the stochastic properties of
exchange rates have implications for cross-country variation in the incentive to accumulate
capital only in the nontraded but not in the traded sector. In the interest of parsimony we
therefore abstract from capital accumulation in the traded sector throughout our analysis.
   In addition to deriving these qualitative results, we take several steps to make the
model quantitatively viable and take it to the data. To this end, we first show formally
that the conclusions outlined above hold regardless of whether markets are complete or
incomplete, and regardless of whether variation in exchange rates is driven by real or
monetary shocks. This finding is particularly important because allowing for market
incompleteness significantly improves the model’s fit to the data. One long-standing
challenge for models of exchange rate determination with complete markets is that they
predict a perfect, negative correlation between appreciations of the real exchange rate and
consumption growth (this is the seminal Backus and Smith (1993) puzzle). By contrast,
inflation shocks induce a positive correlation between appreciations and consumption
growth when markets are incomplete. Allowing for market incompleteness and both
real and monetary shocks can thus generate a correlation between appreciations and
differential consumption growth that is more consistent with the data. Moreover, allowing
for market incompleteness increases the effect of a given productivity shock on the real
exchange rate and raises its volatility in equilibrium, partially addressing another well-
documented shortcoming of the complete-markets model.
   We calibrate our model using annual data from seven industrialized countries that
maintain freely floating exchange rates during the sample period, 1984-2010. Our anal-
ysis proceeds in three steps. First, we allow countries to differ only in size, measuring
each country’s size as the average share it contributes to the overall GDP of the seven
countries under consideration during the sample period. We then estimate the variance
of productivity and inflation shocks to match the average variance across countries of
GDP growth and CPI inflation, constraining the variances of the two shocks to be equal
across countries. Under this specification, the model accounts for 7% of the variation in

                                             4
cross-country differences in capital-output ratios.
   In a second step, we repeat the same procedure but now allow heteroskedastic produc-
tivity and inflation shocks across countries: we estimate the relative size of each country’s
shocks to match the variance of its equal-weighted average real and nominal exchange
rates, subject to the constraint that we again match the average variance across countries
of GDP growth and CPI inflation. This heteroskedastic specification accounts for 72%
of the variation in cross-country differences in capital-output ratios. In this sense, the
stochastic properties of exchange rates, as proxied by differences in country size and the
variances of exchange rates, can account for the majority of the differences in capital-
output ratios across the seven countries in our sample. At the same time, the model
produces a small negative correlation between appreciations and consumption growth
and thus is not obviously rejected by the data along this dimension.
   Although the baseline model does remarkably well in predicting the relative differences
in capital-output ratios across countries, it fails dramatically on magnitudes. For example,
in the data, Canada has a 30% lower capital-output ratio than the United States whereas
the model predicts a difference of around 0.03%. Similarly, although the model (by
construction) matches the relative variances of the real exchange rate, it under-predicts
the average variance of real exchange rates as well as the equity premium. We thus
conjecture that the model’s failure to match the quantitative magnitude of the differences
in capital-output ratios may be related to the well-known failure of the canonical model to
generate sufficiently large risk premia and sufficiently large variability of the real exchange
rate.
   In a third step, we apply a series of modifications to the model that address the latter
issue, including the introduction of capital adjustment costs. The general pattern we find
is that, consistent with our conjecture, modifications that increase the variance of the real
exchange rate also tend to narrow the gap in magnitudes, although no single modification
yields entirely satisfactory results.
   The conclusion of our analysis is that the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange
rates contain information that may account for some of the large variation in capital-
output ratios across countries. We make two main caveats to this interpretation. First,
our results are based on a sample of relatively homogeneous developed countries that have

                                               5
similar institutions, tax systems, and well-functioning markets. This relative homogeneity
may explain why we get a good fit to the data even without controlling for these other
factors. In a sample comprised of a broader set of countries, especially developed and
developing countries, we would expect the stochastic properties of exchange rates to play
a relatively smaller role in explaining differences in capital-output ratios. For this rea-
son, we make no claim about the importance of heterogeneity in stochastic properties of
countries’ real exchange rates relative to heterogeneity in these other factors. Second, our
baseline model matches only relative differences, but falls far from the mark in matching
the magnitude of absolute differences. For this reason, our empirical results should be
interpreted with due caution.
       An additional limitation of our empirical work is that, due to a lack of comparable
data, we only measure differences in capital-output ratios for the economy as a whole
rather than specifically for the nontraded sector. However, we do not believe that this is
a particularly problematic shortcoming as nontraded goods account for a large share of
GDP.

       Our work relates to a growing theoretical literature that centers on the idea that cur-
rencies that appreciate in “bad” times pay lower returns and have lower risk-free interest
rates in equilibrium. This literature has explored various potential drivers of heterogene-
ity of the stochastic properties of countries’ real exchange rates, including differences in
country size (Hassan, 2013; Martin, 2012; Govillot, Rey, and Gourinchas, 2010), the size
and volatility of shocks affecting the nontraded sector (Tran, 2013), financial develop-
ment (Maggiori, 2013), and patterns of production specialization (Ready, Roussanov, and
Ward, 2013; Richmond, 2015). We contribute to this literature by showing that the same
forces that generate differences in currency returns also generate differences in the incen-
tive to accumulate capital across countries, linking this literature to the broader literature
on differences in factor accumulation across countries. 1
       Our paper also relates to a parallel empirical literature that shows evidence that is
broadly consistent with the predictions of these models, including Lustig and Verdelhan
   1
    In this sense our paper also relates to the literature studying the effects of the exchange rate regime
and monetary stabilization on factor accumulation, net foreign asset positions, and entry. Examples
include Kollmann (2002), Fornaro (2015), and Bergin and Corsetti (2015).


                                                    6
(2007), Campbell, Serfaty-De Medeiros, and Viceira (2010), Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling,
and Schrimpf (2012), Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), and David, Henriksen,
and Simonovska (2014).2 Our contribution to this empirical literature is to show that
information contained in the variance-covariance matrix of exchange rates can predict
differences in capital accumulation between the seven industrialized countries in our sam-
ple.
        Finally, our work also relates to the broader literature on violations of uncovered
interest parity by arguing that persistent violations of uncovered interest parity have real
effects on factor accumulation. For an overview of this literature see the surveys by Lewis
(2011), and Engel (2014), as well as Hassan and Mano (2014).

        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: section 2 sets up and derives the
equilibrium conditions of the model. Section 3 derives the main economic insights using
a special case of the model with two periods, full depreciation, and Cobb-Douglas utility.
Section 4 solves and estimates the fully dynamic model. Section 5 concludes.



2         A Model of Exchange Rates and Capital Accumu-
          lation
In this section, we develop an international asset pricing model in which the allocation of
capital across countries and the stochastic properties of real exchange rates are jointly de-
termined as a function of real and monetary shocks. The model generalizes the framework
in Hassan (2013) by introducing a fully dynamic setting and endogenizing the accumu-
lation of capital in the nontraded sector. It nests the canonical complete-markets of
exchange rate determination (Backus and Smith, 1993) as well as a simplified version of
the incomplete-markets model by Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2002).3 Closely related
to our framework are Devereux, Smith, and Yetman (2009) and Kollmann (2012) who also
    2
     Also see the evidence in some of the aforementioned papers, including Hassan (2013), Tran (2013),
and Ready, Roussanov, and Ward (2013) and Richmond (2015).
   3
     Similar models of exchange rate determination with complete markets and non-traded goods include
Stockman and Dellas (1989), Tesar (1993), Stockman and Tesar (1995), Baxter, Jermann, and King
(1998), and Collard, Dellas, Diba, and Stockman (2007).



                                                  7
combine elements of the canonical complete-markets setup with a form of within-country
market segmentation, but do not consider heterogeneous countries or endogenous capital
accumulation.


2.1    Setup
There exists a unit measure of households i ∈ [0, 1], partitioned into N subsets Θn of
measure θn , n = 1, ..., N . Each subset represents the constituent households of a country
n. Households’ utility functions exhibit constant relative risk aversion according to

                                      XT
                                           βt           
                              U (i) =         E Ct (i)1−γ ,                             (1)
                                      t=0
                                          1−γ

where β is the time discount factor, Ct (i) is the quantity of a final good consumed by
household i at time t, and T is a terminal period (equal to 1 and ∞ in sections 3 and
4, respectively). Households are risk-averse with γ > 0. The final good can be used for
consumption or investment in capital. Households produce the final good using a traded
and a nontraded (intermediate) good according to

                                                                      1
                          Yt (i) = [τ IT,t (i)α + (1 − τ )IN,t (i)α ] α ,               (2)


where τ ∈ (0, 1) is the weight of the traded good in the production function, IT,t (i)
is the number of traded goods used as inputs by household i, IN,t (i) is the number of
nontraded goods used, and α ∈ (0, 1) determines the elasticity of substitution between
the two inputs, εα = 1/ (1 − α). Once produced, the final good is freely traded among all
households within a given country.
   At the start of each period, households receive a stochastic endowment of the homoge-
nous traded good. Shocks to endowments are common within each country such that all
                                                       n
households within a country n receive the same amount YT,t of the traded good with

                                      n               
                                  log YT,t ∼ N 0, σ 2T,n .


Throughout, we use the traded good as the numéraire, such that all prices and returns


                                                8
are accounted for in the same units.
   In each country, a representative firm operates a technology for producing nontraded
goods employing capital and labor as inputs. Each household inelastically supplies one
unit of labor. The per capita output of nontraded goods is equal to

                                     n
                                    YN,t = exp [η nt ] (Ktn )ν                            (3)


where 0 < ν < 1 is the capital share in production, Ktn is the per capita stock of capital
in country n, and η nt is a productivity shock to the production of non-tradable goods in
period t,
                                                        
                                      η nt ∼ N 0, σ 2N,n .

The law of motion for per capita capital is

                                   n
                                  Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Ktn + IK,t ,                              (4)


where δ is the depreciation rate of capital and IK,t is the per capita level of investment in
period t. Goods cannot be stored and must be consumed or invested in the period they
are produced or endowed.
   A fixed proportion φ of households within each country own equal shares of the rep-
resentative firm in their country and trade a complete set of state-contingent securities
across all time periods in international markets. We label these households as “active.”
   The remaining proportion 1 − φ of households within each country is excluded from
owning stocks or trading state-contingent securities. We label these households as finan-
cially “inactive.” Inactive households cede the claims to their endowments and wages in
each period t to their country’s active households and receive a nominal bond in return.
This nominal bond pays off a fixed number of units of the country’s nominal consumer
price index in the following period (t + 1). In each period, each inactive household thus
                              n
receives a payment of Ptn e−μt Css traded goods, where Ptn is the number of traded goods
required to purchase one real unit of country n’s final good in period t, μnt is an exogenous
inflation shock to the nominal price of one unit of the traded good in terms of the currency



                                                9
of country n,
                                                         
                                         μnt ∼ N 0, σ̃ 2n ,

and Css is a normalizing constant that equalizes consumption between active and inactive
households at the deterministic steady state.
   To simplify notation, let ω represent the state vector, recording the realization of
endowments, inflation shocks, and capital stocks across countries within a given period.
In what follows, we indicate the dependence on the state once for each variable and drop
the argument thereafter whenever appropriate.
   All households take prices as given. Active households maximize their lifetime utility
(1) subject to their intertemporal budget constraint

                    T Z
                    X                                                
                                                  1−φ n         −μn
                          Qt (ω)     Ptn (ω)Ct (i, ω)
                                                +        Pt (ω)e Css dω
                                                                  t                           (5)
                  t=0   ω                           φ
                  XT Z                                         
                                 1                          
                ≤         Qt (ω) YT,t (ω) + wt (ω) + π t (ω) dω + κn ,
                                   n         n         n

                  t=0   ω        φ

where Qt (ω) is the time-zero price of a state contingent security that pays one unit of
the tradable good in period t if state ω occurs, Ptn (ω) denotes the price of country n’s
final good in period t, wtn (ω) is the wage rate and π nt (ω) is the per capita share of profits
                                                                  1−φ
accruing to the country’s representative firm. Note that           φ
                                                                        is the number of inactive
households per active household in each country. To simplify the solution of the model,
we also assume that active households receive a country-specific transfer κn before trading
begins such that the decentralized problem coincides with the Social Planner’s allocation
with unit Pareto weights. We therefore do not consider the effects that asymmetries in
the stochastic properties of exchange rates may have on the distribution of initial wealth
across countries.
   Inactive households also maximize (1), but subject to the constraints

                                                              n
                           Ptn (ω) Ĉt (i, ω) ≤ Ptn (ω) e−μt Css ∀n, t,                       (6)


where Ĉt (i, ω) is the consumption of final goods by inactive household i. Since inactive



                                                 10
households cannot transfer goods across periods, they optimally choose to consume the
entire payment received from their nominal bond, and thus

                                                                  n
                                        Ĉt (i) = Ĉtn = e−μt Css ∀i ∈ Θn .                              (7)


   Each country’s representative firm makes investment decisions to maximize its present
discounted value of future profits, π nt , subject to the law of motion for capital (4). The
firm’s objective function is

                       T Z
                       X                                                                   
               max                    Qt (ω)θn PN,t
                                                n       n
                                                    (ω)YN,t (ω) − wtn (ω) − Ptn (ω)IK,t
                                                                                    n
                                                                                        (ω) dω           (8)
          {IK,t
            n (ω)
                  }t   t=0        ω


       n
where PN,t is the price of country n’s nontraded good.
   The market clearing conditions for final, nontraded, and traded goods within a given
period t are           Z                                                  Z
                                  Ct (i, ω) di +       θn IK,t
                                                           n
                                                               (ω)    =              Yt (i, ω) di ∀n,    (9)
                           i∈Θn                                               i∈Θn
                                       Z
                                                  IN,t (i, ω) di = θn YN,t
                                                                       n
                                                                           (ω) ∀n,                      (10)
                                           i∈Θn

and                                     Z                             X
                                                  IT,t (i, ω) di =            θn YT,t
                                                                                  n
                                                                                      (ω),              (11)
                                           i∈Θn                       n

respectively. The economy is at an equilibrium when all households maximize utility
subject to their budget constraints, firms maximize the present discounted value of profits
subject to the law of motion of capital, and goods markets clear.


2.2    Solving the Model
Although financial markets are incomplete, the model’s solution remains tractable because
a subset of the population in each country (active households) have access to complete
markets. As a result, we can solve for the equilibrium allocation of capital and goods
by solving the Social Planner’s problem, subject to the equilibrium behavior of inactive
households. To characterize this behavior, it is useful to calculate the number of inputs
of traded and nontraded goods used for the production of final goods consumed by each

                                                             11
inactive household according to (7). Taking prices as given, inactive households use the
optimal mix of traded and nontraded goods given by

                                                                      τ      n
                                                                                  α−1
                                                                                     1
                          exp(−μnt )Ptn Css                                 PN,t        exp(−μnt )Ptn Css
              IˆT,t
                n
                      =     τ           
                                                 ˆn
                                             1 , IN,t =
                                                                      1−τ
                                                                                 τ            1        ,     (12)
                                    n   α                                                n α α−1
                        1 + 1−τ PN,t        α−1
                                                                            1 + 1−τ     PN,t

where IˆTn and IˆNn refer to the inputs of traded and nontraded goods used by inactive
households in country n, respectively.4
      All active households within a given country are identical and receive the same en-
dowments. In a symmetric equilibrium, they consume the same number of final goods
                                                                               
Ctn , and use the same number of traded and nontraded goods inputs IT,t
                                                                    n      n
                                                                        , IN,t   . Using
this simplified notation, we can write the Social Planner’s problem as

                                                      X          (Ctn )1−γ                                      
 V Ktn , YT,t
          n
              , η nt , μnt =            max                 φθn                     n
                                                                            + βE V Kt+1    n
                                                                                        , YT,t+1 , η nt+1 , μnt+1
                                  {IT,t N,t K,t }n,t
                                    n ,I n ,I n
                                                        n
                                                                   1−γ

subject to (12) as well as the economy’s resource constraints for final goods, nontraded
goods, and traded goods. 5
      For further reference, we denote the Lagrange multipliers on these 2n + 1 resource
constraints as Λnt , ΛnN,t , and ΛT,t and interpret them as the Social Planner’s shadow prices
of final, nontraded, and traded goods, respectively. Given this definition, we can re-write
the prices in (12) as

                                                    ΛnN,t (ω)              Λn (ω)
                                   n
                                  PN,t (ω) =                  and Ptn (ω) = t       ,                           (13)
                                                    ΛT,t (ω)               ΛT,t (ω)

completing the setup of the Social Planner’s problem.
                                                  n
      The first-order conditions with respect to IT,t equate the shadow price of the traded
good across all active households in the world,

                               α−1            α                      α  α1 −1
                         n
                      τ IT,t             n
                                      τ IT,t                    n
                                                    + (1 − τ ) IN,t                 (Ctn )−γ = ΛT,t ∀n.         (14)
  4
      See Appendix A for a formal proof.
  5
      See Appendix B for the derivation of these constraints.




                                                             12
                                            n
The first-order conditions with respect to IN,t define the shadow prices of nontraded goods
within each country,

                           α−1            α                     α  α1 −1
                     n
           (1 − τ ) IN,t             n
                                  τ IT,t                    n
                                                + (1 − τ ) IN,t                (Ctn )−γ = ΛnN,t ∀n.   (15)


In addition, it is useful to keep track of the (redundant) first-order condition with respect
to Ctn because it pins down the marginal utility of consumption of active households in
each country,
                                            (Ctn )−γ = Λnt ∀n.                                        (16)

By definition, the real exchange rate between two countries h and f equals the ratio of
these shadow prices,
                                     Stf,h (ω) = Λft (ω)/Λht (ω).

                                                               n
Finally, combining the first-order conditions with respect to IK,t with the correspond-
ing envelope conditions yields an Euler equation for the accumulation of capital in each
country,
                        h             −γ                           ν−1 i
           (Ctn )−γ = βE (1 − δ) Ct+1
                                  n
                                          + ΛnN,t+1 exp η nt+1 ν Kt+1
                                                                  n
                                                                             ∀n.                      (17)


Combining these N Euler equations with the 3N resource constraints and the 3N first-
order conditions (14) - (16) yields a recursive system of 7N equations that determines the
                                     n n
sequence of endogenous variables IT,t    , IN,t , Ctn , Kt+1
                                                         n
                                                             , Λnt , ΛnN,t , ΛT,t n,t .



3    Exchange Rates and the Capital Stock
From (17), it is already apparent that heterogeneity in the effect of the country-specific
                                                                        
productivity shock η nt+1 on the shadow value of nontraded goods ΛnN,t+1 induces variation
in the incentive to accumulate capital across countries. To illustrate how such heterogene-
ity relates to heterogeneity in the stochastic properties of countries’ real exchange rates,
we first consider a simplified, two-period version of the model. In this simplified version,
the production technology for final goods is Cobb-Douglas (εα = 1), capital fully depre-
ciates between periods (δ = 1), the economy is at its deterministic steady state at t = 0,

                                                      13
and the world ends at T = 1. In this case, (17) simplifies to

                                                  ν        n          
                                     K1n = β            E  Λ N,1 Y n
                                                                   N,1   .
                                               (C0n )−γ

                                                                                                    1− γ1
Moreover, from (15), (16), and (32), it follows that ΛnN,1 YN,1
                                                            n
                                                                = (1−τ ) Λnt+1                               . Guessing
that all endogenous variables are log-normally distributed in equilibrium, we can then
write the difference in two countries’ per capita stocks as
                                                                     2 
                   γ−1  f                   1               γ−1                                          
 k1f   −   k1h   =             h     f     h
                      E λ 1 − λ1 − λ 0 − λ 0   +                             var       λf1       − var   λh1        , (18)
                    γ                            2               γ

where lowercase variables stand for logs such that x = log (X) . This equation shows that
differences in capital accumulation between countries are a function of expected changes
in the real exchange rate between the two countries (the first term on the right hand side)
and of the difference in the variance of the marginal utility of consumption in the two
countries (the second term). Plainly, both terms reflect stochastic properties of the real
exchange rate between the two countries, stf,h = λft − λht .6
       Because the economy is at its deterministic steady-state in t = 0, cross-country dif-
ferences in the first term on the right-hand side of (18) can only arise as a result of
differences in the second term. That is, the only reason for expected growth of marginal
utilities to differ across countries is if households in these countries accumulate different
levels of capital for use in period 1. The first term thus represents a feed-back effect that
operates only if the second term is non-zero. The key driver of cross-country differences
in capital accumulation is therefore the difference in the variance of the marginal utility
of consumption of active households across countries.
       To study this term in closed form, we log-linearize the model around the deterministic
steady state, i.e., the point at which the variances of all shocks are zero ( σ T,n , σ N,n , σ̃ n = 0 ∀n)
and all households have a capital stock that is fixed at the deterministic steady state level.
That is, for the remainder of this section, we study the incentives to accumulate different
levels of capital across countries while holding the capital stock fixed. Appendix C shows
   6
      Note that this condition is also closely related to very similar conditions that relate cross-country
differences in expected currency returns to cross-country differences in the variances of stochastic discount
factors, as in Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001). We discuss this analogy in detail in section 3.3


                                                     14
the log-linearized system of equations.
   We proceed in three steps. The following subsection studies the effect of productivity
shocks on the stochastic properties of exchange rates and capital accumulation by consid-
ering the special case in which financial markets are complete φ = 1. We then consider
the effect of inflation shocks while abstracting from productivity shocks before combining
the insights from both special cases and discussing the joint effects of real and monetary
shocks.


3.1       Real Shocks, Exchange Rates, and the Capital Stock
Equation (19) shows the equilibrium use of the traded good in an arbitrary country h
for the special case in which financial markets are complete, φ = 1 (recall that lowercase
variables stand for logs):

                                           (γ − 1) (1 − τ )          
                             ihT = yˉT +                           h
                                                            yˉN − yN   ,                 (19)
                                            (1 − τ ) + τ γ
            P
where yˉN = N      n n
              n=1 θ yN is the average of the log output of non-tradables across countries
          P
and yˉT = N      n n
            n=1 θ yT is the average of the log world endowment of tradables. As one may

expect, use of the traded good in the home country moves one for one with the world
supply. Since the traded good can be freely shipped around the globe, it is inconsequential
which country has a better or worse endowment of tradables, as long as ˉyT is constant.
Households thus perfectly share risk when it comes to endowments of the traded good.
However, the second term of (19) shows that they also use the traded good to insure
against productivity shocks in the nontraded sector. Although non-tradables cannot be
shipped, households purchase insurance in world markets in the form of compensating
deliveries of traded goods if γ > 1.
   This condition ensures that the cross-partial of the shadow price of the traded good
with respect to the nontraded good is negative, i.e., that the relative price of a country’s
nontraded good falls when its supply increases. As most empirical applications of inter-
national asset pricing models find a relative risk aversion significantly larger than one, we
follow the literature in assuming that this condition is met, but refer to it whenever it is



                                                  15
relevant (see Coeurdacier (2009) for a detailed discussion). If relative risk aversion is suf-
ficiently high, households in the home country thus receive additional tradables whenever
they have a lower than average output of nontraded goods.
       This risk-sharing behavior is reflected in the shadow price of traded goods,

                                         N
                                         X                                  N
                                                                            X
               λT = −((1 − τ ) + τ γ)          θn yTn   − (1 − τ )(γ − 1)         θ n yN
                                                                                       n
                                                                                         + log(τ ).     (20)
                                         n=1                                n=1


The first term on the right-hand side shows that the shadow price unambiguously falls
with the world supply of traded goods. The second term states that the same is true
for the average output of nontraded goods, as long as γ > 1. Thus λT tends to be low
in “good” states of the world when endowments of traded goods are high and countries
experience positive productivity shocks in the nontraded sector. 7 Note, however, that not
every productivity shock has the same influence on λT . Shocks to the productivity of
larger countries affect a larger measure of households and thus have a larger effect on λT .
Similarly, countries with more volatile shocks have a larger impact on the variability of
λT . The following definition formalizes the notion of large and volatile countries:
Definition 3.1
Country f is larger than country h if θf > θ h . It is more volatile than country h if


                                      σ N,f > σ N,h and σ̃ f > σ̃ h ,


and it is more systemic than country h if


                               θf ≥ θh and σ N,f ≥ σ N,h and σ̃ f ≥ σ̃ h


with two of the three weak inequalities holding strictly.

       The real exchange rate between countries f and h is

                                                     γ (1 − τ )  h       
                                                                        f
                            sf,h = λf − λh =                     y N − yN   .                           (21)
                                                   (1 − τ ) + γτ
   7
    Because the capital stock is fixed at its deterministic steady state level we have that yN
                                                                                             n
                                                                                               = νkss + η n ,
such that differences in per capita output of non-traded goods are equal to differences in the realization
of productivity shocks.


                                                        16
It depends only on the difference between the per-capita production of nontraded goods
between the two countries. The country with the lower per-capita output of nontraded
goods appreciates.
   From inspecting (20) and (21), we can see that the model produces two kinds of
heterogeneity in the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange rates. First, more volatile
countries – that is, countries that experience more volatile productivity shocks – tend to
have more volatile exchange rates,
                                                                       2
                                      f,h
                                                         γ (1 − τ )                           
                         var s                  =                            σ 2N,f + σ 2N,h
                                                        (1 − τ ) + γτ

Second, more systemic countries – that is, countries that are either larger, more volatile,
or both – tend to appreciate when the shadow price of traded goods is high. If country f
is more systemic than country h, we have

                                           γ(γ − 1) (1 − τ )2 f 2                
                 cov s   f,h
                               , λT       =                    θ σ N,f − θh σ 2N,h > 0.
                                              (1 − τ ) + γτ

The intuition for this result is a follows: whenever any country suffers a low productivity
shock, the relative price of its nontraded goods rises and its real exchange rate appreciates.
For a given percentage decline in productivity, this appreciation occurs independently of
how large the country is. (Note that there is no θ in equation (21).) However, when a
larger or more volatile country suffers this shock, more of it is transmitted to the rest of
the world. For example, in states of the world in which the US (the largest economy in
the world) draws a low productivity shock, it imports a lot of the world’s traded goods,
raising the shadow price of traded goods all over the world. As a result, the US dollar
tends to appreciate when λT is high, producing a positive covariance between the US real
exchange rate and λT .
   This heterogeneity in the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange rates in turn gen-
erates heterogeneity in the incentive to invest across countries. In particular, it generates
a larger incentive to invest in the capital stock of more systemic countries. Interpreting
k1f − k1h in (18) as the differential incentive to accumulate capital across two countries, we
can show the following proposition:


                                                              17
Proposition 1
If markets are complete, and γ > 1, more systemic countries have an incentive to accu-
mulate more capital per worker:

                 (γ − 1)2 (τ − 1)2                                                
   k1f − k1h =                     2(γ − 1)τ θ f 2
                                                σ N,f − θ h 2
                                                           σ N,h   + σ 2
                                                                       N,f − σ 2
                                                                               N,h    >0   (22)
                 2((γ − 1)τ + 1)2

if country f is more systemic than country h.

Proof. In each of the two periods, the marginal utility of consumption of households in
country n is

                            γτ       γτ (1 − τ )(γ − φ)          γ(1 − τ )
                   λn = −      yˉT −                    yˉN −               yn .
                            φ        φ(γτ + (1 − τ )φ)        γτ + (1 − τ )φ N

It follows immediately that the first term in (18) is equal to zero because λn0 = Eλn1 = 0.
Differential incentives to accumulate capital thus only arise from the second term, that is,
the difference in the volatility of marginal utilities of the two countries. These, in turn,
                                       n
                                yN , y N
result from differences in cov (ˉ        ) (the first term in the brackets in (22) and from
                                  n
differences in the volatility of yN (the second term in the brackets).
   It is efficient to accumulate more capital in more systemic countries because a larger
capital stock in a more systemic country represents a good hedge against world-wide
consumption risk. Households around the world worry about states of the world in which
systemic countries suffer bad productivity shocks, because these shocks are transmitted
to the rest of the world in the form of higher shadow prices of traded goods. Although
households have no way of preventing these states from occurring, they can partially
insure against them by accumulating more capital in more systemic countries. By doing
so, they raise the unconditional mean level of output of nontraded goods in these countries
across all states and thus soften the impact of adverse shocks.
   Another way of thinking about this result is from the perspective of an international
investor. Consider an investor who can buy units of capital all around the world. All else
equal, she will prefer to invest in the capital stock of a more systemic country because
systemic countries’ currencies tends to appreciate in states of the world when the shadow
price of traded goods, and thus the marginal utility of consumption around the world,


                                                18
is high. In this sense, systemic countries attract investment because they have “safe”
currencies that appreciate in “bad” states of the world.
       This simple, complete-markets model of exchange rate determination thus predicts a
link between the stochastic properties of countries’ real exchange rates and differential
incentives to accumulate capital across countries. All else equal, larger countries and
countries with more volatile exchange rates should have higher capital-output ratios in
equilibrium. In the following subsection we argue that the logic of this result is quite
general and does not rely on the specific assumption that financial markets are complete.


3.2       Monetary Shocks, Exchange Rates, and the Capital Stock
While the complete-markets model is an important benchmark, it has a number of well-
known empirical shortcomings. First, it predicts a (perfect) negative correlation between
appreciations of the real exchange rate and aggregate consumption growth—a country
appreciates when its aggregate consumption falls. This follows directly from ( 16) and
(21) (Backus and Smith, 1993). Second, real exchange rates seem much too volatile to
be rationalized exclusively by real (productivity) shocks (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan,
2002). As a result, many authors have argued for incomplete market models that allow
for an effect of monetary shocks on equilibrium real exchange rates. 8
       In this subsection, we analyze the case in which markets are incomplete ( φ < 1) . We
will argue that allowing for market incompleteness can partially address both of the main
empirical shortcomings of the complete-markets model outlined above, while preserving
the main intuition that larger countries and countries with more volatile exchange rates
should have higher capital-output ratios in equilibrium. To simplify the discussion, we
first consider the case where productivity and endowments are deterministic σ N,n , σ T,n = 0
before discussing the joint effects of real and monetary shocks.
       Inactive households hold nominal bonds denominated in their national currencies and
   8
     Another branch of the literature has had some success of matching these facts while preserving the
complete-markets framework. For example, Colacito and Croce (2011) get a good fit to the data when
combining highly persistent shocks to productivity with Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences. Rabanal
and Rubio-Ramirez (2015) argue that the model performs well even with standard preferences when
considering the volatility of real exchange rates over the entire frequency domain rather than focusing
only on business-cycle frequencies. Both are promising alternative approaches to improving the model’s
fit to the data.


                                                  19
are thus vulnerable to inflation shocks. A positive inflation shock acts as an “inflation
tax” on these households: the higher inflation, the less their nominal bonds are worth
and the less they are able to consume (see equation (12)). However, since inflation shocks
have no bearing on the real endowments available for consumption, this reduction of
consumption on the part of inactive households must go to the benefit of active households
in equilibrium.
   Active households’ equilibrium use of traded goods is

                             1 − φ h γ (τ (1 − φ) + φ) (1 − φ)       
                     ihT =        μ +                          ˉ − μh ,
                                                               μ                         (23)
                               φ         (γτ + (1 − τ ) φ) φ
           PN
where μ
      ˉ=      n=1   θn μn is the weighted sum of inflation shocks in all countries. The first
term on the right-hand side reflects the immediate rise in active households’ consumption,
which is proportional to the number of inactive households per active household. However,
risk-sharing among active households residing in different countries requires that some of
the initial rise in consumption be shared internationally, which is reflected in the second
term on the right-hand side: whenever the domestic inflation shock exceeds the weighted
average of inflation shocks around the world, ˉμ, the home country ships traded goods to
the rest of the world. This shipment of traded goods has two effects. First, it results
in a fall in the relative price of nontraded goods in the domestic economy, such that the
domestic currency depreciates in real terms whenever inflation is relatively high,

                                             γ(τ − 1)(φ − 1)(μf − μh )
                        sf,h = λf − λh = −                             .                 (24)
                                                  γτ + (1 − τ ) φ

Second, it lowers the shadow price of traded goods in the world:

                                             N
                                       1−φ X n n
                                λT = −    γ     θ μ + log(τ ).                           (25)
                                        φ   n=1


This expression is similar to (20) in that inflation shocks unambiguously lower λT , but
only in proportion to the size of the country in which they originate. Inflation shocks in
larger countries have a larger impact on the shadow price of traded goods than inflation
shocks in smaller countries.


                                               20
   Inspecting (24) and (25) shows that, similar to the effect of productivity shocks, coun-
tries with more volatile inflation shocks tend to have more volatile exchange rates and that
inflation shocks also result in a positive covariance between the exchange rates of more
systemic countries and λT . The intuition for this result is also similar to the complete-
markets case: whenever any country experiences a high inflation shock, active households
receive more real resources, which lowers their marginal utility of consumption and leads
to a depreciation of the real exchange rate. (The marginal utility of inactive agents is
irrelevant for exchange rates because they do not access financial markets.) For a given
inflation shock, this appreciation occurs independently of how large the country is. How-
ever, when a larger or more volatile country suffers this shock, more of it is transmitted
to the rest of the world, as is apparent from (20). As a result, more systemic countries’
exchange rates tend to depreciate when λT is low, again producing a positive covariance
between their real exchange rates and λT .
Proposition 2
If financial markets are incomplete and the economy is affected only by inflation shocks,
more systemic countries have an incentive to accumulate more capital per worker:

                    (γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )(φ − 1)2                                                  
  k1f   −   k1h   =                      2
                                              ((1 − τ )φ σ̃ 2f − σ̃ 2h + 2γτ θf σ̃ 2f − θh σ̃ 2h ) > 0
                       2φ((γ − φ) τ + φ)

if country f is more systemic than country h.

Proof. In each of the two periods, the marginal utility of consumption of active house-
holds in country n is

                            n      γ 2 τ (1 − φ)     γ((1 − φ)(1 − τ )) n
                           λ =−                   ˉ−
                                                  μ                    μ ,                          (26)
                                φ(γτ + (1 − τ )φ)     γτ + (1 − τ )φ

where the remainder of the proof is identical to the one in Proposition 1.
The central insight from the complete-markets model thus holds even if markets are
incomplete and variation in exchange rates is driven by monetary instead of real shocks.
Appendix D shows that this is also true when the economy is simultaneously affected by
both real and monetary shocks.
   In addition to re-enforcing the main insight from the complete-markets case, allowing

                                                      21
for market incompleteness also improves the fit of the model to the data in two critical
dimensions (Alvarez et al., 2002; Kollmann, 2012). First, we demonstrate that the incom-
plete markets model with inflation shocks loosens or even reverses the negative correlation
between appreciations of the real exchange rate and aggregate consumption growth. In a
second step, we show that the incomplete markets model with inflation and productivity
shocks may better fit the high volatility of real exchange rates observed in the data.
Corollary 3
If financial markets are incomplete and the economy is affected only by inflation shocks,
real appreciations of the exchange rate are perfectly positively correlated with relative
growth in aggregate consumption.

Proof.      At the deterministic steady state, we have that log aggregate consumption is
cˉn = φcn + (1 − φ)(−μn ). Using the fact that cn = −λn /γ in conjunction with (24) and
(26), we can write the covariance between the exchange rate and aggregate consumption
as
                                        γ 2 (1 − τ ) τ (1 − φ)2 2
                   cov sf,h , cˉf − cˉh =                                  2
                                                              2 (σ̃ f + σ̃ h ) > 0
                                           ((1 − τ ) φ + γτ )
and their correlation is one.
     To see the intuition for this result again consider a country that experiences a positive
inflation shock. Because active households within the country now have more real re-
sources available, they ship traded goods to active households residing in other countries.
As a result of this outflow of resources, aggregate consumption drops while their coun-
try’s currency depreciates. Inflation shocks thus induce a positive association between
aggregate consumption growth and appreciations.
     By contrast, the productivity shocks discussed in the previous sub-section induce a
negative association between aggregate consumption growth and appreciations: a country
that experiences a negative productivity shock in the nontraded sector experiences a fall
in aggregate consumption and a simultaneous appreciation. Because of these opposite
signs in the association between aggregate consumption and appreciations, the full model
with incomplete markets, real, and monetary shocks can produce any correlation between
aggregate consumption and appreciations. For a range of parameters with φ < 1 it may
thus resolve the Backus and Smith (1993) puzzle.

                                                 22
   Similarly, allowing for market incompleteness may go some of the way in addressing
the second main empirical shortcoming of the complete-markets model by increasing the
volatility of the real exchange rate. The following expression shows the equilibrium real
exchange rate when markets are incomplete (φ < 1) and the economy is affected by
productivity and inflation shocks (σ N,n , σ̃ n > 0).

                          γ (1 − τ )  h      f
                                                 γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ)
              sf,h =                   y N − yN  +                 (μh − μf ).             (27)
                       (1 − τ ) φ + γτ             (1 − τ ) φ + γτ

Comparing this expression with (21) shows two differences. First, and most obviously,
the variance of the real exchange rate is now higher because inflation shocks represent
an additional source of volatility. Second, market incompleteness increases the effect of a
given productivity shock because fewer households engage in risk-sharing (the fraction in
the first term is unambiguously larger than its counterpart in (21)).
   We draw four main conclusions from the analysis of our simplified model. First, the
stochastic properties of real exchange rates should predict differences in capital accumu-
lation across countries: countries whose currencies appreciate when the shadow price of
traded goods is high should accumulate more capital per capita. Second, absent a direct
measure for the shadow price of traded goods, differences in country size and differences in
the volatility of countries’ real exchange rates serve as sufficient statistics for the relevant
differences in the stochastic properties of real exchange rates. Third, these conclusions
hold regardless of whether markets are complete or incomplete, and regardless of whether
variation in exchange rates is driven by real or monetary shocks. Fourth, allowing for
market incompleteness may help to address some of the empirical shortcomings of the
complete-markets model.


3.3    Link to the Asset Pricing Literature
Before moving to the analysis of our quantitative model, it is useful to relate our main the-
oretical results to similar results in the asset pricing literature. The previous subsections
derived Propositions 1 and 2 directly from condition (17), which pins down the optimal
allocation of capital across countries without considering asset prices. Nevertheless, the
results in the two propositions are closely linked to violations of uncovered interest parity

                                               23
and differences in the required rate of return on capital across countries. To see this link
to the extant literature, consider pricing one unit of capital installed for the production
of non-traded goods in country n that pays a stochastic return R̃n in terms of country n’s
final good. The consumption Euler equations of active households require that
                                                                    
                                                               Λn1 n
                                                1 = βE             R̃ .                      (28)
                                                               Λn0

Taking logs of this expression, using the fact that the share of output accruing to capital
is log-normally distributed, and differencing the resulting expression for units of capital
installed in two different countries h and f , we can write

                                                     1              1           
                 Er̃1f   + EΔs  f,h
                                        −   Er̃1h          h     h        f     f
                                                    = var λ1 + r̃1 − var λ1 + r̃1 ,
                                                     2               2

where again lowercase variables stand for the natural log. Since the price of capital is
known at time 0, the only part of r̃1n that has a variance is its payoff, which we can write
       n      
       Λ
as log ΛNn νYNn = log (ν (1 − τ )) − γ1 λn . Applying this condition in the equation above
reveals that the right hand side is then a function only of the difference in the variance
of λh and λf . Performing a similar calculation for a risk-free asset that pays one unit of
country n0 s final good with certainty at a risk-free rate of interest rn , we can write
                                                                2
                                                             1                           
              Er̃1f   + EΔs   f,h
                                    −   Er̃1h   =         1−          rf + EΔsf,h − rh
                                                             γ
                                                         2                   
                                                        1    1           
                                                =   1−          var λ1 − var λf1
                                                                       h
                                                        γ    2
                                                                            
                                                         γ−1               f
                                                =    h
                                                    k1 +       EΔs − k1 ,
                                                                   f,h
                                                                                             (29)
                                                           γ

where the third equality uses (18). The difference in incentives to accumulate capital
across countries is thus one of many manifestations of the effect of heterogeneity in the
stochastic properties of countries’ real exchange, which also include violations of uncovered
interest parity and differences across countries in the required return to capital in the non-
traded sector.
   The prediction that larger and more volatile countries accumulate higher capital-


                                                           24
output ratios is thus intimately linked to violations of uncovered interest parity, as defined
in (Backus, Foresi, and Telmer, 2001), and consistent with a number of stylized facts about
the objects in (29) that have been documented in the recent empirical literature. First,
high interest rate currencies systematically depreciate when US consumption growth is
low (Lustig and Verdelhan, 2007), a direct implication of applying (28) to a representa-
tive US household valuing the domestic returns to risk-free bonds denominated in foreign
currencies. Second, a portfolio that is long high interest rate currencies and short low
interest rate currencies is a priced factor in international currency markets ( Lustig et al.,
2011), a direct implication of (28) and the second equality in (29). Third, larger coun-
tries’ currencies have lower interest rates and pay lower expected returns ( Hassan, 2013),
a direct implication of combining Propositions 1 and 2 with (29). Fourth, the currencies
of countries with more volatile non-traded sectors have lower interest rates and pay lower
expected returns (Tran, 2013), and fifth, stocks in the nontraded but not the traded sector
of larger countries pay lower expected returns and thus have a lower required return to
capital (Hassan, 2013), both again direct implications of combining Propositions 1 and 2
with (29). In this sense, our model is also well-suited to qualitatively match a range of
salient facts about cross-country variation in the returns on international assets.
   Before concluding the discussion of the simplified version of the model it is worth
noting that the link between capital accumulation, interest rates, and the required rate
of return on capital becomes more complex when allowing for dynamics and an arbitrary
elasticity of substitution between traded and nontraded goods. For example, one can
show that the difference between two countries’ risk-free interest rates and required rates
of return on capital can invert for some range of parameters. Nevertheless this does not
appear to be the case for the range of parameters that are empirically relevant, such
that the intuition from our simplified model turns out to be useful for understanding the
results of our quantitative exercise.




                                             25
4     Dynamic Model and Estimation

4.1       Data
Our sample consists of annual data from all OECD member countries that had freely
floating exchange rates from 1984 to 2010 according to the IMF. These are Australia,
Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
We intentionally focus on this set of industrialized and relatively homogeneous countries
with similar institutions, tax systems, and well-functioning markets to mitigate the con-
cern that heterogeneity in these other factors may confound our analysis. We generate the
change in log real and nominal exchange rates for each pair of these countries assuming
free convertibility of currencies using annual nominal exchange rates against the US dollar
and CPI deflators from the OECD database.
    Following Hassan (2013), we interpret the size of country n’s economy as its average
share of GDP in the sample of seven countries,

                                     XT
                                  n      1  GDPtn
                                 θ =       PN        .
                                     t=1
                                         T j=1 GDPtj

    We measure each country’s capital-output ratio by dividing its capital stock at con-
stant 2005 national prices (converted to US Dollars at purchasing power parity) from the
Penn World Tables version 8.1 by real GDP from the same source and averaging across our
sample period. We also calculate the average difference between each country’s risk-free
interest rate and the risk-free interest rate in the US using covered interest parity from
data on forward and spot exchange rates following the procedure in Hassan and Mano
(2014).
    In addition, we use real GDP, CPI deflators, and population growth data from the
OECD database to measure log per capita GDP growth and inflation growth for each
country. Appendix E.1 gives additional details on our data sources and construction.




                                            26
4.2      Calibration and Estimation
We begin by calibrating the parameters of our model to a set of standard values used in the
literature, summarized in Table 1. We choose εα = 0.44, β = 0.99, and δ = 0.1, consistent
with Stockman and Tesar (1995). In addition, we choose standard values for relative risk
aversion (γ = 10) and the capital share (ν = 0.4). We set the expenditure share of
traded goods in the production of final goods to τ = 0.3, reflecting that, in the data, a
large proportion of the price of tradables accrues to nontradable retail services ( Burstein,
Neves, and Rebelo (2003) and Goldberg and Campa (2010)). The only parameter we
have relatively little guidance on is the degree of market segmentation. For lack of a clear
alternative, we set φ = 0.26, equal to the share of households in the United States who
directly own stocks according to Giannetti and Koskinen (2010).9
      Since the volatility of endowments of traded goods has no bearing on exchange rates
or differential incentives to accumulate capital across countries, we choose σ nT = 0.1%
for all countries. We consciously choose a small value for these shocks to maximize the
ability of the model to match the volatility of equilibrium exchange rates, as will become
apparent below.
      We estimate the volatility of the remaining fourteen productivity shocks and inflation
shocks using a Simulated Methods of Moments procedure. Our estimator is the parameter
vector Φ̂ that minimizes the distance between a vector of empirical moments, HD , and
                                                        
the corresponding moments generated by the model, H Φ̂ . This estimator Φ̂ is given
by:


                           Φ̂ = arg min [H (Φ) − HD ]0 [H (Φ) − HD ]
                                     Φ

                           s.t. σ N,n > 0 and σ̃ n > 0,


For a given parameter vector, Φ, we create 1,000 synthetic time series, each of length equal
to our sample size. On each sample, we calculate the sample moments of interest. The
vector H(Φ) that enters the loss function is the average value of the sample moments across
the synthetic time series. Consistent with our data, we assume agents make decisions at
  9
   We also consider an alternative specification in which we chose φ to match the share of the US
population that directly holds foreign stocks in their financial portfolio (Nechio, 2010).


                                               27
the annual frequency and derive the model’s implications for data moments computed at
the annual frequency. 10
       In our baseline specification, the target vector HD contains a total of 16 empirical mo-
ments. The first 7 moments are the variances of each country’s equally-weighted average
real exchange rate with all other countries in the sample normalized by the average of
these variances across countries,
                                               P                     
                                                          1     n,j
                                        varn        j6=n N −1 Δst
                                    P              P                     .
                                          1                   1     n,j
                                        n N varn        j6=n N −1 Δst


The rationale for focusing on equally weighted average exchange rates rather than trade-
weighted average exchange rates is to isolate the variance of real and monetary shocks
specific to each country while averaging out the shocks affecting all other countries as
in (Verdelhan, 2014).11 The following 7 moments are the nominal counterparts of these
moments: the variances of each country’s equally-weighted average nominal exchange rate
with all other countries in the sample, again normalized by the average of these variances
across countries. The purpose of normalizing with averages is to avoid rewarding the
estimator for choosing implausibly volatile real and monetary shocks in order to match the
(high) average volatility of exchange rates in the data. (This is the well-known exchange
rate volatility puzzle.) Instead, we anchor the average level of real and monetary shocks by
including the average variance of GDP growth across countries and the average variance
of CPI inflation across countries in the target vector.
       Beyond these details, the crucial feature of the target vector is that it only contains
information about the variability of exchange rates, output, and inflation, and no informa-
tion about capital accumulation, interest rates, or any variable directly related to it. The
number of parameters to be estimated depends on our assumptions about the covariance
  10
      Given that capital-output ratios are slow moving objects and the recent evidence by Rabanal and
Rubio-Ramirez (2015) it is likely that we would get a better fit when matching the stochastic proper-
ties of exchange rates measured at lower frequencies. Nevertheless we choose the annual frequency for
comparability to the majority of the existing literature.
   11
      Using equal-weighted averages is not essential for our results. Nevertheless note from ( 27) we have that
           P                    γ(1−τ )         γ(1−τ )(1−φ) f
limN →∞ j6=n N 1−1 sn,j
                      t   = − (1−τ         f
                                   )φ+γτ yN − (1−τ )φ+γτ μ , such that in a large sample of countries, the
equally weighted average exchange rate isolates country-specific shocks, making this measure appealing
on theoretical grounds.


                                                      28
matrix for the shocks, and varies across different specifications.


4.3    Results
In our first empirical exercise, we constrain the variance of productivity and inflation
shocks to be constant across countries (σ N,n = σ N and σ̃ n = σ̃). Column 2 of Table 2 and
column 1 of Figure 1 show the results of this “homoskedastic” calibration. The estimated
standard deviation of productivity and inflation shocks are σ N,n = 1.96% and σ̃ = 0.01%,
respectively. Given these parameters, the model roughly matches the average standard
deviation of output and inflation across countries (2.01% and 2.15% in the model versus
1.99% and 1.87% in the data, respectively) but produces a counterfactually large negative
correlation between aggregate consumption growth and appreciations of the real exchange
rate (-0.887 versus -0.012 in the data).
   Because shocks are homoskedastic across countries, differences in country size are the
only source of variation in the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange rates and thus
the only potential driver of differences in capital-output ratios in this calibration. Panel A
of Figure 1 shows a slightly positive association between the model-implied and empirical
capital-output ratios. In this sense, heterogeneity in country size accounts for 7% of
the variation in relative capital-output ratios across the seven countries in our sample.
Similarly, Panel B shows an only slightly positive association between model-implied and
empirical mean risk-free interest rates across countries.
   Panel C plots the model-implied and empirical variances of each country’s equally-
weighted average real exchange rates. It shows a horizontal line, reflecting the fact that
differences country size have no effect on the variance of exchange rates. The same is true
for the variances of nominal exchange rates (not shown).
   To motivate our next calibration, we regress differences in capital-output ratios on
a constant term and our measure of country size. We then plot the residuals of this
regression over the average variance of each country’s bilateral exchange rates in Figure
2. The plot shows a positive association between the two variables consistent with the
predictions of Propositions 1 and 2: countries with more volatile exchange rates tend to
have higher capital-output ratios, accounting for more than half of the residual variation


                                             29
that is not accounted for by differences in country size.
       In our second, “heteroskedastic”, calibration we explore this possibility by examining
how differences in the volatility of productivity and inflation shocks can improve the
model’s predictions. We repeat our estimation procedure, but now allow heteroskedastic
productivity and inflation shocks across countries, such that the vector Φ now contains
the pair (σ N,n , σ̃ n ) for all n. The results of this estimation are in Column 3 of Table 2
and column 2 of Figure 1.
       Column 3 of Table 2 shows that this heteroskedastic calibration again fits almost
perfectly the cross-country averages of the standard deviation of GDP growth and inflation
but now gives a better fit for the average correlation of aggregate consumption growth
and appreciations in the data (-0.21 versus -0.01).
       More importantly, Panel A of Figure 1 shows that allowing for heteroskedastic shocks,
and thus heterogeneity in the volatility of exchange rates across countries, significantly
increases the correlation between empirical and model-implied capital-output ratios. The
regression line shown in the plot accounts for 72% of the variation in the data. In this
sense, the stochastic properties of exchange rates, as proxied by differences in country
size and the variances of exchange rates, can account for the majority of the differences
in relative capital-output ratios across the countries in our sample. Panel B shows that
the same is true for cross-country variation in mean risk-free rates (R2 = 0.57), where
countries with more volatile exchange rates also tend to have lower risk-free interest rates,
as predicted by the model. 12 By design, the estimation now almost fully achieves its
targets by matching the relative differences in the volatility of real and nominal exchange
rates across countries. (Panel C shows an R2 of 0.99 for the relative variances of real
exchange rates. The corresponding R2 for the nominal moments is also 0.99, not shown.)
       Although the model does remarkably well in predicting the relative differences in
capital-output ratios across countries, it fails significantly on magnitudes. The slope of
the regression line in Panel A is orders of magnitude smaller than one (0.001), reflecting
the fact that the absolute size of the model-predicted differences is small compared to
  12
     This figure shows nominal interest rate differentials measured by each country’s forward premia
against the United States. Figure 3 shows the corresponding figure if we use real interest rates. The
two figures are very similar. We calculate real interest rates by correcting the forward premia data with
realized inflation. Details are given in Appendix E.2.


                                                   30
those in the data. For example, in the data, Canada has a 30% lower capital-output ratio
than the United States. The model predicts a difference of around 0.03%. Similarly, the
slope coefficients in Panels B and C are 0.002 and 0.16, respectively, revealing that the
model also under-predicts the absolute size of differences in risk-free interest rates and
the average variance of real exchange rates by more than an order of magnitude. We
conjecture that the model’s failure to match the quantitative magnitude of the differences
in capital-output ratios may be related to the well-known failure of the canonical model to
generate (i) sufficiently large risk premia (and thus sufficiently large variation in risk-free
interest rates across countries) and (ii) sufficient variability of the real exchange rate.
   In Table 3 , we attempt to address the latter issue by applying two modifications to
the model that increase the variance of the real exchange rate. To this end we remove the
average variances of GDP growth and inflation from the target vector and instead target
the average variance of real and nominal exchange rates. In column 1 we add capital
adjustment costs to our model of the form suggested by Jermann (1998), such that the
equation of motion of the capital stock is now


                               Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It − Gt Kt


where                                                        1− 1ξ          !
                                IK,t        v1         IK,t
                           Gt =      −                                 + v0
                                Kt        1 − 1ξ       Kt

and v0 and v1 are constants calibrated such that Gt = 0 and ∂Gt /∂(It /Kt ) = 0 at the
deterministic steady state. Under this specification it is costly to adjust the capital stock
quickly, such that shocks are harder to absorb by increasing and decreasing the level of
capital installed, increasing the effect of a given shock on marginal utility. To maximize
the effect of this modification to the model we set ξ = 2, which is the highest level of
adjustment costs suggested by Jermann (1998).
   The table shows that the model is now able to match the variance of real and nominal
exchange rates almost perfectly (the slopes of regression lines relating model-implied and
empirical variances of real and nominal exchange rates are now 0.94 and 0.96, respec-
tively), albeit at the cost of significantly exceeding the variance of inflation (6.76% versus


                                              31
1.98% in the data). With this modification, the absolute differences in capital-output
ratios increase by a factor of five such that the slope corresponding to Panel A in Figure
1 is now 0.005 rather than 0.001.
    In column 2 we go one step further and increase market segmentation to φ = 0.04,
such that it is approximately equal to the share of the US population that directly holds
foreign stocks in their financial portfolio (Nechio, 2010). The results of this calibration
are similar but now produce a slope corresponding to Panel A in Figure 1 of 0.01. Both
modifications thus go part of the way in terms of generating more volatile real exchange
rates (ii) but nevertheless fail to generate sufficiently large differences in capital-output
ratios.
    We believe that this latter failure persists because the model is unable to generate
sufficiently large risk and equity premia (i) even when it generates volatile exchange rates.
An interesting avenue for future research would be to augment the model with remedies
developed in the literature on the equity premium puzzle, such as long-run risk, rare
events, or habit formation. In closed economy models, these remedies effectively increase
the variance of investors’ marginal utility. It is thus plausible that they could also increase
the absolute differences in variances of marginal utility across countries when applied to
a setting similar to ours. However, implementing such remedies in a multi-lateral model
of exchange rate determination with asymmetric countries poses considerable technical
difficulties that are beyond the scope of this paper.



5     Conclusion
A growing literature in asset pricing centers on the idea that “safe haven” currencies
appreciate in “bad” times, linking heterogeneity in the stochastic properties of exchange
rates to violations of uncovered interest parity, differences in currency risk premia, and
differences in equity returns across countries. In this paper, we have argued that, be-
yond affecting asset prices, this heterogeneity should have real effects: countries whose
currencies appreciate when the shadow price of traded goods is high should have lower
cost of capital for the production of nontraded goods and, as a consequence, accumulate
higher capital-output ratios for the production of these goods. In a simple quantitative

                                              32
application of our model, we find strong support for this prediction – that differences in
stochastic properties of real exchange rates can account for 72% of the variation in relative
capital-output ratios across seven industrialized countries.
       The tentative conclusion of our analysis is that variation in exchange rates may not
be as disconnected from economic fundamentals as previously thought in the sense that
the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange rates appear to line up with variation in
capital-output ratios across countries in the way predicted by our model. Nevertheless,
we interpret our results with due caution. First, our estimation is based on a sample of
relatively homogeneous developed countries that have similar institutions, tax systems,
and well-functioning markets. This relative homogeneity may explain why we get a good
fit to the data even without controlling for these other factors. Second, our model matches
only relative differences but falls far from the mark in matching the magnitude of absolute
differences. We conjecture that this failure to match magnitudes is connected to the
model’s failure to generate sufficient volatility in the real exchange rate and to match
the magnitude of the equity premium, both of which are well-established issues in the
literature. We believe a crucial next step may be to combine our framework with some of
the remedies that have been developed for these issues, such as long-run risk, rare events,
or habit formation, along the lines of recent work by Colacito, Croce, Ho, and Howard
(2012) and Colacito, Croce, Gavazzoni, and Ready (2014).13
       Beyond more quantitative applications, a link between the stochastic properties of
exchange rates and factor allocation across countries also poses interesting normative
questions because it may create incentives to manipulate these stochastic properties. In
Hassan, Mertens, and Zhang (2015), we take a step in this direction by studying the effect
of currency pegs on capital accumulation across countries.



References
Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe (2002). Money, interest rates, and exchange rates
  with endogenously segmented markets. Journal of Political Economy 110 (1), 73–112.
  13
     See Colacito and Croce (2011), Verdelhan (2010), Heyerdahl-Larsen (2014), and Stathopoulos (2012)
for other promising approaches that apply habit-formation or long-run risk in open-economy models.



                                                 33
Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, and C. I. Telmer (2001). Affine term structure models and the
  forward premium anomaly. The Journal of Finance 56 (1), 279–304.

Backus, D. K. and G. W. Smith (1993). Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic
  economies with non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics 35, 297–316.

Baxter, M., U. J. Jermann, and R. G. King (1998). Nontraded goods, nontraded factors
  and international non-diversification. Journal of International Economics 44, 211–229.

Bergin, P. R. and G. Corsetti (2015). International competitiveness and monetary policy.
  Unpublished Manuscript .

Burstein, A. T., J. C. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003). Distribution costs and real exchange
  rate dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 50 (6), 1189 – 1214.

Campbell, J. Y., K. Serfaty-De Medeiros, and L. M. Viceira (2010). Global currency
  hedging. The Journal of Finance 65 (1), 87–121.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002). Can sticky price models generate
  volatile and persistent real exchange rates? The Review of Economic Studies 69 (3),
  533–563.

Coeurdacier, N. (2009). Do trade costs in goods market lead to home bias in equities?
  Journal of International Economics 77 (1), 86–100.

Colacito, R., M. Croce, F. Gavazzoni, and R. Ready (2014). Currency risk factors in a
  recursive multi-country economy. mimeo University of North Carolina.

Colacito, R., M. Croce, S. Ho, and P. Howard (2012). Bkk the ez way. mimeo University
  of North Carolina.

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2011). Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate.
  Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 153 – 181.

Collard, F., H. Dellas, B. Diba, and A. Stockman (2007, October). Goods trade and
  international equity portfolios. (13612).

                                              34
David, J. M., E. Henriksen, and I. Simonovska (2014). The risky capital of emerging
  markets. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Devereux, M. B., G. W. Smith, and J. Yetman (2009, March). Consumption and real
  exchange rates in professional forecasts. Working Paper 14795, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Engel, C. (2014). Chapter 8 - exchange rates and interest parity. In K. R. Elhanan Help-
  man and G. Gopinath (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4 of Hand-
  book of International Economics, pp. 453 – 522. Elsevier.

Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
  of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica: Journal of
  the Econometric Society , 937–969.

Fornaro, L. (2015). Financial crises and exchange rate policy. Journal of International
  Economics.

Giannetti, M. and Y. Koskinen (2010, February). Investor Protection, Equity Returns,
  and Financial Globalization. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45 (01),
  135–168.

Goldberg, L. S. and J. M. Campa (2010). The sensitivity of the cpi to exchange rates:
  Distribution margins, imported inputs, and trade exposure. The Review of Economics
  and Statistics 92 (2), 392–407.

Govillot, N., H. Rey, and P. Gourinchas (2010). Us external returns and the exorbitant
  duty. 2010 Meeting Papers 371, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Hall, R. E. and C. Jones (1997). Levels of economic activity across countries. American
  Economic Review 87 (2), 173–77.

Hassan, T. A. (2013). Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. The
  Journal of Finance 68 (6), 2269–2308.

Hassan, T. A. and R. Mano (2015). Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency
  world. mimeo University of Chicago.

                                            35
Hassan, T. A. and R. C. Mano (2014). Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-
  currency world. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2015). Currency manipluation. mimeo
  University of Chicago.

Heyerdahl-Larsen, C. (2014). Asset Prices and Real Exchange Rates with Deep Habits.
  Review of Financial Studies 27 (11), 32800–3317.

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and
  india. The Quarterly journal of economics 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Jermann, U. J. (1998, April). Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 41 (2), 257–275.

Jorgenson, D. (1996). Investment - Vol. 2: Tax Policy and the Cost of Capital. MIT
  Press.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014). The global decline of the labor share. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129 (1), 61–103.

Kollmann, R. (2002). Monetary policy rules in the open economy: effects on welfare and
  business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics .

Kollmann, R. (2012). Limited asset market participation and the consumption-real ex-
  change rate anomaly. Canadian Journal of Economics.

Lewis, K. K. (2011).       Global asset pricing.     Annual Review of Financial Eco-
  nomics 3 (17261), 435 – 466.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011). Common risk factors in currency
  markets. Review of Financial Studies 24 (11), 3731–3777.

Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and
  consumption growth risk. American Economic Review 97 (1), 89–117.

Maggiori, M. (2013). Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve
  currencies. Mimeo.

                                           36
Martin, I. (2012). The forward premium puzzle in a two-country world. Mimeo.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2012). Carry trades and global
  foreign exchange volatility. Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681–718.

Nechio, F. (2010). Foreign stock holdings: the role of information. Working Paper Series
  2010-26, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Rabanal, P. and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2015). Can international macroeconomic models
  explain low-frequency movements of real exchange rates?       Journal of International
  Economics 96 (1), 199–211.

Ready, R., N. Roussanov, and C. Ward (2013). Commodity trade and the carry trade:
  a tale of two countries. NBER Working Papers 19371, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Richmond, R. (2015). Trade network centrality and the currency carry trade. Mimeo
  UCLA.

Stathopoulos, A. (2012). Portfolio Home Bias and External Habit Formation. 2012
  Meeting Papers 502, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Stockman, A. C. and H. Dellas (1989). International portfolio nondiversification and
  exchange rate variability. Journal of International Economics 26, 271–289.

Stockman, A. C. and L. L. Tesar (1995). Tastes and technology in a two-country model
  of the business cycle: Explaining international comovements. American Economic Re-
  view 85, 168–185.

Tesar, L. L. (1993). International risk-sharing and non-traded goods. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 35, 69–89.

Tran, N.-K. (2013). Growth risk of nontraded industries and asset pricing. Mimeo Olin
  Business School .

Verdelhan, A. (2010). A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium.
  Journal of Finance 65 (1), 123–146.

                                           37
Verdelhan, A. (2014). The share of systematic risk in bilateral exchange rates. mimeo
  MIT Sloan.




                                         38
                              Table 1: Calibrated Parameters

                 Parameter       Value                  Reference
               α = 1/(1 − α)     0.44        Stockman and Tesar (1995)
                      β           0.99        Stockman and Tesar (1995)
                      δ           0.10        Stockman and Tesar (1995)
                      γ          10.00
                      ν           0.40
                      τ           0.30    Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003)
                      φ           0.26      Giannetti and Koskinen (2010)
                   σ T (%)        0.10

Notes: Parameters used in our homoskedastic and heteroskedastic calibrations. All cali-
brations are to annual data for seven industrialized economies. εα denotes the elasticity
of substitution between traded and nontraded goods, β the time discount factor, δ the
depreciation rate of capital, γ the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ν the capital share of
output, τ the expenditure share of traded goods, φ the share of each country’s population
that has access to complete international asset markets, and σ T the standard deviation
of the log endowment of traded goods.




                                               39
                              Table 2: Estimation Results

                                             (1)            (2)               (3)
                                            Data      Homoskedastic   Heteroskedastic
                                                        Calibration     Calibration
    Panel A                                            Estimated Parameters
    Productivity Shocks        σ AU
                                 N
                                    S
                                      (%)                  1.96            1.99
                               σ CAN
                                 N   (%)                   1.96            1.52
                               σ CHE
                                 N   (%)                   1.96            2.22
                               σ GBR
                                 N   (%)                   1.96            1.69
                               σ JP
                                 N
                                    N
                                      (%)                  1.96            2.91
                               σN
                                N
                                  ZD
                                     (%)                   1.96            1.21
                               σ UNSA (%)                  1.96            1.84
    Inflation Shocks      σ̃ AU S (%)                      0.01            0.11
                          σ̃ CAN (%)                       0.01            0.01
                          σ̃ CHE (%)                       0.01            0.27
                          σ̃ GBR (%)                       0.01            0.05
                          σ̃ JP N (%)                      0.01            0.32
                          σ̃ N ZD (%)                      0.01            0.01
                          σ̃ U SA (%)                      0.01            0.16
    Panel B                                         Additional Targeted Moments
    Avg. std(GDP growth)                     1.99          2.01            1.99
                                            (0.13)
    Avg. std(inflation)                      1.87          2.15            2.18
                                            (0.09)
    Panel C                                            Non-targeted Moments
    Avg. Corr(agg. cons. growth, rer)       -0.012         -0.94           -0.21

Notes: The table shows estimated parameters (Panel A) and moments generated (Panels
B and C) by our homoskedastic and heteroskedastic calibrations. ‘Avg. std(x)’ stands for
the average standard deviation of x across countries. We present the standard deviation
of the average standard devation of x in brackets. Standard errors on the empirical
moments are bootstrapped (see Appendix E.2 for details). ‘Avg. Corr(agg. cons. growth,
rer)’ stands for the average across countries of the correlation of aggregate consumption
growth with real appreciations. Moments listed in columns 2 and 3 of Panels B and
C are from simulated annual data for 4,000  40 years in 500 economies using Dynare++.
We calculate the moments on each simulated economy and then average the simulated
moments across economies. Column 1 shows the corresponding moments in the data.
                                                            Table 3: Model Extensions

                                                                                                             (1)          (2)
                              Modified Parameters                                                           ζ=2     ζ = 2, φ = 0.04
                              Panel A: Difference in Log Capital-Output Ratio Relative to US
                              Slope                                                                         0.006       0.011
                              R2                                                                             0.75        0.63
                              Panel B: Variance of the Real Exchange Rate (Average for each Country)
                              Slope                                                                         1.04         1.03
                              R2                                                                            0.99         0.99
                              Panel C: Variance of the Nominal Exchange Rate (Average for each Country)
                              Slope                                                                         0.95         0.94
                              R2                                                                            1.00         1.00
                              Panel D: Additional Moments
                              Avg. std(GDP growth) (%)                                                   0.61           0.80




41
                              Avg. std(inflation) (%)                                                    6.14           6.14
                              Avg. Corr(agg. cons. growth, real exchange rate)                          -0.330          0.036
     Notes: This table summarizes estimation results for each of the modifications to the model. In column 1 we add capital adjustment costs
     according to Jermann (1998). We change the equation of motion of the capital stock to

                                                             Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It − Gt Kt

     where
                                                              IK,t        v1         IK,t
                                                         Gt =      −                                 + v0
                                                               Kt                     Kt
                                                                                           1− ξ1          !

                                                                        1 − 1ξ
     We calibrate ξ to 2.0 and v0 and v1 are calibrated such that Gt = 0 and ∂Gt /∂(It /Kt ) = 0 at the deterministic steady state. In column 2
     we implement the capital adjustment costs modification and additionally decrease the fraction of active households in the model to 0.04. For
     each modification, we report the slope and R2 of the regression line from a regression of the simulated moment on the empirical moment. We
     calculate simulated moments by simulating annual data for 4,000 years in 500 economies using Dynare++. We calculate the moments on each
     simulated economy and then average the simulated moments across economies. Panel A reports regression results for capital-output differences.
     Panel B reports regression results for the variance of country n’s equal-weighted average real exchange rate. Panel C reports regression results
     for the variance of country n’s equal-weighted average nominal exchange rate. Panel D reports simulated moments corresponding to Panels B
     and C of Table (2). “Avg. std(x)” stands for the average standard deviation of x across countries. “Avg. Corr(agg. cons.growth, rer)” stands
     for the average correlation of aggregate consumption growth with real exchange rate appreciations.
Notes: Figure 1 plots the results of our empirical exercise. We calculate and plot simu-
lated moments against their empirical counterparts. We calculate simulated moments by
simulating annual data for 4,000 years in 500 economies using Dynare++. We calculate
the moments on each simulated economy and the average the simulated moments across
economies. Column (1) presents results for the homoskedastic calibration and column (2)
presents results for the heteroskedastic calibration. The slope and R2 of the regression lines
are listed below each figure. Panel A plots differences in log capital-output ratios. In our
model, the capital-output ratio in period t in country n is ln(Ktn /Ytn ) = (1−ν) ln(Ktn /θn ).
Panel B plots the interest rate differential relative to the United States dollar. Panel C
plots the variance of each country’s equal-weighted average real exchange rate.




                                              42
                     Figure 1: Estimation Results

(1) Homoskedastic Calibration                (2) Heteroskedastic Calibration
   Panel A: Mean Difference in Log Capital-Output Ratio Relative to US




  Slope = 0.000, R2 = 0.07                      Slope = 0.001, R2 = 0.72
      Panel B: Mean Interest Rate Differential Relative to US Dollar




  Slope = 0.0002, R2 = 0.04                     Slope = 0.002, R2 = 0.57
           Panel C: Variance of the Average Real Exchange Rate




 Slope = −0.000, R2 = 0.62                       Slope = 0.16, R2 = 0.99

                                   43
                             Figure 2: Reduced-form Results




Notes: The figure plots residuals from a regression of differences in capital-output ratios
on a constant term and our measure of country size over the variance of each country’s
average exchange rate. Residuals are generated using the specification

                   log(K n /Y n ) − log(K U SA /Y U SA ) = αn + β n θn + εn .

We calculate the variance of country n’s average real exchange rate in period t according
to                                                      !
                                       X 1          n,j
                                varn             Δs
                                       j6=n
                                            N −1 t

The regression line has a slope of 0.01 and an R2 of 0.69.




                                              44
        Figure 3: Real Interest Rate Differential Corrected for Realized Inflation




Notes: This figure plots real interest rate spreads generated by the model against their
empirical counterparts. We calculate real interest rate spreads by correcting the (nomi-
                                                           f,U SA
nal) forward premia data with realized inflation. Let f pt+1      be the log forward premia
                                                                       f
between country f and the United States between t to t + 1 and inft+1      be the log change
in the CPI of country f between time t and t + 1. Then, the real interest rate spread is
given by
                                  f,U SA      f        U SA
                               f pt+1    − inft+1 + inft+1
The regression line has a slope of 0.002 and an R2 of 0.47.




                                            45
A      Equilibrium Consumption of Inactive Households
Inactive households in country n maximize utility, defined in equation (1), in each state
of the world by splitting their wealth exp(−μnt )Ptn Css optimally between tradable and
non-tradable goods. Their optimization problem can be written as maximizing ( 1) in
each state subject to (2) and (6)

                                            1  ˆ                                 1−γ
                                                τ IT,t (i)α + (1 − τ )IˆN,t (i)α
                                                                                    α
                           max                                                               (30)
                        ˆ        ˆ
                        IT,t (i),IN,t (i) 1 − γ
                               s.t. IˆT,t (i) + PN,t IˆN,t (i) = exp(−μnt )Ptn Css


We solve this problem by setting up a Lagrangian and taking first-order conditions with
respect to IT,t (i) and IN,t (i) to get equation (12).



B      Social Planner’s Problem
The Social Planner maximizes the utility of active households, subject to the equilibrium
behavior of inactive households, the resource constraint for tradable goods, the resource
constraint for non-tradable goods and the resource constraint for final goods.
    First, we derive the resource constraint for final goods. Final goods are produced by
active and inactive households. Final goods are either consumed by inactive households,
consumed by active households or used for investment. Hence, the resource constraint for
final goods (9) can be written as

                                     α  α1           h  α                 α i α1
             n α                   n                        ˆn               ˆn
      φ τ   IT,t     + (1 − τ )   IN,t           +(1 − φ) τ IT,t + (1 − τ ) IN,t         =   (31)

                                        φCtn +(1 − φ)Ĉtn + IK,t
                                                             n
                                                                 .


Inactive households optimize their utility by consuming their entire production

                               h  α                 α i α1
                                  ˆn               ˆn
                                τ IT,t + (1 − τ ) IN,t         = Ĉtn .


Plugging inactive households’ consumption into the resource constraint for the final good


                                                       46
(31) delivers

                                                                               n α
                                                                                                       α  α1
        θn φCtn + Kt+1
                   n
                       − (1 − δ)Ktn                                     = φθ n τ IT,t               n
                                                                                        + (1 − τ ) IN,t         ∀n,                      (32)


The resource constraint for the non-tradable good (10) can be written as
                                                         
                                  θn φIN,t
                                       n
                                           + (1 − φ)IˆN,t
                                                      n
                                                            = θn [exp (η nt ) (Ktn )ν ] ∀n,                                              (33)


and the resource constraint for the tradable good (11) can be written as
                                                                                  
                                                  θ   n         n
                                                              φIT,t            ˆ
                                                                      + (1 − φ)IT,t = θn YT,t
                                                                                n         n
                                                                                              .                                          (34)

The Social Planner maximizes the utility of active households subject to the resource
constraints (32), (33) and (34). We can thus write the Social Planner’s value function as
        n                          oN         X φθ n                    n                                oN 
    V        Ktn , YY,t
                    n
                        , ηn    n
                           t , μt             =          (Ctn )1−γ + βE V        n
                                                                               Kt+1       n
                                                                                      , YY,t+1 , ηn      n
                                                                                                  t+1 , μt+1
                                    n=1
                                                 n
                                                    1−γ                                                       n=1
                                                     X    h                             i
                                              + ΛT,t   θ n YT,t
                                                              n      n
                                                                 − φIT,t − (1 − φ)IˆT,t
                                                                                    n

                                                          n
                                                  X            h                                        i
                                                                              n ν                  ˆn
                                              +       Λn
                                                       N,t θ
                                                             n
                                                                 exp (η n             n
                                                                        t ) (Kt ) − φIN,t − (1 − φ)IN,t
                                                  n
                                                  X               h      α                α i 1                               
                                                                                                   α         1                   
                                              +       Λn
                                                       t φθ
                                                            n          n
                                                                    τ IT,t                n
                                                                              + (1 − τ ) IN,t        − Ctn −    n
                                                                                                               Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Ktn     .
                                                  n
                                                                                                             φ


                                               n        n
   The first-order conditions with respect to IT,t and IN,t are given by (14) and (15),
respectively. The first-order conditions with respect to next period’s capital per capita
  n
(Kt+1 ) is                                                
                                                     ∂                                                            
                                                                                                              N
                         θ   n
                                 (Ctn )−γ     = βE    n
                                                         V     n
                                                              Kt+1    n
                                                                   , YY,t+1 , η nt+1 , μnt+1                  n=1
                                                                                                                                         (35)
                                                   ∂Kt+1
The envelope condition is

    ∂                                                       
                                                      N
        V    Ktn , YY,t
                    n
                        , η nt , μnt                              = θn (1 − δ) (Ctn )−γ + ΛnN,t θn exp (η nt ) ν (Ktn )ν−1 .             (36)
   ∂Ktn                                               n=1




                                                                             47
C          Log-linearized System of Equations
We log-linearize the system of equilibrium conditions around the point at which σ nN,t , σ̃ n =
0 ∀n. Therefore, we start with equation (14) which leads to


                          (1 − γ − α)(τ inT + (1 − τ )inN ) + log τ + (α − 1)inT = λT ∀n


and equation (15) yields


                     (1 − γ − α)(τ inT + (1 − τ )inN ) + log(1 − τ ) + (α − 1)inN = λnN ∀n.


Next we approximate the resource constraint for non-tradable goods ( 33) in which we
substitute equilibrium consumption of inactive households (12) and replace prices PN,t
and Pt with the ratio of Lagrange multipliers from (13)
                                                                                       
                                            1                                    1−τ
                   φinN   + (1 − φ) −μ − τn
                                                            (λnN   − λT ) − log(     )           n
                                                                                              = yN ∀n
                                           1−α                                    τ

Lastly, we sum the resource constraint for tradable goods (33) over all countries and again
substitute for the consumption of inactive households and prices as above to get

    N
    X                          N 
                               X                                              X N
                                            1                              1−τ
φ         θn inT   + (1 − φ)          −μ +n               n
                                               (1 − τ ) (λN − λT ) − log          =     θn yTn .
    n=1                        n=1
                                           1−α                              τ       n=1



D          Differential Incentives for Capital Accumulation
When markets are incomplete and the economy is affected by both real and monetary
shocks the differential incentive to accumulate capital can be written as

                            (γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2                                                         
      k1f − k1k =                                 2τ (γ − φ)  θ f 2
                                                                 σ N,f −    θ h 2
                                                                               σ N,h   + σ 2
                                                                                           N,f − σ 2
                                                                                                   N,h     +
                          2φ (φ(1 − τ ) + γτ )2
                          (1 − τ )(γ − 1)2 (1 − φ)2                                                   
                                                      (1 − τ )φ σ̃ 2f − σ̃ 2h + 2γτ θf σ̃ 2f − θh σ̃ 2h ,
                             2φ ((1 − τ )φ + γτ )

which is unambiguously greater than zero if country f is more systemic than country h.



                                                            48
E     Data Appendix

E.1     Data Sources
IMF Exchange Rate Class The IMF exchange rate regime classification was taken
from the data section of Carmen Reinhart’s website.
    Nominal Exchange Rates Nominal exchange rates are taken from the National
Accounts section of the OECD Statistics database. The exchanges rates are given as
quarterly averages of national currency per US dollar.
    Consumer Price Index We use a CPI deflator to translate nominal exchange rates to
real exchange rates. We use the “Consumer prices - all items” variable from the Consumer
Prices (MEI) subsection of the Prices and Purchasing Power Parities section of the OECD
Statistics database. The base year for the CPI is 2010.
    Real GDP (OECD) We use GDP data to generate each country’s Pareto weights.
These data come from the OECD Statistics database. Real GDP is measured using the
expenditure approach at the annual frequency, in millions of national currency, in the
OECD reference year prices, and are seasonally adjusted.
    Real GDP per Capita We also gather real GDP per capita data to calculate the
standard deviation of the growth rate of real GDP per capita. The data are GDP per
head of population measured in USD, constant prices at 2005 PPPs. They are taken from
the OECD Statistics database under the subject heading T GDPPOP.
    Capital Stock Capital stock data is taken from the Penn World Tables version 8.1.
We use “Capital stock at constant 2005 national prices (in mil. 2005US$ )”. The data
can be accessed at:
http://citaotest01.housing.rug.nl/FebPwt/Dmn/AggregateXs.mvc/VariableCodeSelect.
The capital stock data are given at the annual frequency.
    Real GDP (PWT) We use the Penn World Table’s version of real GDP as the
denominator for calculating capital-output ratios across countries. This is “Real GDP at
constant 2005 national prices (in mil. 2005US$ )”. As with the capital stock data, these
data are given at the annual frequency.
    Population We use population data to generate a measure of consumption growth



                                           49
per capita. We use the variable “Population (hist5) All ages” from the OECD Statistics
database. Population data are given at the annual frequency.
   Consumption Growth We obtain consumption growth data from the OECD Statis-
tics database. We observe net GDP private final consumption expenditure growth from
the previous period as a percentage. The subject code is NAEXKP02.
   Forward Premia Data In order to calculate differences in real bond returns, we use
forward premia data from Hassan and Mano (2015). Under covered interest parity, the
log forward premia between two countries is equal to the spread in the two countries’ log
risk free bond returns.


E.2     Moment Generation
We estimate our model using the following moments

  1. The variance of each each country’s average real exchange rate normalized by the
      average variance of the average real exchange rates across countries

  2. The variance of each each country’s average nominal exchange rate normalized by
      the average variance of the average nominal exchange rates across countries

  3. The average variance of per capita GDP growth

  4. The average variance of inflation


Real Exchange Rates

We calculate the real exchange rate between each pair of countries by adjusting their
nominal exchange rate by the ratio of their CPIs. Specifically, this is

                                                      CP I f
                                 RERth,f = N ERth,f
                                                      CP I h

where RERth,f is the real exchange rate given as the amount of currency h needed to buy a
unit of currency f , N ERth,f is the corresponding nominal exchange rate, and CP I h , CP I f
are the price indicies for each country.


                                             50
   We calculate each country’s average exchange rate as the equally weighted sum of that
country’s exchange rates appreciations For country h, the average exchange rate is

                                        X         1 h        h,f          h,f
                                                                              i
                          rer ht    =                 log RERt+1 − log RERt
                                        f 6=h
                                                N −1

                                                                        
We calculate the variance of this average real exchange rate, var rer ht .
                                                                         P                         1
                                                                                                                  
  We normalize each variance, var rer ht , by the average variance,         h                       N
                                                                                                      var   rer ht .
This allows us to match the relative volatility of exchange rates without having to match
the level of exchange rates.
   The theoretical counterpart to the variance of the real exchange rate between countries
h and f is                                                                                      !
                                                  X         1 h h                          i
                V ar rer      h
                                    = V ar                      pt+1 − pft+1 − (pht − pft )
                                                   f 6=h
                                                           N −1

where pnt represents the log price level of country n in period t


Nominal Exchange Rates

We calculate the variance of average nominal exchange rates in the same way as we
calculated the variance of average real exchange rates. For country h, this is
                                                                                                !
                                                          1 h                            i
                                                N
                                                X
                                                                     h,f
                           h
              var ner t = var                                 log N ERt+1 − log N ERth,f
                                                f 6=h
                                                        N −1

   The theoretical counterpart to the variance of the average nominal exchange rate
between countries h is
                                                                                                    !
                                    1 h h                                           i
                                XN
                      
          var ner   h
                          = var        −μt+1 + μft+1 + pht+1 − pft+1 − (pht − pft )
                                i=1
                                    N

where μnt is the inflationary shock in country n at time t.




                                                              51
Average Variance of GDP Growth

We use annual GDP per capita data from the OECD. Call this GDP P Ct . We calculate
                                                                              n
the variance of GDP growth for country n by taking the variance of log GDP P Ct+1 −
log GDP P Ctn . Finally, we average the variance of GDP growth across countries.
   The theoretical counterpart to real GDP per capita is the value of all goods produced
in that country in period t in terms of the final consumption bundle.

                                                   YT,t + PN,t YN,t
                               GDP P Ct =
                                                         Pt

Average Variance of Inflation

We measure inflation as the change in the CPI, IN Ft+1 = CP It+1 /CP It . We calculate
                                                                           n
the variance of inflation for country n by taking the variance of log IN Ft+1 . Finally, we
average the variance of inflation across countries.
   The theoretical counterpart to inflation is the change in the nominal price level.


                              log IN Ftn = −μnt+1 + pnt+1 − pnt


Consumption Growth

We observe consumption growth at the annual frequency from the OECD Statistics library.
We calculate log consumption growth and subtract out log population growth in order to
measure per capita log consumption growth. This is
                                                                           
                                            Ct+1                    P OPt+1
                          dct+1 = log                   − log
                                             Ct                      P OPt

where dct+1 is per capita log consumption growth, Ct+1 /Ct is observed from the OECD
data and P OPt+1 /P OPt is constructed from the population data.
   The theoretical counterpart to log per capita consumption is the weighted sum of
consumption by active and inactive households.


                                cnt = log(φCtn + (1 − φ)Ĉtn )



                                                   52
where Ctn is the consumption of active households and Ĉtn is the consumption of inactive
households.


Real and Nominal Interest Rate

We use forward premia data from Hassan and Mano (2015) to obtain spreads in nominal
risk free bonds. Under covered interest rate parity, the log forward premia between
two countries is equal to the spread in the two countries’ log (nominal) risk free bond
returns. In order to obtain real interest rate spreads, we need to correct for inflationary
                                                               f,h
expectations in each period. We use realized inflation. Let f pt+1 be the log forward
premia from time t to t + 1 and let nomintft be the nominal interest in country f between
time t to t + 1. Then,
                               f pf,h         f         h
                                  t+1 = nomintt − nomintt

           f
Letting inft+1 represent the realized inflation rate in country f from t to t + 1, we can
write the real interest rate spread as

                   f,h
                f pt+1 − inftf + infhf = nomintft − nomintht − inftf + infhf


   The theoretical counterpart to the time t risk free interest rate in country n is the
expected return on a bond that pays one unit of country n’s consumption bundle in
period t + 1. The price of this bond is
                                                         
                                              ΛT,t+1 n
                                   n
                                  VP,t   =E β       P
                                               ΛT,t t+1

and the expected return on the risk free bond of country n is
                                            "        #
                                             Pn
                                           E t+1
                                              n
                                             VP,t

Bootstrapped Standard Errors

We bootstrap standard errors for the average standard deviation of log GDP growth and
the average standard deviation of log inflation. We draw (with replacement) 10,000 sample


                                                53
economies from our data. We calculate the appropriate moment on each sample economy
and then calculate the standard deviation of the moment across sample economies.




                                         54
