                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    AN EVALUATION OF THE MELLON MAYS UNDERGRADUATE FELLOWSHIP'S
          EFFECT ON PHD PRODUCTION AT NON-UNCF INSTITUTIONS

                                        Sarah J. Prenovitz
                                         Gary R. Cohen
                                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg
                                       George H. Jakubson

                                       Working Paper 21451
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21451


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2015




CHERI receives financial support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation but the conclusions we
express here are strictly our own. The use of NSF data does not imply NSF endorsement of the research,
research methods, or conclusions contained in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sarah J. Prenovitz, Gary R. Cohen, Ronald G. Ehrenberg, and George H. Jakubson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Evaluation of The Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship's Effect on PhD Production
at Non-UNCF Institutions
Sarah J. Prenovitz, Gary R. Cohen, Ronald G. Ehrenberg, and George H. Jakubson
NBER Working Paper No. 21451
August 2015
JEL No. I23

                                               ABSTRACT

The Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship Program (MMUF) was established in 1988 to encourage
underrepresented minority (URM) students to pursue PhD study with an eye towards entering academia.
Fellows have completed PhDs at high rates relative to other students, but they are selected for their
interest and potential, so this reflects both the effects of the program and the abilities of the students
themselves. In order to understand one impact of the program we investigate its causal effect - how
many of its fellows earned PhDs who would not have done so without the MMUF’s support.

In this paper we use restricted access administrative data from the Mellon Foundation and the National
Science Foundation’s Survey of Earned Doctorates to investigate the effect of the MMUF on PhD
completions by underrepresented minority students who graduate from participating institutions. We
find no evidence that participation in the program causes a statistically significant increase in the PhD
production rate of URM students and increases in larger than 0.4 percentage points lie outside a 95%
confidence interval using our unweighted baseline estimates. We also do not find evidence that increasing
the intensity of the program by adding more fellows increases the PhD production rate, which is particularly
notable as this estimate is upward-biased: the number of fellows likely reflects the strength of the candidate
pool in a given year.


Sarah J. Prenovitz                                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg
Cornell Higher Education Research Institute              Cornell Higher Education Research Institute
149 Ives Hall East                                       271 Ives Hall East
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                    Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
sjp268@cornell.edu                                       and NBER
                                                         rge2@cornell.edu
Gary R. Cohen
Cornell Higher Education Research Institute              George H. Jakubson
465 Uris Hall                                            Cornell Higher Education Research Institute
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                    257 Ives Hall
grc64@cornell.edu                                        Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
                                                         George.Jakubson@cornell.edu
1 Introduction
Colleges and universities seek to diversify their faculty along several dimensions, but find few
underrepresented minorities1 in their hiring pool, with the problem worse in some fields than
others. This is a manifestation of what is often referred to as the pipeline problem. Relatively few
minorities pursue graduate study in many disciplines in the humanities, social sciences, physical
sciences, or life sciences. If individuals do not enter PhD programs in a given field they will not
emerge from the other end of the pipeline as potential faculty members.
The Mellon Minority Undergraduate Fellowship Program, since renamed the Mellon Mays
Undergraduate Fellowship Program (MMUF), was established in 1988 with the goal of
addressing this issue by encouraging underrepresented minorities to pursue graduate study in
particular fields, with an eye towards ultimately entering academia. Participating schools select
fellows from among their students, coordinate mentoring, and hold regular seminars which
emphasize research and graduate school. Fellows receive stipends to allow them to conduct
research as undergraduates. They are eligible to attend regional and national conferences at
which they can present their own research, learn about that done by other fellows, and network.
Fellows can also receive up to $10,000 in loan repayments.
As of 2014, over 4,000 students have participated in the program; 506 have earned PhDs and
another 665 PhDs are in progress (Bengochea, 2013). As the program has expanded over time
and as most PhD programs take at least 5 years to complete, if not substantially longer, this
suggests an extremely high rate of PhD completion by MMUF scholars. A back of the envelope
estimate suggests that about a quarter of MMUF students will eventually complete a PhD,
compared with around 4 percent of underrepresented minority students graduating from MMUF
institutions in years their school was not participating in the program.2

Anecdotal evidence suggests that the MMUF may play a large role in the ultimate PhD
completion of its participants. MMUF administrators report struggling to recruit undergraduate
candidates because few students have considered the possibility of entering academia, and
fellows cite their research experiences, relationships with mentors, and connections with other
fellows as crucial to their decision to pursue a PhD and their ultimate success in completing one
(Rose, 2012). However, fellows presumably apply to the program because of their own interest
and are selected based on their potential as scholars, so the high rate of PhD completion reflects
both this selection and the effects of the program. Indeed, in a 2007 survey, 67 percent of current
and former fellows responded that they would have or might have aspired to earn a PhD absent

1
    Underrepresented minorities are defined as those who identify neither as non-Hispanic White nor as Asian.
2
  If we assume that the program selected the same number of fellows in each year for a total of 4,000 as of 2014
and their distribution of completion times was the same as non-white non-Asian students who completed a
bachelors’ degree in a MMUF field in 1985-1989 and went on to complete a PhD, we would expect to observe
about half of those PhDs which will be completed within 20 years of graduation. As approximately one in eight
MMUF fellows has completed a PhD, this suggests that about a quarter of MMUF fellows will do so eventually. The
program has grown over time, which would make this back of the envelope calculation an underestimate.
However, fellows also have incentives and supports to complete degrees more quickly, so degrees completed so
far may represent a larger proportion of those that will eventually be completed.
the program (Rose, 2012). The MMUF may still help students turn these goals into reality, and
inspire those who would not have otherwise considered an academic career to explore one, but
fellows are probably quite different from other students in their underlying propensity to
complete a PhD. It also may be the case that students who have already completed the program
overstate their chances of pursuing PhDs in its absence. Without a doubt some current and
former fellows would have aspired to earn PhDs in the program's absence, and so it is useful to
determine to what extent fellows' high PhD completion rate is a result of the program.
We address this issue by estimating the effect of a school’s MMUF participation per se and the
intensity of participation on the number and rate of PhD completions by under-represented
minority (URM) students.3 By investigating the outcomes of all URM students at an institution
we are able to avoid this sample selection problem, and address the effect of the program on its
medium-run goal. Institutions have joined the program gradually over time, and this allows us to
control for time trends and cross-institution variation using institution and year fixed effects.
However, due to the lengthy nature of PhD programs we do not observe the completions of many
of those who will eventually earn a PhD, especially in later cohorts. Time to degree is in general
longer for URM students than for other students, exacerbating the problem. We estimate the size
of this truncation using data from those who graduated in the early years of our dataset, and
conduct the bulk of our analyses using this adjusted data.
While our focus is on a single fellowship, many other programs share the broad goals and
methods of the MMUF. To our knowledge these programs have not been evaluated in the
economics literature, but several prior studies in the education literature have explored their
effects. Most of this work has been purely correlational, which is problematic as students who
participate are quite different from those who do not. Other analyses have used propensity score
matching to construct an appropriate control group of students, but participants may still differ
from non-participants in important but unobservable ways (e.g. Eagan et al., 2013). We
contribute to this literature by using a design that allows us to avoid the issue of student
selection, addressing problems of truncation in degree data, and analyzing a program whose
causal effects are unknown.
We estimate the average effect of an institution's participation in the MMUF program and find
no significant effect of the program when considering only the MMUF schools. These findings
persist when we account for truncation and when we add control groups constructed through
propensity score matching. We also find no effect of adding an additional fellow or increasing
the percentage of URM students who are fellows. This is particularly notable as these estimates
may suffer from positive selection bias: institutions are able to move funds from year to year,
awarding more fellowships in years with relatively strong applicant pools and fewer in other


3
 The Mellon Foundation considers throughput – the entry of its fellows into PhD programs – to be a key metric for
assessing the undergraduate components of the program (Bengochea 2013). While the PhD completion rate of the
URM student body as a whole is not an explicit program goal, the best available data for causal analysis limit our
focus to completion and to an estimate of the treatment effect on an average URM student at a participant school
rather than a Mellon Mays fellow specifically. We believe that this average treatment effect is an appropriate
metric for evaluation, as it is closely linked to the pipeline problem that is the raison d'etre for the MMUF, and any
increase in fellows' PhD completion that results from the program should also increase the overall number of URM
students completing PhDs.
years. We conclude that there is no evidence that the MMUF program has a causal effect on
URM PhD completion rates. Because we are evaluating a small program using aggregate data, it
is possible the program has an effect that is too small for us to distinguish. It may also be that the
MMUF is important to participants in other ways that do not increase the number of PhDs, or
that our truncation adjustments do not adequately capture changes in the time to degree over
time.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background and further detail on
the program structure and history. Section 3 describes our data and methods. Section 4 presents
results and section 5 discusses these results and our conclusions.

2 Background and Program Structure
2.1 Background
Colleges and universities pursue faculty diversity for several reasons. First, if minority faculty
members are better at connecting with minority students, either in the classroom or as mentors
and role models, their presence might be important to the persistence and graduation rates of
minority students. There is some evidence that minority students are more likely to persist in
STEM majors if they have an introductory STEM course that is taught by a minority professor
(Price, 2010), and that gaps between minority and non-minority community college students in
pass rates, grades, and courses dropped are smaller when classes are taught by professors who
are minorities themselves (Fairlie, Hoffmann, & Oreopoulos, 2011). Second, to the extent that
raw teaching and research potential are distributed throughout the population, hiring
underrepresented minorities at a very low rate implies that institutions are losing out on
important groups of potential faculty. Finally, diversity may be pursued for its own merits. It can
stimulate a dynamic academic atmosphere, enriching the work and lives of all faculty and
students; address societal inequalities; or bring academic attention to a wider range of issues that
would otherwise be the case.
Institutions that seek to diversify faculty are constrained by the small number of
underrepresented minorities completing PhDs. In 2011, 6.14 percent of the US citizens or
permanent residents earning a PhD reported that they were Black, while 6.3 percent reported that
they were Hispanic (National Science Foundation, 2012). These numbers are substantially higher
than at the inception of the MMUF (4.8 percent and 3.6 percent in 1985 respectively), but still
quite low relative to the US population, which was 12.3 percent Black and 16.7 percent Hispanic
in 2011 (Census, 2011). There is also substantial variation across fields, with Black students
earning 13 percent of PhDs in education but only 3 percent of those in physical sciences, and
Hispanic students earning 8 percent of PhDs in social sciences and 4.5 percent of those in the
physical sciences (NSF, 2012). While departments in some fields might find a diverse range of
job candidates others are still constrained in their ability to hire from underrepresented minority
groups.

2.2 The Mellon Minority/Mays Undergraduate Fellowship
Program
The MMUF program began with eight institutions, which joined the program in late 1988 and
recruited their first fellows in the spring of 1989. Additional cohorts joined in 1989, 1992, 1996,
2000, and 2007. A group of Historically Black Colleges and Universities has participated since
1989 through a consortium administered by the United Negro College Fund (UNCF).4 Not
counting this consortium, 42 institutions participated in the program in 2014. A table of the
institutions in our sample and the year they joined the program appears in appendix table A1.
Participating institutions select fellows, generally targeting students in the spring of their
sophomore year. Schools are provided with funding for up to five fellows per year, though they
are able to select more fellows in some years by moving funds from one school year to another,
or if students who were previously selected drop out of the program. In the early years of the
program fellowships were restricted to those belonging to underrepresented minority groups.
However, in response to concerns from participating institutions about the legality and ethics of
affirmative action and other race-based programs, eligibility was extended in 2003 to students of
all backgrounds who were committed to the program’s goal of increasing the presence of
underrepresented minorities in academia (Mellon Foundation, 2003). In addition to supporting
the diversity goals of the program, fellows must be pursuing a major in one of the Mellon-
designated fields. These span the humanities, social sciences, and hard sciences, but do not
include all majors. A list of the fields for 2000 and 2008 is included in appendix table A2.
Students apply directly to the fellowship program at their institution. Although each institution
has considerable discretion in evaluating applicants, they are asked to consider the student's field
and either minority status or commitment to the program's goals, as well as academic promise,
interest in an academic career, and potential as a mentor. Once selected as fellows, students work
with mentors and attend seminars at their home institution. Because of the decentralized nature
of the program, each participating school decides how to implement the mentorship and seminar
components. Mentors are intended to act as graduate school advisers – much as a pre–law or
pre–med adviser would – and to oversee the student’s independent research. Seminars are in
general focused on research and preparation for graduate school, and are intended also to allow
students to form a group identity. Fellows also receive stipends both during the school year and
over the summer to allow them to focus on research rather than paid work, and to potentially
allow for fieldwork or study at another institution over the summer. The MMUF administers
regional and national conferences at which students can present work, be exposed to the work
done by other fellows, and network with current and former fellows.
After college graduation, fellows who attend graduate school in a designated field can be eligible
to participate in seminars and conferences, apply for grants expressly for former undergraduate
fellows, and receive loan forgiveness. The seminars and conferences include an annual
conference similar to that attended by undergraduates as well as programs focused on writing
grants and dissertations. There are also retreats for those in the dissertation-writing phase. Loans
taken out for undergraduate and graduate study are eligible for loan forgiveness, up to a total of
$10,000 if the student completes a PhD in a Mellon-designated field. Loan forgiveness is only
available to those who attend a PhD or terminal Masters’ program in one of the designated fields,
and requires the fellow to begin his or her program within about three years of graduation or
submit an appeal.



4
Our analyses exclude the UNCF consortium for reasons described in the methodology section.
3 Data and Methods
3.1 Data and Sample
Our analyses use data from the Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System (IPEDS), a
restricted access version of the National Science Foundation’s Survey of Earned Doctorates
(SED), and restricted access administrative data from the Mellon Foundation. The IPEDS
includes institution-level information on enrollment, costs and finances, faculty, and other
characteristics for all colleges and universities in the United States that receive federal funding.
Data is provided by institutions, and has been collected in 1987 and then annually since 1989.
The Higher Education General Information System (HEGIS), the predecessor to IPEDS,
includes data for earlier years, dating back to 1966. Many of the variables in the HEGIS data are
the same or similar to those in IPEDS, but HEGIS includes less information and was collected
less frequently. From these systems we obtain institution-level information on the number of
students completing bachelors’ degrees by race/ethnicity, gender, and field from 1985 through
2005. We also use a larger set of institutional characteristics, drawn from the IPEDS Delta Cost
Project data, in order to construct matched comparison groups.
The Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) is an annual census of PhD completers in the United
States, sponsored by six federal entities and administered since 1957. The SED achieves a high
response rate, with 92 percent of those earning PhDs responding in 2012, although item response
rates are somewhat lower (National Science Foundation 2013). It includes information on
demographics, undergraduate and graduate study, and career plans. We use data from the SED
for those who completed a PhD between 1985 and 2011. From this population we count the
number of individuals who have completed a PhD by undergraduate institution, year of
bachelors’ degree, minority status, field, and gender. We also obtain counts of the number
completing a PhD a given number of years after the bachelors’ degree by subgroup and year of
bachelors’ degree. This data on the distribution of times to PhD completion for the early cohorts
in our sample is used to adjust for the fact that later cohorts have fewer years to complete a PhD,
and thus their number of PhD completers is understated due to sample truncation.
The Mellon Foundation's data provides counts of MMUF program fellows at each participant
institution in each year. The distribution of fellows by year and school is depicted in Figure 1.
Although most institutions had 3-6 fellows in most years of participation there is considerable
variation in the number of fellows. In general, the smallest schools in terms of URM enrollment
are more likely to have fewer than 5 fellows in multiple years. We use this data to calculate the
`dosage' of the program within the overall URM population of each cohort at each institution.
We then use this dosage and the raw numbers of participants in extensions to our base model to
account for the fact that we would expect the treatment effect of this relatively small program to
be more pronounced – and easier to detect – at institutions where a greater proportion of the
URM population participated.
Our analyses focus on the 32 non-UNCF institutions that selected their first fellows by 2005. The
UNCF institutions are excluded because program participation at each UNCF school in any
particular year is far more varied than at the other U.S. institutions with most UNCF institutions
having zero participants in any given year. We are concerned that we would be unable to discern
the effect of the program at these schools, and that the participation of a given institution in the
program in a particular year may be a strong signal about the propensity of its students in that
cohort to attend graduate school. We limit our analysis to cohorts that graduated by 2005, as
more recent graduates had completed relatively few PhDs by 2011.
Most institutions in our sample are privately controlled (Table 1). A slight majority grant
doctorates, with the rest about evenly split between those that only grant bachelor’s degrees and
those that grant masters or first professional degrees. In 1985, before the MMUF began, the
average institution produced slightly over 1,000 bachelors' degrees, about 14 percent of which
went to URM students. About 11 percent of graduates went on to complete a PhD by 2011, with
rates fairly similar for URM and non-URM students. By 2005 the average institution produced
about 1,300 bachelor’s degrees, with about 23 percent going to URM students. Only 1.7 percent
of these graduates completed a PhD by 2011, which is unsurprising given that they only had six
years to do so.
We focus primarily on the sample of URM students, based on the assumption that the MMUF
has the potential to affect PhD completion rates for those students who are eligible to participate,
but not those who are not eligible. In some analyses we include the PhD completion rate for non-
minority students as a control variable. While the introduction of a new fellowship opportunity
could decrease competition for existing programs, change campus culture, or inspire the peers of
fellows to pursue a different path, we do not expect these factors to be large, particularly as the
program is relatively small, and its benefits are restricted to fellows. To the extent that the
benefits of the MMUF spill over to those who are not eligible to participate, our estimates would
understate the full effect of the MMUF on PhD completion.
Our initial plan was to restrict the analysis to the PhD completion rate in MMUF fields, based on
similar reasoning. We were forced to abandon this plan for several reasons. First, IPEDS reports
only one major per BA completer until 2000, and two in later years. Thus students with more
than one major before 2000, or more than two after, could be eligible for the program but not be
identifiable in the data as being eligible. Second, a sizable number of students switch fields
between BA and PhD, so those identified in the numerator and denominator of our rate
calculation are not necessarily the same students. Third, although more recent data contains
detailed information on undergraduate majors, HEGIS and IPEDS used a very broad coding
scheme for completers' fields (2-digit CIP) until 1996. As a result we are unable to distinguish
some of the MMUF fields in these early data. Finally, even with perfect data we would not be
able to define which students were eligible for the program based on fields, both because
institutions had some discretion to decide whether a field closely related to a MMUF field was
eligible, and because documentation on which fields were eligible before 2000 does not exist.
Instead we restrict the sample by broad categories of fields – arts and sciences; arts, sciences, and
engineering; and all fields – rather than using a more specific definition of eligible fields. All
MMUF fields from 2000 and 2008 fall into arts and sciences, which includes humanities, social
sciences, life sciences, and physical sciences. The arts, sciences, and engineering group adds
engineering fields. The all fields category includes all BAs or doctorates, including those in arts,
humanities, and engineering, as well as fields such as education and business.

3.2 Method
Using the number of BA completers and PhD completers, we compute PhD completion rates,
calculated as the percentage of graduates of a given institution in a given year who have since
gone on to earn a PhD. This is done separately for minority and non-minority students, by the
broad field groups. Here           is the number of individuals in group j who completed bachelor’s'
degrees at institution i in year t, and         is the number of those individuals who completed a
PhD by 2011, when our information on PhD completion ends.                 is the eventual PhD
completion rate for institution i , group j , graduation year t .

   (1)

In our baseline specification we regress the PhD completion rate for minorities (              ) on
whether the institution was participating in the program when that cohort was eligible to be
selected to participate (       ). We also include graduation year fixed effects ( ) in order to
control for variations over time in the share of bachelors' graduates completing PhDs nationally,
and institution fixed effects ( ). This gives us an estimate of the effect of an institution's
participation on the PhD completion rate.
         (2)
We also estimate the baseline equation with the addition of the rate for non-minority students
(          ) included as an explanatory variable. If the coefficient on this term were restricted to
be equal to 1 this would be equivalent to a standard difference-in-difference specification with
year and institution fixed effects. Empirically we find that this coefficient is not equal to 1, so
use this more flexible specification instead. Standard errors are clustered at the institution level.
We present unweighted results as well as results that weight observations by the number of
underrepresented minority students completing bachelors’ degrees to improve the precision of
our estimates.

4 Results
4.1 Baseline Estimates
Results from the baseline specification are displayed in the first two columns of Table 2. Despite
the benefits of the MMUF felt by its participants, the model is unable to detect any impact of the
program on the PhD production rates of URM graduates. We find no significant effect of the
program on PhD completions, and point estimates are mostly negative and very small. An
increase in the rate of PhD completion in the arts and sciences larger than 0.4 percentage points
lies outside a 95% confidence interval using unweighted results, as does an increase larger than
0.8 percentage points using weights. Results are similar when we include the non-minority PhD
completion rate (Table 2 columns 3 and 4) and when considering degrees in all fields.
Because more schools have joined the MMUF program over time, and later cohorts suffer
greater truncation, our baseline model likely understates the impact of the program. For example,
a student who completed his or her bachelors’ degree in 2002 has only 9 years to complete a PhD
by 2011, the last year of data available to us on PhD completions. This number is below the
median time to degree for some fields, and thus will miss more than half of the potential PhDs.
Because PhDs in progress at the time of measurement are treated as though they will never be
completed, this causes it to appear as though the PhD production rate is declining over time.
Then, because the MMUF program is introduced throughout our sample period, participation
effects are confounded with truncation effects. URM students take longer on average to complete
PhDs, as illustrated in Figure 2, which presents the distribution of PhD completion times for all
SED respondents who completed their BA in the US and are US citizens or permanent residents.5
As a result, including the non-minority rate does not eliminate the problem of truncation.
In order to improve this estimate we implement two strategies to adjust for the fact that we do
not observe PhDs in progress. The first takes the distribution of time to PhD that prevailed in the
first 5 years of our sample and applies it to the remainder of the data. That is, we predict how
many of those who have completed bachelor's degrees but are not recorded as having completed
PhDs them will eventually complete a PhD, and use that to form our estimate of the PhD
production rate. We do this separately for URM and non-URM students. Students from these
early cohorts have at least 20 years post-college to finish their graduate degrees, so truncation is
likely to be a much smaller problem. If this method captures truncation patterns accurately it
allows us to compare PhD completion rates as of the same number of years from BA graduation,
putting all cohorts on an equal footing. The disadvantage of this approach is that it makes the
strong assumption that the time-to-PhD distribution is fixed over time.6 To address this latter
concern, we estimate a second model where we allow the truncation pattern to change over time.
We do this by estimating a quadratic model on early cohorts for each number of years from BA
y, where t is the number of years from 1985:
        (3)
We then apply this to the rest of the sample as before. Similarly to the previous approach, we
would like to fit the prediction model to a set of data where truncation is less problematic. We
therefore run specifications where this prediction model is applied to the first ten years of data
(1985–1994).7 As in the first model, degree completion patterns are estimated separately for
URM and non-minority students, and applied to both PhD completion rates. Table 3 displays
results after correcting for truncation. The results of the first, 'fixed' truncation model are
presented in the first two columns, while those from ten-year quadratic model is presented in
columns 3 and 4. Both methods of correcting for truncation produce similar results - adopting the
MMUF does not appear to have a significant effect on an institution's URM PhD completion
rate.
Our analyses so far have used only the MMUF schools, using those institutions in years before
they began participating in the program as controls. Although our estimates are fairly precise, we
would like to introduce additional control observations to increase precision further. Estimating
the program effect using the sample of all U.S. institutions would greatly overstate the effects of
the program, as many MMUF institutions were selected for participation in the program
specifically because they are high-quality colleges and universities where the PhD production
rate is already high. Instead we select two control groups constructed using the Stata command
psmatch2 to estimate the probability that each institution would be selected to participate in the
MMUF program based on its observable characteristics. The first control group uses 1-nearest-
neighbor matching to select the non-treated institution with the nearest propensity score to each


5
  This figure understates the difference in degree completion time somewhat, as URM students make up a larger
proportion of PhD completions in later cohorts, and members of later cohorts with particularly long times to
degree do not appear in the data.
6
  In fact, formal statistical tests that we conducted suggest that this assumption is not strictly true.
7
 We investigated a similar quadratic model using the first five years of data, and the results were qualitatively
similar.
treated institution as an appropriate control. 8 We match with replacement, meaning that a non-
treated school can serve as the match for more than one treated school if no other non-treated
school is a `better' control. The second matched control group is constructed using kernel
matching to construct an appropriate control institution from a combination of non-participating
schools. A list of the variables employed in the matching routine appears as Appendix Table A3,
and a list of the schools in the 1-nearest neighbor match appears as Appendix Table A4.
Results from the matching procedures are presented in Table 4. These estimates employ the 10-
year flexible truncation correction described above and include the non-minority PhD
completion rate as a control. We do not weight observations by the number of URM graduates in
these specifications, as weights are not used in constructing the matched comparison schools. We
find no evidence that participation affected the PhD completion rate in arts and sciences, but
using the nearest neighbor match suggests program participation decreased the rate for arts,
sciences and engineering and all fields. Although it is possible that these significant estimates are
due to chance, the pattern of negative coefficients suggests that participation decreases the PhD
completion rate for fields outside of the arts and sciences.

4.2 Estimates of Program Intensity
In addition to changes in whether a school was participating in the MMUF in a given year there
is considerable variation in the size of a MMUF cohort for a given school. This variation should
improve our ability to identify the effect of the program and offer an estimate of the effect of
changing the size of the program at an institution. We do this first by estimating the effect of
increasing the number of fellows (                ) on the number of PhDs completed by URM
students (          ). As in the baseline model we include year fixed effects ( ) and institution
fixed effects ( ). We include a control for the number of BAs completed by minority students
(        ) and the non-minority completion rate (            ). We estimate with a negative
binomial model to account for the fact that the dependent variable is a count.9

         (4)

We find uniformly positive point estimates for the effect of adding an additional fellow, but these
estimates are not significant at conventional levels (Table 5). If correct, our estimates would
imply that each student added to the MMUF program adds 0.01 to 0.02 PhDs that otherwise
would not have been completed - an extremely small effect. Adjusting for truncation using the
10-year adjustments increases the point estimates slightly, but they remain insignificant and quite
small. This null finding is particularly interesting as the estimates include both the effect of
adding a fellow and whatever factors drove a school to add that fellow, which likely includes the
strength of a given cohort.
As an alternative to estimating the effect of adding a given number of fellows, we estimate the
following, where             is defined as the number of fellows from graduation cohort t at
institution i divided by the number of URM students in that cohort and institution.


8
 We estimated the same models with Malahnobis-metric matching and obtained qualitatively similar results.
9
 Although a Poisson distribution would also account for this feature of the data, the negative binomial fits our data
better.
       (5)
Increasing the dosage of the program appears to decrease the PhD completion rate for all fields,
although this association is not significant for other field groups, and becomes insignificant once
we adjust for truncation using the 10-year model. The negative relationship could result from an
actual causal mechanism or it may be a statistical artifact of the relationship between URM
population size and dosage - if the number of fellows remains approximately the same an
increase in the number of URM students will decrease the dosage. If the number of URM
students is small enough very small changes in the number of URM students can generate
considerable differences in the dosage. In order to disentangle the two possibilities we broke the
sample into three groups based on the size of the URM population and repeated our estimates
with each group separately. This exercise produced negative point estimates for small schools in
all three field groupings and positive point estimates for medium and large schools, none of
which are significant (results available from authors upon request). We interpret this result as
suggesting that the negative result is the product of the relationship between dosage and cohort
size.

4.3 Robustness
We explore the possibility that the adoption of the MMUF program is not random by
investigating whether there is any difference in PhD completion rates up to 5 years before and up
to 5 years after program adoption. For this analysis we focus on the data adjusted using the 10-
year truncation model, and weight observations by URM cohort size. We find some evidence of
an increase in PhD production rates for arts and sciences two cohorts before the first cohort was
eligible to participate (Table 6). This is particularly interesting as these students were in the
spring of their senior year when the MMUF began recruiting students at their institution. It may
suggest that institutions adopted the MMUF also pursued other avenues to encourage PhD-going
among URM students. However, as there is no effect for the cohort one year ahead of the first
MMUF cohort it appears that these initiatives were short-lived.
We also conduct our baseline estimates with institution-specific linear trends to allow for the
possibility that each institution follows its own trend. The results are similar to those found
without the inclusion of time trends and are available from the authors upon request.

5 Conclusion
We describe the Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship Program, the supports it offers its
participants, and its growth over time. Using a census of undergraduate completions from the
Department of Education as well as a census of PhD completions from the National Science
Foundation, we then attempt to estimate the causal effect of the MMUF program on the rate of
PhD production of URM bachelors’ graduates at participant schools. We find no statistically
significant effect of an institution's participation in the program and a 95% confidence interval
rules out an effect of more than about 0.4 percentage points using our baseline estimates. We
also find no significant effect of increasing the number or percentage of fellows, although we do
find predominantly positive point estimates that would suggest an effect of about 0.01-0.02
additional PhDs for each additional fellow. In both cases these estimates are extremely small, in
contrast to the large percentage of MMUF fellows who complete PhDs.
Several factors could explain our null findings. First, the program may simply not do much to
increase the number of PhDs produced by URM students. If the program selects the brightest and
most motivated students it may benefit those who would have already been likely to attend
graduate school and earn PhDs even in its absence. This would not necessarily mean that the
MMUF is unimportant - the program could increase the quality of the institutions fellows attend
for their doctoral studies, improve dissertations produced or job skills gained, speed completion,
or improve the financial position of graduates. Any of these effects could increase the number of
URM students entering academia, in addition to being beneficial to fellows, but we are not able
to capture them in our data: the Survey of Earned Doctorates is collected at the time of PhD
completion and thus is limited in its ability to measure most variables pertaining to careers in
academia. Second, the small size of the program at each institution might inhibit our ability to
discover an overall effect with statistical models: if only a handful of students in each year are
MMUF participants, the largest possible effect the program could have on PhD production rates
will similarly be small. Despite our rather precise estimates we may be failing to detect a real,
but small, effect of the program. This is less likely given the insignificant effects we find for
Increases in program intensity, but those are still complicated by the substantial noise of PhD
completions by non-fellows. Finally, our truncation correction could simply be incorrect. If the
true truncation pattern is not fit or well approximated by any of our models we may fail to find
results where any exist. The true distribution of degree completion times is unknowable until all
degrees can be observed, so we cannot rule out this possibility.
Our findings are most generalizable to expansions of the MMUF to institutions relatively similar
to those that already participate or increases in the size of the program at MMUF institutions.
Many MMUF schools are quite unlike the average U.S. institution and were selected in part
based on their high PhD-going rates and a perception that many students had the potential and
preparation for a career in academia. However, the program has also been implemented at
institutions selected more for the diverse populations they serve (e.g. CUNY schools), where
overall student preparation may not be as high. It would be interesting to extend our study to the
subsample of the CUNY schools and the state universities that were later introduced to the
program, but that shrinks the pool of observations too greatly to draw meaningful conclusions
from the data. There are also other programs that are broadly similar to the MMUF (such as the
McNair Scholars Program) to which these same empirical methods could be applied.
Despite the caveats listed above, we hope our findings will prove instructive to designers of
future policies. If a program aims to maximize its impact on the number of students achieving
any particular benchmark it is important not only to design the program to benefit its recipients
but also to select those recipients on the margin of the desired outcome.
    References
Bengochea, Armando I. (2013). “25th Anniversary Review of the Mellon Mays Undergraduate
     Fellowship (MMUF).” Unpublished Manuscript.
Eagan, M. Kevin., Hurtado, Sylvia, Chang, Mitchell, Garcia, Gina, Herrera, and Garibay, Juan (2013).
     “Making a difference in science education: The impact of undergraduate research programs.
     American Education Research Journal, 50(4), 683-713. doi: 10.3102/0002831213482038
Fairlie, Robert, Hoffmann, Florian, and Oreopoulos, Philip (2011). “A community college instructor
     like me: Race and ethnic interactions in the classroom." NBER Working Paper 17381. DOI:
     10.3386/w17381
Mellon Foundation (2003). “The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation: Report from January 1, 2003
     through December 31, 2003.” New York: Mellon Foundation. Available at
     [http://www.mellon.org/news_publications/annual-reports-essays/annual-
     reports/content2003.pdf]. Accessed 4/24/14.
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship (2013). “About.” Available at [www.mmuf.org/about].
     Accessed 4/28/14.
National Science Foundation (2012). “US Citizen and Permanent Resident Doctorate Recipients, by
     Race/Ethnicity and Broad Field of Study: Selected Years, 1991-2011.” Available at
     [http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/sed/2011/data_table.cfm]. Accessed 4/24/14
National Science Foundation (2013). Survey of Earned Doctorates. Available at
     [http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvydoctorates/#sd]. Accessed 4/24/14.
Price, Joshua (2010). “The effects of instructor race and gender on student persistence in STEM
     fields.” Economics of Education Review, 29, 901-910. DOI: 10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.07.009
Rose, Brad (2012). “Program Review: The Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship (MMUF)
     Program.” Wellesley, MA: Brad Rose Consulting. Available at
     [http://bradroseconsulting.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/MMUF-Program-Review.pdf].
     Accessed 4/28/14.
United States Census Bureau (2011). Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Sex, Race, and
     Hispanic Origin for the United States: April 1 2010 to July 1, 2011 (NC-ECT2011-03). Available
     at [http://www.census.gov/popest/data/national/asrh/2011/tables/NC-EST2011-03.xls]. Accessed
     6/8/15.
United States Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for
     Education Statistics (2014). The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
United States Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Higher Education
     General Information Survey (HEGIS)
Figure 1.




Source: Administrative data provided by the Mellon Foundation
Figure 2.




Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Survey of Earned Doctorates

Notes: Sample includes all US Citizens and Permanent Residents who completed a PhD in one
of the MMUF fields between 1980 and 2011, completed a BA in the US, and responded to the
Survey of Earned Doctorates
Table 1. Characteristics of the non-UNCF institutions participating in the MMUF program by
2005
                                                   N      Mean           SD
 Public Control                                    32     0.125         0.336
 Highest Degree
   Bachelors                                       32     0.219         0.420
   Doctorate                                       32     0.594         0.499
   Masters/First professional                      32     0.188         0.397
 Characteristics as of 1987
   Enrollment                                      32    8,901.4       7768.5
   Tuition and fees per student                    32 8834.223 3335.806
   Percent of students who are undergraduates      32     0.734         0.217
 1985 Graduates
   All BAs                                         32     1,046          727
   URM BAs                                         32     214.1         495.9
   non-URM BAs                                     32     831.7         610.6
   Proportion of Bas awarded to URM students 32           0.145         0.202
   PhD completion rate                             32     0.106         0.078
   PhD completion rate - URM                       32     0.110         0.127
   PhD completion rate - non-URM                   31     0.110         0.075
   Ratio of URM to non-URM rate                    31     0.930         0.508
 2005 Graduates
   All BAs                                         31     1,323          922
   URM BAs                                         31     333.1         269.6
   non-URM BAs                                     31     989.5         702.5
   Proportion of Bas awarded to URM students 31           0.229          0.12
   PhD completion rate                             31     0.017          0.03
   PhD completion rate - URM                       31     0.010          0.02
   PhD completion rate - non-URM                   31     0.019          0.03
   Ratio of URM to non-URM rate                    30     0.476          0.68
Table 2. Effect of MMUF participation on the URM PhD completion rate - unadjusted model


                                   (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)

(a)   A&S                         0.013           -0.002            0.013            -0.002
                                 (0.018)         (0.005)          (0.018)           (0.005)
(b) A&S + Eng.                    -0.011          -0.003           -0.011            -0.004
                                 (0.010)         (0.005)          (0.010)           (0.005)
(c) All Fields                    -0.015          -0004            -0.015            -0.005
                                 (0.009)         (0.004)          (0.009)           (0.004)
      Weights                                       ✓                                  ✓
      Non-URM Rate                                                   ✓                 ✓
Notes: Twelve models are reported: for each model, the dependent variable is the rate of PhD
completion among those non-white, non-Asian students who graduated from an institution in a
particular year, with degrees in a particular group of fields as indicated by (a), (b), and (c). All
models include year and institution fixed effects. Specifications (3) and (4) include the
comparable rate for white and Asian students. Weights are by size of institution in number of
URM BA completers. Estimation is by OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
institution.
A * indicates significance at the 5% confidence level, and a † the 1% confidence level.
Table 3. Effect of MMUF participation on the URM PhD completion rate – truncation adjusted

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
(a)   A&S                         0.027             0.001            0.006           -0.003
                                 (0.031)          (0.004)          (0.014)          (0.004)
(b)   A&S + Eng.                  -0.004           -0.003           -0.013           -0.004
                                 (0.006)          (0.004)          (0.009)          (0.004)
(c)   All Fields                  -0.008           -0.004           -0.015           -0.004
                                 (0.006)          (0.003)          (0.008)          (0.004)
      Weights                                         ✓                                 ✓
      Simple adjustment              ✓                ✓
      10-year adjustment                                              ✓                ✓
Notes: Twelve models are reported: for each model, the dependent variable is the predicted rate
of PhD completion among those non-white, non-Asian students who graduated from an
institution in a particular year, with degrees in a particular group of fields as indicated by (a), (b),
and (c). All models include the comparable rate for white and Asian students, as well as year and
institution fixed effects. The simple adjustment is a truncation adjustment under the assumption
that the time to PhD pattern from 1985–1989 persists throughout the sample. The 10-year
adjustment is a truncation adjustment with a quadratic model in time fit to the first ten years of
data. Weights are by size of institution in number of URM BA completers. Estimation is by
OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by institution.
A * indicates significance at the 5% confidence level, and a † the 1% confidence level.
Table 4: Effect of MMUF participation on the URM PhD completion rate - matched comparison
                                    (1)             (2)
(a)   A&S                         -0.008          -0.001
                                 (0.007)         (0.005)
(b)   A&S + Eng.                 -0.019*          -0.006
                                 (0.008)         (0.004)
(c)   All Fields                 -0.018†          -0.007
                                 (0.006)         (0.004)
      1 Nearest neighbor             ✓
      Kernel                                        ✓

Notes: Six models are reported: for each model, the dependent variable is the predicted rate of
PhD completion among those non-white, non-Asian students who graduated from an institution
in a particular year, with degrees in a particular group of fields as indicated by (a), (b), and (c).
Prediction is a truncation adjustment with a quadratic model in time fit to the first ten years of
data. All models include the comparable rate for white and Asian students, as well as year and
institution fixed effects. Estimation is by OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
institution.
A * indicates significance at the 5% confidence level, and a † the 1% confidence level.
Table 5. Effect of intensity of MMUF participation on URM PhD production
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
(a)   A&S                        0.017           0.021           0.083          -0.240*
                                (0.012)         (0.013)         (0.063)         (0.096)
(b)   A&S + Eng.                 0.015           0.021           0.458           0.045
                                (0.012)         (0.013)         (0.257)         (0.104)
(c)   All Fields                 0.011           0.019           0.508           0.130
                                (0.011)         (0.012)         (0.338)         (0.172)
     Count                         ✓               ✓
     Dosage                                                            ✓              ✓
     Unadjusted                     ✓                                  ✓
     10-year adjustment                              ✓                                ✓
Notes: Twelve models are reported: for each model, the dependent variable is the predicted
number of PhD completions or predicted PhD completion rate among those non-white, non-
Asian students who graduated from an institution in a particular year, with degrees in a particular
group of fields as indicated by (a), (b), and (c). Prediction is a truncation adjustment with a
quadratic model in time fit to the first ten years of data. All models include the comparable rate
for white and Asian students, as well as year and institution fixed effects. Columns (1) and (2)
present estimates of the effect of adding an additional fellow on the number of PhDs completed.
Column (1) uses a negative binomial model and column (2) uses OLS. Columns (3) and (4)
present estimates of the effect of increasing the dosage of the program on PhD completion rates,
using OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by institution.
A * indicates significance at the 5% confidence level, and a † the 1% confidence level.
Table 6. Event study of MMUF adoption
              t-5       t-4       t-3      t-2        t-1        t       t+1       t+2       t+3       t+4       t+5
Arts and     0.003     0.005     0.004    0.020*     0.010    -0.003     0.006     0.009     0.009     0.009     0.005
Sciences
            (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.011)   (0.008)   (0.006)   (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)

Arts Sci.    0.009    0.016*     0.005     0.005     0.003    -0.004     0.007     0.011     0.011     0.007     0.003
    and
    Eng.    (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.004)   (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)

      All    0.001     0.003     0.005     0.013     0.009    -0.004     0.007     0.009     0.009     0.005     0.003
  Fields
            (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)
Notes: Thirty three models are reported: for each model the dependent variable is the predicted
rate of PhD completion among those non-white, non-Asian students who graduated from an
institution in a particular year relative to the first MMUF cohort at that institution (t). Prediction
is a truncation adjustment with a quadratic model in time fit to the first ten years of data. All
models include the comparable rate for white and Asian students, as well as year and institution
fixed effects. Estimation is by OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by institution.
A * indicates significance at the 5% confidence level, and a † the 1% confidence level.
Appendix
Table A1. Non-UNCF Mellon Mays Institutions Participating by 2005
Institution Name                                     First Year of Participation
Barnard College                                      1998
Bowdoin College                                      1993
Brown University                                     1994
Bryn Mawr College                                    1990
California Institute of Technology                   1994
Carleton College                                     1989
Columbia University                                  1997
Cornell University                                   1990
CUNY Brooklyn College                                1990
CUNY City College                                    1990
CUNY Hunter College                                  1990
CUNY Queens College                                  1990
Dartmouth College                                    1990
Duke University                                      1998
Emory University                                     2001
Harvard University                                   1990
Haverford College                                    2001
Macalester College                                   2001
Oberlin College                                      1989
Princeton University                                 1990
Rice University                                      1994
Smith College                                        2000
Stanford University                                  1989
Swarthmore College                                   1990
University of Chicago                                1990
University of Pennsylvania                           1990
University of Southern California                    1994
Washington University in Saint Louis                 1994
Wellesley College                                    1990
Wesleyan University                                  1991
Williams College                                     1990
Yale University                                      1990
Table A2. Mellon-Designated Fields
Fields as of 2000
Anthropology and Archaeology
Area/Cultural/Ethnic/Gender Studies
Art History
Classics
Demography, Geography and Population Studies
Earth/Environmental/Geological Science and Ecology
English
Ethnomusicology
Film, Cinema and Media Studies (theoretical focus)
Foreign Languages and Literatures
Linguistics
History
Literature
Mathematics
Musicology
Philosophy
Oceanographic/Marine/Atmospheric/Planetary Science
Physics and Astronomy
Political Theory
Religion and Theology
Theater (non-performance focus)
2008 Field Additions
Computer Science
Sociology
Table A3. Predictor variables for propensity score matches
Institution is Public
Fall Enrollment
Ratio of Undergraduates to All Students
Ratio of Female Undergraduate Students to All Undergraduate Students
Ratio of Full-Time Undergraduate Students to All Undergraduate Students
Ratio of Full-Time Female Faculty to All Female Faculty
Ratio of Female Faculty to All Faculty
Ratio of Full-Time Faculty to All Faculty
Ratio of Faculty to All Staff
Avg. 9–10 Month Salary for All Male Faculty
Avg. 9–10 Month Salary for All Female Faculty
Ratio of Undergraduate STEM Completions to All Undergraduate Completions
Ratio of Undergraduate Humanities Completions to All Undergraduate Completions
Tuition and Fees per Student
Endowment Income per Student
Total Revenues per Student
Instruction Expenditure per Student
Academic Support Expenditure per Student
Student Services Expenditure per Student
Total Scholarship Expenditures per Student
Percentage of Student Body that is Black
Percentage of Student Body that is Asian
Percentage of Student Body that is Hispanic
Table A4. Matched control institutions, nearest neighbor match
Baptist Bible College of Pennsylvania
Carnegie Mellon University
Case Western Reserve University
Davidson College
Georgetown University
Goucher College
Le Moyne-Owen College
Long Island University
North Carolina State University at Raleigh
Northwestern University
Radcliffe College
Saint Basil's College
San Diego State University
San Francisco Conservatory of Music
Seton Hall University
Smith College
Southern University Agricultural and Mechanical College
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
