                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TECHNOLOGY ENTRY IN THE PRESENCE OF PATENT THICKETS

                                        Bronwyn H. Hall
                                       Christian Helmers
                                      Georg von Graevenitz

                                       Working Paper 21455
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21455


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2015




We are grateful to the Intellectual Property Office of the United Kingdom for research support
and to the National Institute of Economic and Social Research for hospitality while this paper was
being written. The views expressed here are those of the authors. They are not necessarily those
of the UK Intellectual Property Office or NIESR. The revision of this paper has benefitted from
comments by participants in seminars at the UKIPO, the USPTO, the NBER Summer Institute,
the University of California at Berkeley, TILEC, Tilburg University, the University of Wuppertal
and the TIGER Conference in Toulouse. We would like to thank Jonathan Haskel, Scott Stern,
Dietmar Harhoff, Stefan Wagner and Megan MacGarvie for comments, and Iain Cockburn,
Dietmar Harhoff, and Stefan Wagner for very generous support with additional data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21455.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Christian Helmers, and Georg von Graevenitz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technology Entry in the Presence of Patent Thickets
Bronwyn H. Hall, Christian Helmers, and Georg von Graevenitz
NBER Working Paper No. 21455
August 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. K11,L20,O31,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the effect of patent thickets on entry into technology areas by firms in the UK. We
present a model that describes incentives to enter technology areas characterized by varying
technological opportunity, complexity, and the potential for hold-up due to the presence of patent
thickets. We show empirically that our measure of patent thickets is associated with a reduction
of first time patenting in a given technology area controlling for the level of technological
complexity and opportunity. Technological areas characterized by more technological complexity
and opportunity, in contrast, see more entry. Our evidence indicates that patent thickets raise
entry costs, which leads to less entry into technologies regardless of a firm’s size.


Bronwyn H. Hall                                 Georg von Graevenitz
123 Tamalpais Road                              Queen Mary University of London
Berkeley, CA 94708                              g.v.graevenitz@qmul.ac.uk
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

Christian Helmers
Department of Economics
Santa Clara University
Lucas Hall
Santa Clara, CA 95053
christian.r.helmers@gmail.com
1 Introduction
The past two decades have seen an enormous increase in patent filings worldwide (Fink
et al., 2013). There are signs that the high level of patenting may be reducing innovation
in certain technologies (Federal Trade Commission, 2011; Bessen and Meurer, 2008;
Jaffe and Lerner, 2004; Federal Trade Commission, 2003). Companies drawing on these
technologies face elevated legal costs of commercializing innovative products when
patents that contain overlapping claims form so-called “patent thickets” (Shapiro,
2001). Patent thickets arise where individual products draw on innovations protected
by hundreds or even thousands of patents, often with fuzzy boundaries. These patents
belong to many independent and frequently competing firms. Patent thickets can lead to
hold-up of innovations, increases in the complexity of negotiations over licenses,
increases in litigation, and they create incentives to add more, often weaker patents to
the patent system (Allison et al., 2015). The increased transaction costs associated with
patent thickets reduce profits that derive from the commercialization of innovation, and
ultimately may reduce incentives to innovate.
There is a growing theoretical (Bessen and Maskin, 2009; Clark and Konrad, 2008;
Farrell and Shapiro, 2008; Fershtman and Kamien, 1992) and legal literature (Chien and
Lemley, 2012; Bessen et al., 2011) on patent thickets. Related work analyzes firms’
attempts to form patent pools to reduce hold-up (Joshi and Nerkar, 2011; Lerner et al.,
2007; Lerner and Tirole, 2004) and the particular challenges posed in this context by
standard essential patents (Lerner and Tirole, 2013).
The existing empirical evidence on patent thickets is largely concerned with showing
that they exist and measuring their density (von Graevenitz et al., 2011; Ziedonis, 2004).
There is less evidence on the effects patent thickets have for firms. Cockburn and
MacGarvie (2011) demonstrate that patenting levels affect product market entry in the
software industry. They show that a 1 per cent increase in the number of existing
patents is associated with a 0.8 per cent drop in the number of product market entrants.
This result echoes earlier findings by Lerner (1995) who showed for a small sample of
U.S. biotech companies that first-time patenting in a given technology is affected by the
presence of other companies’ patents. These two papers use patent counts in narrow
technological fields as a proxy for thickets; in this paper we move beyond this measure
to use an indicator of the extent to which the patents actually might overlap.
Bessen and Meurer (2013) suggest that patent thickets also lead to increased litigation
related to hold-up. They (and we) use the term to describe a situation where an alleged
infringer faces the threat of an injunction or high licensing costs after she has sunk
investment. 1 Patent thickets have remained a concern of antitrust agencies and


1 “High licensing costs” refers to costs that are higher than those that would have been negotiated ex ante
in the present of possible “invent around” before the alleged infringer sank her investment. This


                                                     1
regulators in the U.S. for over a decade (Federal Trade Commission, 2011, 2003; USDoJ
and FTC, 2007). Reforms that address some of the factors contributing to the growth of
patent thickets have recently been introduced in the U.S. (America Invents Act (AIA) of
2011) 2 and by the European Patent Office (EPO).
However, it is sometimes argued that patent thickets are a feature of rapidly developing
technologies in which technological opportunities abound (Teece et al., 2014). Thickets
are seen as a reflection of fast technological progress that is paired with increased
technological complexity (Lewis and Mott, 2013). This suggests that the increased
transactions costs associated with patent thickets and the benefits of technological
complexity and opportunity often coincide. There may be a trade-off between
technological opportunity and growth on the one hand and increased transaction costs
due to the emergence of patent thickets on the other - if the transaction costs of
patenting in complex technologies are not avoidable. The challenge in assessing
technologies with high levels of patenting is to develop a framework that captures the
main factors that incentivize patenting and the costs and benefits thereof.
This paper contains such a framework in the form of a model that incorporates
technological patenting incentives and the effects of patenting by rivals on each firm’s
incentives to enter and to patent. The aim of the paper is to empirically disentangle the
effects of thickets and technological opportunity and complexity on entry into
technology areas. Modeling patenting and entry we show that greater technological
opportunity and complexity both encourage entry, while higher transaction costs
associated with preexisting patent thickets reduce entry. These effects are quantified
empirically using firm-level data on patenting by firms in the United Kingdom.
In a first contribution, we develop a theoretical model of entry into patenting in discrete
and complex technologies. Building on previous work on patenting incentives (von
Graevenitz et al., 2013), we model how entry decisions are affected by the potential for
hold-up due to patent thickets. The model focuses on the interaction between
incumbents and new entrants through two channels: i) via legal costs associated with
patent enforcement and ii) via incumbency advantages in R&D fixed costs. In contrast to
previous work, we separate technological complexity and thicket density. Where
previously granted patents raise thicket density, we assume that the expected legal
costs of defending new patents are higher and the benefits of amassing portfolios of
new patents are lower. This reflects higher potential for hold-up and leads firms to
patent less and reduce entry, ceteris paribus. As in von Graevenitz et al. (2013), the
model predicts that greater complexity of a technology leads to an increase of a firm’s


possibility can arise because of either prohibitive search costs (Mulligan and Lee, 2012) or fuzzy patent
boundaries or both.
2For further information see http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-112hr1249enr/pdf/BILLS-
112hr1249enr.pdf


                                                     2
patent applications, while greater technological opportunity reduces applications.3 The
model also predicts that higher complexity and opportunity will increase entry, because
competition for individual patents is reduced and the probability that entrants can
establish themselves in a technology is increased. In addition, where incumbency
implies that firms enjoy lower costs of R&D, incumbents patent more than entrants,
which reinforces the growth of thickets.
Our second contribution consists of an empirical test of these predictions and a
quantification of the importance of the conflicting effects of opportunity, complexity,
and patent thickets on entry. We use patent data from both the EPO and the USPTO to
construct measures of technological opportunity, technological complexity and hold-up
potential and relate these to entry into new technology areas by UK firms.
To test the predictions of the model, we measure technological complexity and hold-up
potential in patent thickets separately. This is an important improvement over the
analysis in von Graevenitz et al. (2013), who conflated complexity and hold-up potential
arising from existing patent portfolios. To distinguish complexity and hold-up potential,
we introduce a new empirical measure of technological complexity and sharpen the
definition of an existing measure of hold-up potential.4
Our empirical analysis of entry confirms that greater technological opportunity and
complexity increase entry and that hold-up potential reduces entry substantially. While
we cannot quantify the overall net welfare effect, our results indicate that patent
thickets raise entry costs for large and small firms alike. To the extent that more original
and radical, rather than incremental ideas come from new entrants rather than
incumbents (Tushman and Anderson, 1986; Henderson, 1993), this is likely to have
negative long-run consequences on innovation and product market competition. In
combination with earlier results by von Graevenitz et al. (2013), who point to a positive
correlation between patenting levels and the presence of thickets, our results suggest
that any increases in transaction costs due to thickets can potentially have important
dynamic effects on innovation by reducing entry.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model of entry
into patenting in a technology area and derives several testable predictions. Section 3
describes the data, and the empirical measurement of the key concepts in the model.
Section 4 discusses our results and Section 5 provides concluding remarks.




3Opposite signs of complexity and opportunity are due to firms’ efforts to maintain a constant share of
patents on each opportunity, to protect their profits from patenting (von Graevenitz et al., 2013).
4We also provide separate empirical tests of the measures we propose on the EPO patent data used by
von Graevenitz et al. (2013) in Appendix D.



                                                    3
2   Theoretical Model

This section summarizes the main results of a two-stage model of entry into patenting
and subsequent patenting decisions. The model shows how complexity of a technology,
technological opportunity and the potential of hold-up due to patent thickets affect
firms’ decisions to enter into patenting in that technology.
We assume that each technology consists of a set of opportunities, each of which
consists of a number of patentable facets. The more facets opportunities in a technology
have, the more complex is that technology.
Greater technological opportunity attracts entrants to a technology as more avenues
arise to earn a profit through application of the technology. Greater complexity of a
technology also attracts entrants, because it is more likely that each entrant will be able
to gain a share of the profits flowing from any one opportunity. Where multiple firms
hold patents on the same opportunity, licensing negotiations or litigation ensue as firms
divide the profits flowing from the opportunity. We assume that holding a larger share
of patents on an opportunity is beneficial for firms in terms of licensing or litigation, but
less so when thickets arise from poorly delineated patents that provide increased
options to litigate. This captures the costs imposed by thickets on patentees.
The model consists of two stages: entry and patenting. We solve the model by backward
induction. Analysis of the entry decision shows that greater technological opportunity
and complexity increase entry into patenting, while the threat of increased legal costs
arising from denser patent thickets reduces entry into patenting.
Analyzing patenting we show that denser thickets reduce patent applications, while
greater technological opportunity increases applications in discrete technologies, but
reduces them in complex technologies. This prediction is analogous to that in von
Graevenitz et al. (2013). Finally, greater complexity increases patent applications.
Below we set out the notation and the main findings from the model. Most proofs and
derivations are relegated to appendices A and B.

2.1 Notation and Assumptions
The key variables of the model are the complexity of a technology k, measured by Fk
(𝐹𝑘 ∈ ℝ+0 ), the degree of technological opportunity, measured by Ok (𝑂𝑘 ∈ ℝ0 ), and
                                                                                    +

hold-up potential hk. The value of all 𝐹̃𝑘 patents in an opportunity is Vk. In the simplest
discrete setting this is the value of the one patent (facet) that covers each technological
opportunity. In more complex technologies this is the value of controlling all patents
(facets) on a technological opportunity. Firms (indexed by i) choose the number of
opportunities oi to invest in and the number of facets fi per opportunity to patent.

In equilibrium only Fk  (1  (1  ( fˆk / Fk ) N0 1 )) facets are patented, where fˆk   is the
equilibrium number of facets chosen by applicants and NO is the number of firms that

                                               4
have chosen a specific opportunity.5 Since Fk may be smaller than Fk the total value of
patenting in a technology is V ( Fk )  V ( Fk ) . Von Graevenitz et al. (2013) assume that the
value function Vk ( Fk ) is convex in covered facets. In Appendix B.1 we discuss how this
assumption is relaxed and generalize the model by introducing a concave function
relating the share of patents a firm holds on an opportunity sik to the proportion of the
value Vk the firm can extract through licensing and its own sales: Δ(sik). This captures
the benefits that a patent portfolio confers in the market for technology.

In sum, the assumptions we make on the value function and portfolio benefits are:
                                               V
                           (VF ): V (0)  0,       0                                             (1)
                                               Fk

                                               d ( sik )         d 2 ( sik )
                           ( PB): (0)  0,                0 and              0                 (2)
                                                 dsik                dsik2

The model contains three types of patenting costs:

•       Costs of R&D per opportunity, which depend on overall R&D activity in that
        technology area: C0     o  .
                                   NO
                                   j    j



•       Costs of maintaining each granted patent in force: Ca.

•       Costs of coordinating R&D on different technological opportunities Cc(oi), where

                                                   Cc
                                                       0                                         (3)
                                                   oi

These assumptions imply that R&D costs are fixed costs.6 We allow for the endogenous
determination of the level of R&D fixed costs, which rise as more opportunities are
researched simultaneously by rival firms. This reflects competition for inputs into R&D,
e.g. scientists and engineers that are in fixed supply in the short run (Goolsbee, 1998).
Where multiple firms own facets on an opportunity, their legal costs L(γik, sik, hk) depend
on the absolute number of patented facets γik, on the share of patents per opportunity
that a firm holds sik, and on the extent to which they face hold-up hk. The first two
channels capture the costs of defending a patent portfolio as the number of patents
increases, while leaving scope for effects on bargaining costs that derive from the share


5   The properties of N0 are summarized in Appendix A.2.
6It also implies that there is no technological uncertainty. However, introducing technological
uncertainty into the model does not change the main comparative statics results.



                                                     5
of patents owned: The hold-up parameter captures contexts in which several firms’ core
technologies become extremely closely intertwined. Then each firm has to
simultaneously negotiate with many others to commercialize its products, which
significantly raises transaction costs.
                                                           L       2 L    L       2 L
                     ( LC ): L( ik , sik , hk ), where          0, 2  0,       0, 2  0,
                                                           ik      ik   sik     sik
                                                                                                          (4)
                                                          L        2 L           2 L
                                                               0,            0,          0
                                                          hk       ik hk      sik hk

All remaining cross partial derivatives of the legal costs function are zero.

In what follows, we use the following definitions:

         oi            fi              Fk V ( Fk )               sk d ( sk )            f F
k         ,   k       ,   k                   ,     k                  , and k  i k .
         Ok            Fk            V ( Fk ) Fk                ( sk ) dsk             Fk f i

Here 𝜔𝑘 is the share of opportunities each firm chooses to pursue, 𝜙𝑘 is the share of
facets each firm seeks to patent per opportunity, 𝜇𝑘 is the elasticity of the value function
w.r.t. the level of complexity, 𝜉𝑘 is the elasticity of the benefits function ∆ w.r.t. the share
of patents each firm is granted and 𝜂𝑘 is the elasticity of the number of covered facets
w.r.t. the number of patent applications of each firm.

2.2 Patenting and Entry
Firm i’s profits in technology k,  ik (oi , fi , Fk , Ok , Nk , hk ) , are a function of the number of
opportunities oi which the firm invests in, the number of facets per opportunity fi the
firm seeks to patent, the total number of patentable facets per opportunity Fk, the
number of technological opportunities a technology offers Ok, the number of firms
entering the technology Nk, and the degree of hold-up in that technology hk.
In this section we analyze the following two-stage game G*:

Stage 1: Firms enter until  ik (oi , fi , Fk , Ok , N k , hk )  0 ;7

Stage 2: Firms simultaneously choose the number of opportunities, oi, to invest in and
the number of facets per opportunity fi to patent in order to maximize profits πik.

We solve the game by backward induction and derive local comparative statics results
for the symmetric extremal equilibria of the second stage game. For the subsequent
analysis it is important to note that all equilibria of this second stage game are
symmetric. In case that the second stage game has multiple equilibria we focus on the


7   We treat Nk as a continuous variable here, which is an abstraction that simplifies our analysis.



                                                          6
properties of the extremal equilibria when providing comparative statics results
(Milgrom and Roberts, 1994; Amir and Lambson, 2000; Vives, 2005). Equilibrium
values of the firms’ choices are denoted by a hat (^) and we drop the firm specific
subscripts in what follows, e.g., ˆ .     k


At stage two of the game each firm maximizes the following objective function:

                                                                                                
              ik (oi , fi )  oi V ( Fk )( sik )  L( ik , sik , hk )  C0 ( j o j )  fi pk Ca  Cc (oi )
                                                                              NO
                                                                                                                 (5)

This expression shows that per opportunity k, the firm derives profits from its share
sik  pk fi / Fk of patented facets, while facing legal costs L to appropriate those profits,
as well as costs of R&D C0, costs of maintaining its patent portfolio Ca, and coordination
costs across opportunities Cc.

2.3 Simultaneous Entry with Multiple Facets

2.3.1 Comparative statics of patenting
We show that the second stage of this game is smooth supermodular:
Proposition 1: The second stage patenting game, defined in particular by assumptions
(VF, eq. 1), (PB, eq. 2) and (LC, eq. 4) is smooth supermodular if k  ik and if ownership
of the technology is expected to be fragmented.
This is shown in Appendix B.1.
This result generalizes Proposition 1 derived by von Graevenitz et al. (2013).8 Given this
result we can show that:
Proposition 2: The potential for hold-up in complex technologies reduces patenting
incentives.
In Appendix B.2 we show that the expected legal costs of hold-up reduce the number of
opportunities that firms invest in. In addition, firms with larger portfolios are more
exposed to hold-up and benefit less from the share of patents they have patented per
opportunity. Both effects combine to reduce the number of facets each firm applies for.

2.3.2 Comparative statics of entry
In Appendix B.3 we show that there is a free entry equilibrium. In this equilibrium the
following propositions hold:
Proposition 4: Under free entry greater complexity of a technology increases entry.



8 Here it is no longer the case that the value function has to be increasing in the number of patented facets
for supermodularity of the patenting game. We relegate further discussion of this result to Appendix B.1.



                                                          7
In the model, complexity has countervailing effects: first, it increases profits, because it
is less likely that duplicative R&D arises making each opportunity more valuable; this
clearly increases incentives to enter. Next, given the level of patent applications 𝑓̂𝑘 ,
complexity reduces the probability that each facet is patented, which reduces profits
and entry incentives. Finally, complexity reduces competition for each facet, which
increases the probability of patenting and increases innovation incentives. Overall we
show that the positive effects outweigh the negative effects and incentives for entry rise
with complexity of a technology.
To derive Proposition 4, consider how equilibrium profits are affected by the
complexity of the technology Fk, the degree of technological opportunity Ok, and the
potential for hold-up hk:


𝜕𝜋(𝑜̂,𝑓̂)                                                      △(𝑠̂ )
                         ((𝜀̂𝐹̃𝑘,𝐹𝑘 − 𝜀̂𝑝𝑘,𝐹𝑘 𝜂̂ 𝑘 ) [𝑉 (𝐹̂̃𝑘 ) 𝑘 (𝜇̂ 𝑘 − 𝜉̂𝑘 ) +
                   𝑠̂𝑘                                                                𝜕𝐿
            = 𝑜̂                                                                             ]) > 0                            (6)
  𝜕𝐹𝑘              𝐹𝑘                                           𝑠̂𝑘                   𝜕𝑠̂𝑘




𝜕𝜋(𝑜̂,𝑓̂)           ̂𝑜 𝑠̂𝑘                                         △(𝑠̂ )                                        ̂𝑜 𝑜̂
                                        − 𝜀̂𝑝𝑘,𝑁𝑜 𝜂̂ 𝑘 ) [𝑉 (𝐹̂̃𝑘 ) 𝑘 (𝜇̂ 𝑘 − 𝜉̂𝑘 ) +
                   𝜕𝑁                                                                         𝜕𝐿          𝜕𝐶𝑜 𝑁
            = 𝑜̂       ̂𝑜
                           ((𝜀̂𝐹̃𝑘,𝑁𝑜                                                               ]−     ̂𝑜 𝑜̂ 𝜕𝑠̂𝑘
                                                                                                                       )   > 0 (7)
  𝜕𝑂𝑘              𝜕𝑂𝑘 𝑁                                              𝑠̂𝑘                    𝜕𝑠̂𝑘        𝜕𝑁




𝜕𝜋(𝑜̂,𝑓̂)                𝜕𝐿
            = −𝑜̂             <0                                                                                               (8)
  𝜕ℎ𝑘                𝜕ℎ𝑘




Proposition 4 follows from the Implicit Function theorem once we know the sign of the
derivative of profits w.r.t. F. Under free entry firms’ profits decrease with entry:
                                                  𝜕𝑁𝑘             𝜕𝜋        𝜕𝜋
                                                        =−             ⁄                                                       (9)
                                                  𝜕𝐹𝑘             𝜕𝐹𝑘 𝜕𝑁𝑘

Therefore, the Implicit Function theorem implies that the sign of the effect of
complexity F on entry depends on the sign of the effect of complexity on profits.
Equation (6) shows that the effect of complexity on profits depends on the difference
between the elasticities 𝜀̂𝐹̃𝑘,𝐹𝑘 and 𝜀̂𝑝𝑘,𝐹𝑘 𝜂̂ 𝑘 , which are derived in Appendix A.3. The
elasticity 𝜀̂𝑝𝑘,𝐹𝑘 is (see Appendix A.1):
                                                                  ̂ 𝑘 −1(1+ 1 )
                                                                  𝜙        ̂
                                               𝜀̂𝑝𝑘 ,𝐹𝑘 =   ̂𝑜2
                                                            𝑁
                                                                        2        𝑁𝑜
                                                                                                                              (10)
                                                                         ̂𝑘
                                                                       1−𝜙

                                      1
This elasticity is negative for 𝜙̂𝑘 < 2, which is also a precondition for supermodularity of
game G*. Both terms in brackets in equation (6) are positive, when game G* is


                                                            8
supermodular. This implies that greater complexity raises profits and this induces
entry.9
Proposition 5: Under free entry greater technological opportunity increases entry.
For any given number of entrants an increase in technological opportunity reduces
competition between firms for patents. This increases firms’ expected profits and
increases entry.
Continuing from the proof of Proposition 4 above, by the Implicit Function theorem the
sign of the derivative of profits w.r.t. technological opportunity determines the effect of
technological opportunity on entry:
                                            𝜕𝑁𝑘            𝜕𝜋       𝜕𝜋
                                                   =−           ⁄                                            (11)
                                            𝜕𝑂𝑘           𝜕𝑂𝑘 𝜕𝑁𝑘

An increase in technological opportunity increases profits and entry. In Appendix B.3
we show that the term in brackets in Equation (7) is negative under free entry. Profits
increase as technological opportunity increases, because fewer firms enter per
opportunity.
Proposition 6: Under free entry the potential for hold-up reduces entry.
An increase in the potential for hold-up raises firms’ expected legal costs. This reduces
expected profits and lowers potential for entry.
To derive this prediction, note that by the Implicit Function theorem the sign of the
derivative of profits w.r.t. the level of hold-up in a technology area determines the effect
of hold-up on entry:
                                             𝜕𝑁𝑘           𝜕𝜋       𝜕𝜋
                                                   =−           ⁄                                            (12)
                                             𝜕ℎ𝑘          𝜕ℎ𝑘 𝜕𝑁𝑘

Hence, equation (8) shows that the effect of hold-up on entry derives from the increased
legal costs that the possibility of hold-up imposes on affected firms.

2.4 Entry and Incumbency
The previous section sets out a model in which all firms entered and then invested in
patents. At both stages firms’ decisions were simultaneous. In Appendix B.5 we extend
the model to a setting in which some firms, the incumbents, face lower costs ( CO   ,


                1
9        ̂𝑘
    When 𝜙    ≥ 2 we no longer have the assumptions necessary to show supermodularity. This situation
corresponds to the case where one firm has more than half the patents in a particular technology
opportunity within a technology area. Thus our results may not hold when a specific opportunity is highly
concentrated. In general this will not be the case, especially at our level of empirical analysis, but it would
be interesting to explore this possibility in future work.



                                                      9
where   0 ) of entering opportunities. This captures the fact that incumbents have
previous experience of doing R&D in a technology area. We demonstrate that our main
results derived above are robust to this extension of the model. We also show that
incumbents will enter more new opportunities and that this will crowd out new
entrants. The increased levels of entry by incumbents raise costs of entry to new firms,
lowering their numbers.

2.5 Predictions of the Model
Our model predicts how the probability of entry into patenting depends on opportunity,
complexity, hold-up potential and incumbents’ experience. Here we summarize these
predictions, which are tested empirically below:10
Prediction 1: Greater technological opportunity increases the probability of entry.
Greater technological opportunity reduces competition for facets per opportunity,
which raises expected profits and thereby attracts entry.
Prediction 2: Greater complexity of a technology increases the probability of entry.
Greater complexity has countervailing effects: it reduces competition per facet as well
as duplicative R&D, attracting entry. It also increases the likelihood that some of a
technology remains unpatented, reducing its overall value and entry. Our model shows
that overall complexity increases entry.
Prediction 3: Greater potential for hold-up reduces the probability of entry.
Hold-up potential increases expected costs of entry, reducing it.
Prediction 4: More experienced incumbents are more likely to enter technological
opportunities new to them.
We show that incumbency advantage raises the number of opportunities that
incumbents enter. This implies that they also enter new opportunities, which they have
not previously been active in. This expansion of activity by incumbents crowds out
entry by new entrants.


3    Data and Empirical Model

This section of the paper describes the data we use in the empirical test of our
theoretical predictions. In particular, we discuss how we measure entry, how the set of
potential entrants is identified, and which measures and covariates are used.
Our empirical model is a hazard rate model of firm entry into patenting in a technology

10Note that von Graevenitz et al. (2013) tested predictions from a substantially more restrictive version
of the model on the level of patent applications using data from the European Patent Office.



                                                   10
area as a function of technological opportunity, technological complexity, and hold-up
potential that characterize a technology area. Additional firm level covariates include
the age and size of firms. The models we estimate are stratified at the industry level.
That is, the unit of observation for each entry hazard is a firm-technology area, but the
hazard shapes and levels are allowed to vary by the industry that the firm is in. This
approach recognizes that patenting propensities vary across industries for reasons that
may not be technological (e.g., strategic reasons, or reasons arising from the historical
development of the sector).
We use a combination of firm level data for the entire population of UK firms registered
with Companies House and data on patenting at the European Patent Office and at the
Intellectual Property Office for the UK. The firm data come from the data held at
Companies House provided by Bureau van Dijk in their FAME database. European
patent registers do not include reference numbers from company registers, nor does
Bureau van Dijk provide the identification numbers used by patent offices in Europe.
Linking the data from patent registers to firm register data requires matching of
applicant names in patent documents and firm names in firm registers. In our work
both a firm’s current and previous name(s) were used for matching in order to account
for changes in firm names. For more details on the matching of firm- and patent-level
data see Appendix C.
Economic studies of entry are frequently hampered by the problem of identifying the
correct set of potential entrants (Bresnahan and Reiss, 1991; Berry, 1992). In our case
this problem is slightly mitigated by the fact that one set of potential entrants into
patenting in a specific technology area consists of all those firms that currently patent in
other technology areas. We complement this group of firms with a set of comparable
firms from the population of UK firms that have not patented previously.
To construct the sample we deleted all firms from the data for which we have no size
measure, because of missing data on assets. We select previously non-patenting firms
from the population of all UK firms in two steps: 1) we delete all firms in industrial
sectors with little patenting (amounting to less than 2 per cent of all patenting); and 2)
we choose a sample of non-patenting firms that matches our sample of patenting firms
by industry, size class, and age class. In principle, this approach will result in an
endogenous (choice-based) sample. However our focus is on industry and technology
area level effects rather than firm-level effects. Therefore we do not expect the sampling
approach we adopt to introduce systematic biases into the estimates we report. We
provide a number of robustness checks to ensure that our results are stable. These
reveal that sample composition does not affect the key results we present below. All
estimates are based on data weighted by the probability that a firm is in our sample.11

11To check this, we estimated the model with and without weights based on our sampling methodology
and find little difference in the results.



                                                11
The sample that results from our selection criteria is a set of firms with non-missing
assets in manufacturing, oil and gas extraction and quarrying, construction, utilities,
trade, and selected business services including financial services that includes all
(approximately 10,000) firms applying for a patent at the EPO or UKIPO during the
2001-2009 period and another 10,000 firms that did not apply for a patent.
The definition of technology areas that we use is based on the 2008 version of the ISI-
OST-INPI technology classification (denoted TF34 classes) (Schmoch, 2009). The list is
shown in Table 1, along with the number of EPO and UKIPO patents applied for by UK
firms with priority dates between 2002 and 2009. A comparison of the frequency
distribution of patenting across the technology areas from the two patent offices shows
that firms are more likely to apply for patents in Chemicals at the EPO, while Electrical
and Mechanical Engineering predominate in the national patent data (see the bottom
panel in Table 1).
We treat entry into each technology area as a separate decision made by firms. More
than half of firms we observe patent in more than one area and 10 per cent patent in
more than four. From the 20,000 firms observed, each of which can potentially enter
into each one of the 34 technology areas, we obtain about 700,000 observations at risk.
We cluster the standard errors by firm, so our models are effectively firm random
effects models for entry into 34 technology areas. Allowing firm choices to vary by
technology area is sensible under the assumption that firms’ patenting strategies are
contingent upon technology and industry level factors and are not homogeneous across
technology areas. We confirmed the validity of this assumption through interviews with
leading UK patent attorneys.
There are some technology-industry combinations that do not occur, e.g. audio-visual
technology and the paper industry, telecommunications technology and the
pharmaceutical industry. In order to reduce the size of the sample, we drop all
technology-industry combinations for which Lybbert and Zolas (2014) find no patenting
in their data and for which there was no patenting by any UK firm from the relevant
industry in the corresponding technology category. This removes about 30 per cent of
observations from the data. We provide a robustness check for this procedure in Table
E-2 in the Appendix.
                                      [Table 1 here]

3.1 Variables

Dependent Variable - Entry
The dependent variable is a dichotomous variable taking the value one if a firm has
entered a technology area k at time t and otherwise the value zero. Entry into a
technology area is measured by the first time a firm applies for a patent that is classified
in that technology area, dated by the priority year of the patent.



                                            12
Technological opportunity
Our first prediction from the theoretical model is that there will be more entry in
technology areas with greater technological opportunity. Additional reasons that a
sector may have more or less patenting include sector “size” or “breadth” and the
propensity of firms to patent in particular technologies for strategic reasons or because
of varying patent effectiveness in protecting inventions. To control for both
technological opportunity and these other factors, we include the logarithm of the
aggregate EPO patent applications in the technology sector during the year. To capture
opportunity more specifically we also include the past 5-year growth rate in the non-
patent (scientific publication) references cited in patents in that technology class at the
EPO.12 We have found that the growth rate in non-patent references is a better predictor
of entry than the level of non-patent references, which has been used previously.
Presumably the growth rate is a better indicator because it captures new or expanded
technological opportunity.
Technology complexity
The second prediction of the theoretical model is that technological complexity
increases entry, other things equal. Our interpretation of complexity is that it implies
many interconnections between inventions in a particular field, rather than a series of
fairly isolated inventions that do not connect to each other. To construct such a measure,
we use the concept of network density applied to citations among all the patents that
have issued in the particular technology area during the 10 years prior to the date of
potential entry. We use citations at the U.S. patent office, both because these are richer
(averaging 7 or so cites per patent during this period versus 3 for the EPO) and also to
minimize correlation with the thickets measure, which is based on EPO data.13
The network density measure is computed as follows: in any year t, there are Nkt patents
that have been applied for in technology area k between 1975 and year t. Each of these
patents can cite any of the patents that were applied for earlier, which implies that the
maximum number of citations within the technology area is given by Nkt(Nkt-1)/2. We
count the actual number of citations made and normalize them by this quantity, scaling
the measure by one million for visibility, given its small size.

Patent Thickets
The third prediction of our model is that greater potential for hold-up reduces entry. We
measure the potential for hold-up in patent thickets using the triples count proposed by


12   See von Graevenitz et al. (2013) for a more extensive discussion of this variable in the literature.
13 It is important to emphasize that although patent offices cooperate and share search reports citations
listed on U.S. patents are largely proposed by the applicant, whilst the citations listed on EPO and IPO
patents are inserted by the examiner. This explains why the two measures are not highly correlated.



                                                        13
von Graevenitz et al. (2011). This is a narrower interpretation of this measure than in
von Graevenitz et al. (2013), where it was used as a proxy for complexity and hold-up
potential together.14 In contrast, our model separates the effect of previously existing
patent thickets on entry from that of technological complexity. The hold-up potential of
thickets is captured by measuring how often patent applicants in a technology area
simultaneously face patents that overlap with and block their own applications from
firms that also block each-other’s patent applications. This is more likely to happen in
complex technologies, but does not necessarily arise as a result of complexity. Hence we
use separate measures of complexity and hold-up potential.
The triples measure is a count of the number of fully connected triads on the set of
firms’ critical patent citations. At time t each unidirectional link between two firms A
and B corresponds to one or more critical references to firm A’s patents in the set of
patents applied for by firm B in the years t, t-1 and t-2. These critical references are
obtained from examiner search reports issued by the EPO and represent prior art that
calls in question novelty and/or the inventive step of the patent application under
examination.15 Triples are then formed by groups of three firms where each firm has at
least one patent that is cited as critical prior art in the search report for at least one
patent held by each of the other two firms. That is, in a triple, each firm holds patents
that potentially block the other firms’ patents creating mutually blocking triads.
We use the same measure of triples as Harhoff et al. (2015), which contains all triples in
each technology area. The citation data used is extracted from PATSTAT (October 2011
edition).16 We normalize the count of triples by aggregate patenting in the same sector,
so that the triples variable represents the intensity with which firms potentially hold
blocking patents on each other relative to aggregate patenting activity in the technology.
The triples measure has been used in a number of papers since it was suggested by von
Graevenitz et al. (2011). They show that counts of triples by technical area are
significantly higher for technologies classified as complex than for areas classified as


14In Appendix D, we show that this confounded the separate effects of complexity and hold-up. Including
the measures of complexity and hold-up potential proposed here in their empirical model, we find that
the effects on patenting incentives predicted by our theoretical model for complexity (positive) and hold-
up potential (negative) apply.
15These are the so-called X- and Y-references in EPO search reports. According to 9.2.1 of the EPO’s
Guidelines for Examination: “Category "Y" is applicable where a document is such that a claimed
invention cannot be considered to involve an inventive step when the document is combined with one or
more other documents of the same category, such combination being obvious to a person skilled in the
art. If a document explicitly refers to another document as providing more detailed information on
certain features and the combination of these documents is considered particularly relevant, the primary
document should be indicated by the letter "X".”
16   Triples data was kindly provided by Harhoff et al. (2015).



                                                      14
discrete by Cohen et al. (2000). Fischer and Henkel (2012) find that the measure
predicts patent acquisitions by Non-Practicing Entities. Graevenitz et al. (2013) use the
measure to study patenting incentives in patent thickets and Harhoff et al. (2015) show
that opposition to patent applications falls in patent thickets, particularly for patents of
those firms that are caught up in thickets.
As a robustness check, we have also explored the use of duples, i.e. the count of mutual
blocking relationships, to measure hold-up potential. Combining both measures in one
regression leads to thorny problems of interpretation. Taken alone the measure has
similar effects as the triples measure in this context.
                                              [Table 2 here]

Covariates
It is well known that firm size and industry are important predictors of whether a firm
patents at all (Bound et al. 1984 for U.S. data). Hall et al. (2013) show this for UK
patenting during the period studied here. Therefore, in all of our regressions we control
for firm size, industrial sector, and year of observation. We include the logarithm of the
firm’s reported assets and a set of year dummies in all the regressions.17 To control for
industrial sector, we stratify by industry, which effectively means that each industry has
its own hazard function, which is shifted up or down by the other regressors.
We also expect the likelihood that a firm will enter a particular technology area to
depend on its prior patenting experience overall, as well as its age. Long-established
firms are less likely to be exploring new technology areas in which to compete. Thus we
include the logarithm of firm age and the logarithm of the stock of prior patents applied
for in any technology by the firm, lagged one year to avoid any endogeneity concerns.
The variables on firm size and patent stock also allow us to test Prediction 4 about the
effect of incumbency advantage on entry.

3.2 Descriptive Statistics
Our estimation sample contains about 20,000 firms and 700,000 firm-TF34 sector
combinations. During the 2002-2009 period there are about 10,000 entries into
patenting for the first time in a technology area by these firms. Table C-1 in the appendix
shows the distribution of the number of entries per firm: 2,531 enter one class, and the
rest enter more than one. Table C-2 shows the population of UK firms obtained from
FAME in our industries, together with the shares in each industry that have applied for a
UK or European patent during the 2001-2009 period. These shares range from over 10
per cent in Pharmaceuticals and R&D Services to less than 0.1 per cent in Construction,



 The choice of assets as a size measure reflects the fact that it is the only size variable available for the
17

majority of the firms in the FAME dataset.



                                                      15
Oil and Gas Services, Real Estate, Law, and Accounting.

3.3 Empirical Model
We use hazard models to estimate the probability of entry into a technology area. The
models express the probability that a firm enters into patenting in a certain area
conditional on not having entered yet as a function of the firm’s characteristics and the
time since the firm was “at risk,” which is the time since the founding of the firm. In
some cases, our data do not go back as far as the founding date of the firm, and in these
cases the data are “left-censored.” When we do not observe the entry of the firm into a
particular technology sector by the last year (2009), the data is referred to as “right-
censored.”
In Appendix E, we discuss the choice of the survival models that we use for analysis,
how to interpret the results, and present some robustness checks. We estimate two
classes of failure or survival models: 1) proportional hazard, where the hazard of failure
over time has the same shape for all firms, but the overall level is proportional to an
index that depends on firm characteristics; and 2) accelerated failure time, where the
survival rate is accelerated or decelerated by the characteristics of the firm. In the body
of the paper we present results using the well-known Cox proportional hazards model
stratified by industry. The effect of the stratification is that we allow firms in each of the
industries to have a different distribution of the time until entry into patenting conditional on
the regressors. That is, each industry has its own “failure” time distribution, where failure is
defined as entry into patenting in a technology area, but the level of this distribution is also
modified by the firm’s size, aggregate patenting in the technology, network density, and the
triples density.
Appendix Table E-1 shows exploratory regressions made using various survival models.
None of the choices made large differences to the coefficients of interest, for instance results
from the accelerated failure time models were similar to those of the Cox proportional
hazards model, but the estimated effects are somewhat larger (shown in Table E-1).
As indicated earlier, our data for estimation are for the 2002-2009 period, but many
firms have been at risk of patenting for many years prior to that. The oldest firm in our
dataset was founded in 1856 and the average founding year was 1992. Because the EPO
was only founded in 1978, we chose to use that year as the earliest date any of our firms
is at risk of entering into patenting. That is, we defined the initial year as the maximum
of the founding year and 1978. Table E-2 in the appendix presents estimates of our
model using 1900 instead of 1978 as the earliest at risk year and finds little difference
in the estimates.18 We conclude that the precise assumption of the initial period is



18The main difference is in the firm age coefficient. Because the models are nonlinear, this coefficient is
identified even in the presence of year dummies and vintage/cohort (which is implied by the survival


                                                     16
innocuous. Our assumption amounts to assuming that the shape of the hazard for firms
founded between 1856 and 1978 but otherwise identical is the same during the 2002-
2009 period.


4    Results

Our estimates of the model for entry into patenting are shown in Table 3. All
regressions control for size, age, and industry. Both size and age are strongly positively
associated with entry into patenting in a new technological area. Our indicator of
technological opportunity and technology class size, the log of current patent
applications in the technology class, is also positively associated with entry into that
class, as predicted by our model.
Column 3 of Table 3 contains the basic result from our data and estimation, which is
fully consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model: greater complexity as
measured by citation network density increases the probability of entry into a
technology area (Prediction 2), as does technological opportunity (Prediction 1),
measured both as prior patenting in the class and as growth in the relevant science
literature. Controlling for both technological opportunity and complexity, firms are
discouraged from entry into areas with a greater density of triple relationships among
existing firms (Prediction 3). We interpret this latter result as an indicator of the
discouraging effect of hold-up possibilities or the legal costs associated with negotiation
of rights or defense in the case of litigation.
We were concerned that our network density (complexity) and triples density (hold-up
potential) measures might be too closely related to convey separate information, but we
found that the raw correlation between these two variables was -0.001. To check for the
impact of potential correlation conditional on year, industry, and the other variables, in
columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 we included these two measures of complexity/thickets
separately and found that although the coefficients were very slightly lower in absolute
value, the results still hold, although it is clear that the aggregate class size is correlated
negatively with the triples density via the denominator of the density (compare the
change in the log (patents in class) coefficient between columns 1 and 2).
As we show in Appendix E, the estimated coefficients in the table are estimates of the
elasticity of the yearly hazard rate with respect to the variable, and do not depend on
the industry specific proportional hazard. A one standard deviation increase in the log
of network density is associated with a 32 percent increase in the hazard of entry
(0.13*2.78), while a one standard deviation in the log of triples density is associated


model formulation). However it will be highly sensitive to the assumptions about vintage due to the age-
year-cohort identity.



                                                   17
with a 20 percent decrease in the hazard of entry (0.14*1.44). Thus the differences
across these technology areas in the willingness of firms to enter them is substantial,
bearing in mind that the average probability of entry is only about 1.5 per cent in this
sample.
                                      [Table 3 here]
There are fixed costs to patenting, and a firm may be more likely to enter into patenting
in a new area if it already patents in another area. To test this idea, in the fourth column
of Table 3, we add the logarithm of past patenting by the firm. Inline with Prediction 4,
firms with a greater prior patenting history are indeed more likely to enter a new
technology area – doubling a firm’s past patents leads to an almost 100% higher hazard
of entry.
In the last column we interact the log of assets with the log of patents, the log of
network density, the growth of non-patent literature, and the log of triples density to
see whether these effects vary by firm size. The results show that the network density
and technological opportunity effects decline slightly with firm size. The triples density
effect does not show any size relationship, suggesting that hold-up concerns affect firms
of all sizes proportionately. We show this graphically in Figure 1, which overlays the
coefficients as a function of firm size on the actual size distribution of our firms. From
the graph one can see that the impact of aggregate patenting in a sector is higher and
more variable than the impact of the network density, and that both fall to zero for the
largest firms. Growth in non-patent literature is positively associated with technology
entry for small firms, but negatively for large firms, suggesting the role played by the
smaller firms in newer technologies based on science. Large firms seem not to be as
active in these areas. Controlling for all these features of a technology, the impact of
triples density is uniformly negative across firm size, which contradicts the view that
the potential for hold-up discourages entry by smaller firms more than by larger firms.

4.1 Robustness
One concern we may have with the relationship between entry and the triples variable
is simultaneity. That is, technology areas with lots of entry may also be prone to a
higher triples density, just because of the entries. To address this possibility, we use the
aggregate form of our entry regression. For each year we regress the log of the number
of first time entries in each technology-industry sector combination on the
characteristics of the technology class together with industry and year dummies. As
instruments for the triples density, we use the median examination lag in the
technology for patents applied for 5 and 6 years prior to the current year, which is long
enough so that most of them will have been granted, rejected, or withdrawn. The idea is
that classes with long examination lags may also be those where it is more difficult to
assess patentability, leading to the hold-up potential captured by the triples proxy
variable. We find that the instrumental variables regression easily passes the


                                            18
specification tests for under-, weak and over-identification, justifying our choice of
instruments.
Table 4 shows the results, both ordinary least squares and instrumental variables.19
Note that we do not expect results to be identical when comparing the aggregate
regressions to individual firm-level hazard rate estimations, as the functional forms of
the models differ. However, the results are similar in sign to those in column 3 of Table
3, with the exception of the technological opportunity coefficient (the past five-year
growth in non-patent-literature references) which has the opposite sign. For our
purposes, interest centers on the coefficient of triples density. The least squares
estimate of the elasticity is negative and implies a 12 per cent reduction in entry per
year when the triples density increases by one standard deviation. Instrumenting this
variable triples its coefficient, which suggests that our hazard rate estimates may by an
underestimate of the true impact of potential hold-up on entry.
Table E-2 in the appendix explores some variations of the sample used for estimation in
Table 3. Column 1 of Table E-2 is the same as column 4 of Table 3 for comparison. The
first change (column 2) was to add back all the technology-industry combinations
where Lybbert and Zolas (2012) find no patenting in their data and where there was no
entry by any UK firm from the relevant industry into that technology category. These
observations are about 20 per cent of the sample. The impact of network density on
entry is weaker, but the impact of triples density and the technological opportunity
variables is considerably stronger. That is, technology area-industry combinations with
no patenting are also those where the technology area displays low technological
opportunity.
Next we removed all the firms with assets greater than 12.5 million pounds, to check
whether large firms were responsible for our findings.20 This removed about 2 per cent
of the 20,000 firms. Column 3 of Table E-2 shows that the results do not change a great
deal, although they are somewhat stronger. In column 4, we removed the
telecommunications technology sector from the estimation, because it is such a large
triples outlier. Once again, there was little change to the estimates. The last column of
Table E-2 shows the results of defining the minimum entry year as 1900. With the
exception of firm age, the coefficients are nearly identical to those in column 1 of the
table.



19We also estimated this model by LIML and GMM, with almost no change in the resulting coefficients
(not shown).
20 12.5 million pounds is a cutoff based on the definition of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs)
as firms with fewer than 250 employees. We do not have employment for all our firms, so we assume that
assets are approximately 50 thousand pounds per employee in order to compute this measure. For small
firms only, this yields an assets cutoff of 2.5 million pounds.



                                                  19
5   Conclusion

Patent thickets arise for a multitude of reasons; they are mainly driven by an increase in
the number of patent filings and concomitant reductions in patent quality (that is, the
extent to which the patent satisfies the requirements of patentability) as well as
increased technological complexity and interdependence of technological components.
The theoretical analysis of patent thickets (Shapiro, 2001) and the qualitative evidence
provided by the FTC in a number of reports (FTC, 2003; 2011) suggest that thickets can
impose significant costs on some firms. The subsequent literature has focused on the
measurement of thickets (e.g. Graevenitz et al. 2011; Ziedonis, 2004) and has linked
thickets to changes in firms’ intellectual property strategies in a number of dimensions.
There is still a lack of evidence on the effect of patent thickets as well as their welfare
implications at the aggregate level.
The empirical analysis of the effects of patent thickets must contend with two
challenges: first, patent thickets have to be measured and secondly, effects of thickets
must be separated from effects of other factors that are correlated with the growth of
thickets, in particular technological complexity.
This paper confronts both challenges. We show that our empirical measure for the
density of thickets captures effects of patent thickets predicted by theory. We separate
the impact of patent thickets on entry from effects of technological opportunity and
complexity and show that thickets reduce entry into patenting. Controlling for
technological opportunity and complexity is important because both are correlated with
entry into patenting and the presence of thickets. It is also worth emphasizing that our
measure of thickets is purged of effects that are driven by patenting trends in particular
technologies. That is, our results are not due to the level of invention and technological
progress within a technology field.
Our results demonstrate that patent thickets significantly reduce entry into those
technology areas in which growing complexity and growing opportunity increase the
underlying demand for patent protection. These are the technology areas, which are
associated most with productivity growth in the knowledge economy. However, the
welfare consequences of our finding are unclear. Reduced entry into new technology
areas could be welfare-enhancing: As is well known from the industrial organization
literature, entry into a market may be excessive if entry creates negative externalities
for active firms, for instance due to business stealing. This is likely to be true of
patenting too. Furthermore, Arora et al. (2008) show that the patent premium does not
cover the costs of patenting for the average patent (except for pharmaceuticals). These
and related facts might lead one to conclude that lower entry into patenting is likely to
increase welfare and that thickets raise welfare by reducing entry.
In contrast, reduced entry into patenting in new technology areas may also be welfare-
reducing, for at least two reasons. First, there is the obvious argument that the benefits
from more innovation may exceed any business stealing costs (as has been shown
                                             20
empirically in the past by others, e.g., Bloom et al. 2013), so that some desirable
innovation may be deterred by high entry costs. Even if this were not true, there is no
reason to believe that firms that do not enter into patenting due to thickets are those we
wish to deter. Given the incumbency advantage, it is likely that the failure to enter into
patenting in these areas reflects less innovation by those who bring the most original
ideas, that is, by those who are inventing “outside the box.”


References

Allison, J.R., M.A. Lemley, and D. Schwartz, 2015. Our Divided Patent System. The
     University of Chicago Law Review 82(3): 1073-1154.
Amir, R. and V. E. Lambson, 2000. On the effects of entry in Cournot markets. The Review
   of Economic Studies 67(2): 235–254.
Arora, A., M. Ceccagnoli, and W.M. Cohen, 2008. R&D and the Patent Premium.
    International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(5): 1153-1179.
Berry, S., 1992. Estimation of a model of entry in the airline industry, Econometrica 60:
   889-917.
Bessen, J., and E. Maskin, 2009. Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation. RAND
   Journal of Economics 40: 611-635.
Bessen, J. M. Meurer, and J. Ford, 2011. The Private and Social Costs of Patent Trolls.
   Boston, MA: Boston University School of Law, Law and Economics Research Paper
   No. 11-45.
Bessen, J. and M. Meurer, 2013. The Patent Litigation Explosion. Loyola University
    Chicago Law Journal 45(2): 401-440.
Bessen, J. and M. Meurer, 2008. Patent failure: how judges, bureaucrats, and lawyers put
   innovators at risk. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. van Reenen, 2013. Idenitfying technology spillovers
   and product market rivalry, Econometrica 81 (4): 1347–1393.
Bound, J., C. Cummins, Z. Griliches, B.H. Hall, and A. Jaffe, 1984. Who does R&D and who
   patents? R&D Patents and productivity, Z. Griliches (ed.). Chicago, University of
   Chicago Press.
Bresnahan, T. and P. Reiss, 1991. Entry and competition in concentrated markets,
   Journal of Political Economy 99: 977-1009.
Chien, C. and M. A. Lemley, 2012. Patent Holdup, the ITC, and the Public Interest. Cornell
    Law Review 98(1).
Clark, D.J. and K. Konrad, 2008. Fragmented Property Rights and Incentives for R&D,
    Management Science 54(5): 969-981.

                                            21
Cockburn, I.M. and M.J. MacGarvie, 2011. Entry and Patenting in the Software Industry.
   Management Science 57: 915–933.
Cohen, W.M., R.R. Nelson, and J.P. Walsh, 2000. Protecting their Intellectual Assets:
   Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not).
   Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 7552.
Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro, 2008. How strong are weak patents? American Economic
    Review 98: 1347–1369.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 2003. To Promote Innovation - The Proper Balance of
   Competition and Patent Law and Policy. Washington, DC: GPO. Available at
   http://www.ftc.gov/reports/innovation/P040101PromotingInnovationandCompet
   itionrpt0704.pdf
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 2011. The Evolving IP Marketplace:. Aligning Patent
   Notice and Remedies With Competition. Washington, DC. Available at
   http://www.ftc.gov/os/2011/03/110307patentreport.pdf
Fershtman, C. and M. I. Kamien, 1992. Cross licensing of complementary technologies
    International Journal of Industrial Organization 10(3): 329-348.
Fink C., M. Khan, and H. Zhou (2013). Exploring the worldwide patent surge. WIPO
    Economic Research Working Paper No. 12.
Fischer, T. and J. Henkel, 2012. Patent trolls on markets for technology–An empirical
    analysis of NPEs’ patent acquisitions. Research Policy, 41(9): 1519-1533.
Goolsbee, A. (1998). Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and
   Engineers? The American Economic Review, 88(2): 298-302.
Graevenitz, von G., S. Wagner, and D. Harhoff, 2011. How to measure patent thickets—A
   novel approach. Economics Letters 111: 1–4.
Graevenitz, von G., S. Wagner, and D. Harhoff 2013. Incidence and growth of patent
   thickets: the impact of technological opportunities and complexity. Journal of
   Industrial Economics, 61(3): 521-563.
Hall, B.H., C. Helmers, M. Rogers, and V. Sena, 2013. The importance (or not) of patents
    to UK firms. Oxford Economic Papers 65 (3): 603-629.
Harhoff, D., G. von Graevenitz, and S. Wagner, 2015. Conflict Resolution, Public Goods
   and Patent Thickets. Management Science, forthcoming.
Henderson, R., 1993. Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to Radical
   Innovation: Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Equipment Industry,
   The RAND Journal of Economics 24(2): 248-270.
Jaffe, A. and J. Lerner, 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents. Princeton University Press.
Joshi, A.M. and A. Nerkar, 2001. When do strategic alliances inhibit innovation by firms?
    Evidence from patent pools in the global optical disc industry. Strategic
                                          22
    Management Journal 32(11): 1139-1160.
Lerner, J., 1995. Patenting in the shadow of competitors. Journal of Law and Economics
   38: 463-495.
Lerner, J. and J. Tirole, 2004. Efficient Patent Pools. American Economic Review 94(3):
   691-711.
Lerner, J., M. Strojwas, and J. Tirole. 2007. The design of patent pools: the determinants
   of licensing rules, The RAND Journal of Economics 38(3): 610-625.
Lerner, J. and J. Tirole, 2013. Standard-Essential Patents, NBER Working Paper 19664.
Lewis, J.I.D. and R.M. Mott, 2013. The sky is not falling: Navigating the smartphone
   patent thicket, WIPO Magazine, February 2013,
   http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2013/01/article_0002.html
Lybbert, T. J. and N. J. Zolas, 2014. Getting Patents & Economic Data to Speak to Each
   Other: An ‘Algorithmic Links with Probabilities’ Approach for Joint Analyses of
   Patenting & Economic Activity. Research Policy 43(3): 530-542.
Milgrom P. and J. Roberts, 1994. Comparing equilibria. American Economic Review
    84(3): 441–459.
Mulligan C. and T. B. Lee, 2012. Scaling the patent system. NYU Annual Survey of
    American Law 68: 289-317.
Schmoch, U., 2009. Document IPC/CE/41/5, Annex, Conception of a Technology
   Classification for Country Comparisons, 41th session of the IPC Committee of Experts.
   1–15.
Shapiro, C., 2001. Navigating the patent thicket: Cross licenses, patent pools, and
   standard setting. Innovation policy and the economy 1: 119–150.
Teece, D., E. Sherry, and P. Grindley, 2014. Patents and "Patent Wars" in Wireless
   Communications: An Economic Assessment, Digiworld Economic Journal 95: 85-98.
U.S. Department of Justice (USDoJ), Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 2007. Antitrust
     Enforcement and Intellectual Property Rights: Promoting Innovation and Competition,
     1–217.
Vives, X., 2005. Complementarities and games: New developments. Journal of Economic
    Literature XLIII(2): 437–479.
Ziedonis, R.H., 2004. Don't Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and the
    Patent Acquisition Strategies of Firms. Management Science 50: 804–820.




                                            23
                                      Table 1
            Patenting by Fame firms on Patstat (priority years 2002‐2009)

                                        Weighted by #owners & #classes*               Sector shares
Technology categories                    GB pats     EP pats      Total              GB pats    EP pats
Elec machinery, energy                      1,321      1,101      2,422                 6.1%        4.4%
Audio‐visual tech                             633        549      1,182                 2.9%        2.2%
Telecommunications                          1,181      1,206      2,386                 5.5%        4.8%
Digital communication                         590        732      1,323                 2.7%        2.9%
Basic comm processes                          302        146        447                 1.4%        0.6%
Computer technology                         1,481      1,302      2,783                 6.8%        5.2%
IT methods for mgt                            256        224        480                 1.2%        0.9%
Semiconductors                                269        248        518                 1.2%        1.0%
Optics                                        392        481        873                 1.8%        1.9%
Measurement                                 1,216      1,458      2,674                 5.6%        5.8%
Analysis bio materials                        132        426        557                 0.6%        1.7%
Control                                       592        542      1,134                 2.7%        2.2%
Medical technology                            996      1,561      2,558                 4.6%        6.3%
Organic fine chemistry                        182      1,538      1,720                 0.8%        6.2%
Biotechnology                                 193        950      1,143                 0.9%        3.8%
Pharmaceuticals                               277      1,876      2,153                 1.3%        7.5%
Polymers                                      114        280        394                 0.5%        1.1%
Food chemistry                                 88        458        547                 0.4%        1.8%
Basic materials chemistry                     314      1,050      1,363                 1.5%        4.2%
Materials metallurgy                          161        318        479                 0.7%        1.3%
Surface tech coating                          287        284        571                 1.3%        1.1%
Chemical engineering                          507        724      1,231                 2.3%        2.9%
Environmental tech                            296        344        640                 1.4%        1.4%
Handling                                      996        813      1,809                 4.6%        3.3%
Machine tools                                 428        356        784                 2.0%        1.4%
Engines,pumps,turbine                         887        942      1,829                 4.1%        3.8%
Textile and paper mach                        235        304        539                 1.1%        1.2%
Other spec machines                           742        623      1,365                 3.4%        2.5%
Thermal process and app                       410        261        671                 1.9%        1.0%
Mechanical elements                         1,149        854      2,002                 5.3%        3.4%
Transport                                   1,063        930      1,993                 4.9%        3.7%
Furniture, games                            1,064        612      1,675                 4.9%        2.5%
Other consumer goods                          630        507      1,137                 2.9%        2.0%
Civil engineering                           2,237        960      3,196               10.3%         3.8%
Total                                      21,619     24,959     46,578
Electrical engineering                      6,032      5,508     11,540                27.9%           22.1%
Instruments                                 3,328      4,468      7,796                15.4%           17.9%
Chemistry                                   2,418      7,822     10,240                11.2%           31.3%
Mechanical engineering                      5,910      5,083     10,993                27.3%           20.4%
Other Fields                                3,930      2,079      6,009                18.2%            8.3%
* Weighting by owners does not affect the numbers, since they all get added back into the same cell.
Weighting by classes means that a patent in multiple TF34 sectors is downweighted in each of the sectors.
                                       Table 2
          UKIPO and EPO patents: numbers, triples and network density 2002‐2009
                                                                                             US Citation Average non‐
                                     Aggregate    Number of    Triples per                     network         patent
Technology categories               EPO patents EPO triples@ 1000 patents                      density#    references
Elec machinery, energy                   56,714          7751        136.7                          39.4        0.420
Audio‐visual tech                        34,131        13268         388.7                          63.5        0.449
Telecommunications                       62,288        27049         434.3                          79.1        1.235
Digital communication                    36,975        16529         447.0                         178.5        1.397
Basic comm processes                     10,035          2289        228.1                         110.8        1.162
Computer technology                      60,577        21956         362.4                          54.3        1.529
IT methods for mgt                        9,312            34          3.7                         144.2        0.920
Semiconductors                           24,544          9974        406.4                          94.0        1.070
Optics                                   28,458          7767        272.9                          58.0        0.806
Measurement                              44,320          2503         56.5                          45.6        1.000
Analysis bio materials                   11,787            26          2.2                         319.4        7.040
Control                                  17,612           308         17.5                         112.1        0.445
Medical technology                       66,062          4411         66.8                         206.2        0.614
Organic fine chemistry                   41,137          3993         97.1                          32.9        5.253
Biotechnology                            33,192           365         11.0                          89.6       17.332
Pharmaceuticals                          52,671        11222         213.1                          76.6        6.391
Macromolecular chemistry                 21,307          3722        174.7                          92.7        1.236
Food chemistry                            9,955           140         14.1                         326.3        2.701
Basic materials chemistry                27,679          1929         69.7                          84.8        1.498
Materials metallurgy                     16,935           405         23.9                          91.7        1.130
Surface tech coating                     17,429           363         20.8                          59.4        0.803
Chemical engineering                     24,494           443         18.1                          66.2        0.797
Environmental tech                       12,708           858         67.5                         206.9        0.487
Handling                                 30,343           252          8.3                          66.9        0.137
Machine tools                            24,040           508         21.1                          64.0        0.191
Engines,pumps,turbine                    32,602          6678        204.8                          85.4        0.210
Textile and paper mach                   23,145          2640        114.1                          84.9        0.312
Other spec machines                      29,826           319         10.7                          65.7        0.422
Thermal process and app                  15,290           335         21.9                         146.3        0.189
Mechanical elements                      32,716          1301         39.8                          57.8        0.168
Transport                                48,875        10929         223.6                          68.3        0.203
Furniture, games                         19,847           206         10.4                         107.6        0.166
Other consumer goods                     19,734           301         15.3                         105.6        0.194
Civil engineering                        28,817           171          5.9                         117.1        0.150
Total                                 1,025,555      160,945         156.9                         100.3    #REF!
Electrical engineering                  294,575        98,850        335.6                          60.4        1.042
Instruments                             168,239        15,015         89.2                          96.3        1.181
Chemistry                               257,507        23,440         91.0                          71.1        4.977
Mechanical engineering                  236,836        22,962         97.0                          70.1        0.227
Other Fields                             68,398           678          9.9                         110.8        0.167
@ Triples based on all EPO patenting, priority years 2002‐2009 (see text for definition and further explanation).
# Network density is 1,000,000 times the number of within technology citations between 1976 and the
current year divided by the potential number of such citations.
                                                  Table 3
                               Hazard of entry into patenting in a TF34 Class
                           538,452 firm‐TF34 observations with 10,665 entries (20,384 firms)

Variable                                                   Cox Proportional Hazard Model
Log (network density)              0.115***                               0.127***          0.107***          0.184***
                                    (0.024)                                (0.023)            (0.021)           (0.052)
Log (triples density                                  ‐0.138***          ‐0.139***          ‐0.101***         ‐0.100***
     in class)                                          (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.010)           (0.023)
Log (patents in class)             0.317***            0.506***           0.545***           0.514***          0.822***
                                    (0.025)             (0.031)            (0.030)            (0.027)           (0.071)
5‐year growth of non‐              0.060***            0.084***           0.072***             ‐0.009            0.103*
   patent refs in class)            (0.022)             (0.022)            (0.022)            (0.021)           (0.056)
Log assets                         0.270***            0.270***           0.270***           0.142***          0.513***
                                    (0.011)             (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.083)
Log firm age in years              1.135***            1.135***           1.136***           0.773***          0.767***
                                    (0.104)             (0.104)            (0.104)            (0.130)           (0.131)
Log (pats applied for                                                                        0.836***          0.836***
 by firm previously)                                                                          (0.021)           (0.021)
Log (network density)                                                                                           ‐0.010*
   * Log assets                                                                                                 (0.006)
Log (triples density)                                                                                            ‐0.001
   * Log assets                                                                                                 (0.003)
Log (patents in class)                                                                                        ‐0.040***
   * Log assets                                                                                                 (0.008)
Log (average NPL refs)                                                                                         ‐0.015**
   * Log assets                                                                                                 (0.006)
Industry dummies                  stratified#        stratified#         stratified#        stratified#       stratified#
Year dummies                          yes                yes                 yes                yes               yes
Log likelihood                       ‐65.96             ‐65.86              ‐65.84             ‐58.69            ‐58.67
Degrees of freedom                     12                 12                  13                 14                18
Chi‐squared                         1270.6             1429.1              1517.2             3465.1            3458.6

The sample is matched on size class, sector, and age class. Estimates are weighted by sampling probability.
Coefficients for the hazard of entry into a patenting class are shown.
Standard errors are clustered on firm. *** (**) denote significance at the 1% (5%) level.
Time period is 2002‐2009 and minimum entry year is 1978. Sample is UK firms with nonmissing assets, all patenting firms
and a matched sample of non‐patenting firms
# Estimates are stratified by industry ‐ each industry has its own baseline hazard.
                                      Table 4
          Aggregate regressions for entry into patenting classes 2001‐2009
                       9 years*33 tech classes*26 sectors = 7722 observations
Dependent variable                        Log number of first time entries by a firm into class by sector
                                                    OLS                                  IV#
                                           Coef.      s.e.*                  Coef.          s.e.*

Log (US network density)                   0.018          0.029                  0.055         0.032        *
Log (triples density)                      ‐0.079         0.010        ***       ‐0.251        0.042       ***
Log (patent apps in class)                 0.247          0.030        ***       0.469         0.059       ***
Past 5 year growth in NPL refs             ‐0.099         0.015        ***       ‐0.101        0.016       ***
R‐squared                                              0.478                                0.389
Standard error                                         0.564                                0.608

*Standard errors are clustered on class and industrial sector (which allows free correlation over time).
# Instruments are lag 5 and 6 median exam duration for patents in the class.
Log of triples density is treated as endogenous in the IV and LIML estimates
                                                            Figure 1
              1.0                                                                                               20000

                                                                                                                18000
              0.8
                                                                                                                16000
              0.6                                                                                               14000




                                                                                                                        Number of firms
                                                                                                                12000
Coefficient




              0.4
                                                                                                                10000
              0.2
                                                                                                                8000

              0.0                                                                                               6000

                                                                                                                4000
              ‐0.2
                                                                                                                2000

              ‐0.4                                                                                              0



                                                   Firm assets (millions of GBP)

                     Number of firms                 Aggregate patenting coefficient   Network density coefficient
                     Triples density coefficient     5‐year growth in NPL refs
                                                    Appendix
A     Previous Results
To help the reader this appendix summarizes a number of results derived by Graevenitz et al. (2013) as
well as some additional results that are useful.


A.1     The Probability of Patenting a Facet
The probability pk that a firm obtains a patent on a facet is:

                                                   NO         NYO −j         NO
                                                                               Y
                                                   X      1  NO            fl        fm
                pk (f6k , F, NO (O, o6k , N )) =                        1−                        .         (A.1)
                                                   j=0
                                                         j+1 j   l=0
                                                                           Fk m=N −j Fk
                                                                                          O



Then, the expected number of patents a firm owns when it applyies for fi facets is γk ≡ pk fi .
     For the comparative statics of entry stage it is useful to know that the elasticity of pk w.r.t. F is negative
if φ̂k < 12 :

                             NO                                             
                       ∂pk X      1  NO            NO −i i         NO NO − i
                           =            (1 − φ̂k )      φ̂k (−1)      −                                      (A.2)
                       ∂Fk   i=0
                                 i+1 i                             Fk   F − fˆ

Then the elasticity pk ,Fk is:
                                                                                     
                                                               φ̂k − 21 (1 +    1
                                                                               NO
                                                                                  )
                                           pk ,Fk =NO2                                                      (A.3)
                                                                    1 − φ̂k

A.2     The Expected Number of Rival Investors
The expected number of rival firms NO that undertake R&D on the same technology opportunity as firm i
can be expressed as a sum of products:

                                           N      NY−j             N
                                          X      N                  Y
                                     NO =     j          (1 − ωl )        ωm .                               (A.4)
                                          j=0
                                                 j   l=0           m=N −i


Graevenitz et al. (2013) show that NO is increasing in ωn , where n ∈ {l, m}.
   In the second stage equilibrium NO can be rewritten as:

                                              N     
                                             X      N
                                        NO =     j    (1 − ω̂k )(N −j) ω̂kj .                                (A.5)
                                             j=0
                                                    j




                                                                1
Incumbency Advantage

In the case in which there are incumbents and entrants the expected number of rival firms NO has to
rewritten slightly. To do this define:

                               ωnI ≡ oIi O                                     ωnE ≡ oE
                                                                                       
                                                                                      i O                (A.6)

    We assume that in a previous period N p firms entered and of these a fraction λ are still active. Then
the expected number of rival firms ÑO that undertake R&D on the same technology opportunity as firm i
is:

                       λN P      P                          N     
                       X         λN        J (N −j)
                                                             X      N
               ÑO =          j     (1 − ω̂k )         J j
                                                    (ω̂k ) +     j    (1 − ω̂kE )(N −j) (ω̂kE )j .       (A.7)
                       j=0
                                  j                          j=0
                                                                    j


A.3    The Expected Number of Facets Covered
In the second stage equilibrium the expected number of facets covered through the joint efforts of all firms
investing in a technological opportunity is:
                                                  h                       i
                                            ˜
                                            Fk = F 1 − (1 − φ̂k ) (NO +1)
                                                                                                         (A.8)

The derivative of this expression with respect to F is positive:

                                   ∂ F˜k              NO            
                                         = 1 − 1 − φ̂k       1 + φ̂k NO ≥ 0 .                            (A.9)
                                   ∂Fk

The elasticities of F˜k with respect to fk and F are:

                                                       φ̂k (1 − φ̂k )NO
                                           η̂k =                                                        (A.10)
                                                    1 − (1 − φ̂k )(NO +1)
                                                    1 − (1 − φ̂k )(NO ) (1 + φ̂j NO )
                                      ˆF̃k ,Fk =                                       .               (A.11)
                                                           1 − (1 − φ̂k )(NO +1)

which shows that 1 ≥ F˜k Fk ≥ 0 as the denominator in the fraction is always greater than the numerator. It
is useful to observe that the upper bound of the elasticity η̂k is decreasing in NO . To see this note that the
elasticity can be expressed as:

                                                             (1 − φ̂k )NO
                                  η̂k =                                               .               (A.12)
                                          (No + 1) 1 − φ̂k N2!o + φ̂2k No (N3!O −1) ...

                                                                                       
This shows that the upper bound of the elasticity decreases in NO : limφ̂k →0 ηk = 1 (NO + 1) ≤ 1. Here
we use the binomial expansion of (1 − φ̂k )No +1 . The expression also shows that the lower bound of ηk |φ̂k =1
is zero.




                                                                2
B     Results
This appendix contains derivations for the propositions set out in Section 2 of the paper.


B.1    Supermodularity of the Second Stage Game
This section sets out the main results needed to show that the second stage of game G∗ is supermodular.
    Consider the first order conditions that determine the equilibrium number of facets (fˆ) and technolog-
ical opportunities (ô):


    ∂πik                                                        ∂Cc
         = V ∆(sik ) − L(γik , sik ) − Co (ΣN
                                            j=1 oj ) − γik Ca −
                                              o
                                                                    =0 ,                                       (B.13)
    ∂oi                                                         ∂oi
                                                       h                         
    ∂πik   o i pk             ∆(sik )   ˜    ∂L                   d∆   ∂L i
         =           V µk ηik         − Fk         + Ca      + V     −      (1 − ηik ) = 0 .                   (B.14)
    ∂fi     F˜k                sik           ∂γik                dsik ∂sik

Now, consider the cross-partial derivatives which must be positive, if the second stage game is supermod-
ular. First, we derive the cross partial derivative with respect to firms’ own actions:

  ∂ 2 πik
                                                                                          
            pk                   ∆(sik )             ∂L                h d∆     ∂L i
          =             V µk ηik         − F˜k            + Ca        + V     −      (1 − ηik ) = 0         . (B.15)
  ∂oi ∂fi   F˜k                   sik                ∂γik                 dsik ∂sik

This expression corresponds to the first order condition (B.14) for the optimal number of facets.
   Now consider effects of rivals’ actions on firms’ own actions:
                       "                         #           "                                  #
  ∂ 2 πk     ∂ F˜k sik
                                                                                    
                          ∆                 ∂L       ∂pk fi  d∆         ∂L          ∂L
         =              V     (µk − ξik ) +        +           V      −       − F˜k        + Ca
 ∂oi ∂om    ∂om F˜k       sik               ∂sik     ∂om F˜k     dsik ∂sik            ∂γik
                                                                                                               (B.16)
                ∂Co
           −            ,
             ∂ΣN j=1 oj
                  o

                       "                           #           "                               #
  ∂ 2 πk     ∂ F˜k sik
                                                                                    
                            ∆                 ∂L       ∂pk fi  d∆       ∂L          ∂L
           =              V     (µk − ξik ) +        +           V     −      − F˜k        + Ca ,
 ∂oi ∂fm     ∂fm F˜k        sik               ∂sik     ∂fm F˜k     dsik ∂sik          ∂γik
                                                                                                               (B.17)
                   "                                                             #
  ∂ 2 πk   ∂ F˜k ∂V       ∂ 2V ˜             ∂L              ∂ 2 L sik
         =             +        F  η
                                  k ik −         −    C a +            (1 − ηik )
 ∂fi ∂om   ∂om ∂ F˜k ∂ F˜k 2               ∂γik             ∂sik 2 F˜k
                                                          "                                  #
           ∂ηik  ∆                    ∂L  ∂pk ∂ 2 L                    ∂ 2 L fi
         +       V     (µk − ξik ) +           −                  fi +             (1 − ηik ) ,                  (B.18)
           ∂om     sik                 ∂sik       ∂om ∂γik 2            ∂sik 2 F˜k
                "                                                                                                     #
  ∂ 2 πk   ∂ F˜k ∂V ∆                                   ∂ 2V
                                                                    ˜     ∆        ∂L            ∂ 2
                                                                                                     L s ik
         =                 ξik (1 − F˜k ,f ) + F˜k ,f +        2 Fk ηik      −        − Ca +              (1 − ηik )
 ∂fi ∂fm   ∂fm ∂ F˜k sik                                      ˜
                                                            ∂ Fk          s ik    ∂γ ik         ∂s    2 ˜
                                                                                                    ik Fk
                                                          "                                   #
           ∂ηik  ∆                    ∂L  ∂pk ∂ 2 L                    ∂ 2 L fi
         +       V     (µk − ξik ) +           −                  fi +             (1 − ηik )   .                (B.19)
           ∂fm     sik                 ∂sik       ∂fm ∂γik 2            ∂sik 2 F˜k

    The second stage game is supermodular, if the equations (B.16)-(B.19) are non-negative. The follow-

                                                            3
ing results show that the conditions noted in Section 2 above must hold simultaneously if the game is
supermodular.
    Using the first order condition (B.14), which will hold for any interior equilibrium, it can be shown
that:
              "                                    #                                    !
                 d∆        ∂L           ∂L                       ∆                 ∂L
                  V      −        − F˜k        + Ca     = −ηik V       (µk − ξik ) +        .       (B.20)
                    dsik ∂sik             ∂γik                     sik               ∂sik

                         ∂L
If V s∆ik (µk − ξik ) + ∂s
                              
                           ik
                                > 0, then the second term in the cross-partial derivatives (B.16) and (B.17) is the
product of two negative expressions, and then equation (B.17) is positive. Equation (B.16) is also positive
in a free entry equilibrium: the negative term at the end is less than the negative term in the derivative of
                                                                                       ∂Co         ∂Co
profits w.r.t. Nk in Section 2, which is otherwise the same as equation (B.16): ∂N       o ô
                                                                                              ô > ∂N o ô
                                                                                                           .
    Turning to equations (B.18) and (B.19) we can show that:

                            ∂ 2 F˜k fi   ∂ F˜k ∂ F˜k fi             ˜k  φk        
                    ∂ηik                                       −1 ∂ F
                         =             −                = −F˜k               + ηik                                   (B.21)
                    ∂om    ∂fi ∂om F˜k   ∂fi ∂om F˜k 2            ∂om 1 − φk
                            ∂ 2 F˜k fi   ∂ F˜k ∂ F˜k fi             ˜k  φk        
                    ∂ηik                                       −1 ∂ F
                         =             −                = −F˜k               + ηik                                   (B.22)
                    ∂fm    ∂fi ∂fm F˜k   ∂fi ∂fm F˜k 2            ∂fm 1 − φk

This result allows us to rewrite equations (B.18) and (B.19) as follows:
                   "                                                                                                     #
 ∂ 2 πk    1 ∂ F˜k                                                             ∂ 2V ˜            ∂ 2 L sik
                                                                  
                        ∆                   ∂L                   φ
        =             V     (µk − ξik ) +            1 − 2ηik −       +              2 F k ηik +            (1 − ηik )
∂fi ∂om   F˜k ∂om       sik                 ∂sik                1−φ            ∂ F˜k             ∂sik 2 F˜k
               "                                  #
          ∂pk ∂ 2 L          ∂ 2 L fi
        −             fi +              (1 − ηik ) ,                                                                 (B.23)
          ∂om ∂γik 2         ∂sik 2 F˜k
                   "                                                                                                #
 ∂ 2 πk    1 ∂ F˜k                                                             ∂ 2V ˜           ∂ 2 L sik
                                                                  
                        ∆                    ∂L                  φ
        =             V     (µk − ξik ) +            1 − 2ηik −       +              2 Fk ηik +            (1 − ηik )
∂fi ∂fm   F˜k ∂fm       sik                 ∂sik                1−φ            ∂ F˜k            ∂sik 2 F˜k
               "                                  #
          ∂pk ∂ 2 L          ∂ 2 L fi
        −             fi +              (1 − ηik )   .                                                               (B.24)
          ∂fm ∂γik 2         ∂sik 2 F˜k

                                                                                    ∆                     ∂L
                                                                                                                
Given assumptions (VF) and (LC) these two equations will be positive if V          sik
                                                                                       (µk   − ξik ) +   ∂sik
                                                                                                                    > 0 and
                
              φ
  1 − 2ηik − 1−φ   > 0. We analyze each condition in more detail next:

   1. Given our assumptions on the legal cost function (LC, eq. 4) the condition V 4(ŝ     k)
                                                                                               (µk − ξˆk + ∂ŝ
                                                                                                           ∂L
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                         ŝk                   k
                                                                                                                   >
                4(ŝk )
      0 ⇔ V ŝk (µk − ξˆk > − ∂ŝ    ∂L
                                       k
                                         implies that µk > ξˆk . The elasticity of the value function w.r.t.
      additional covered patents must exceed the elasticity of the portfolio benefits function w.r.t. the
      share of patents held by the firm. This condition is less restrictive than the assumption in Graevenitz
      et al. (2013) that µk > 1, since we are assuming that ξˆk < 1.

   2. (1 − 2η̂k ) − 1−φ̂kφ̂ > 0 ⇔ (1 − 2φ̂) > (1 − φ̂)(NO +1) . This holds for any φ̂k < 12 and No suffi-
                           k
      ciently large. These restrictions imply a setting in which the ownership of patents belonging to each
      opportunity is fragmented amongst many firms. It is more likely to arise if the technology is highly
      complex, otherwise the condition that φ̂k < 21 is less likely to hold.

                                                         4
    In Appendix B.4 we derive the conditions under which the equilibrium of game G∗ is unique. If there is
a unique solution to the optimization problem of the firm at which profits are maximized, then this requires
that ∂ 2 πk /∂ fˆ2 < 0. The restrictions that i) µk < 1 and ii) the share of overall profits which the firm obtains
is decreasing at the margin in the share of patents the firm holds (∂ 2 ∆/∂ŝ2k < 0) ensure that there is always
such a unique interior solution.
    In this game G∗ the comparative statics of patenting are the same as in the main model analyzed in
Graevenitz et al. (2013). Specifically we can show that the following effects hold in this game:

                               ∂ 2π         ∂ 2π         ∂ 2π         ∂ 2π
                                      > 0,         > 0,         < 0,         <0                            (B.25)
                              ∂oi ∂Fk      ∂fi ∂Fk      ∂oi ∂Ok      ∂fi ∂Ok

This implies that complexity of the technology increases firms’ patent applications while increased tech-
nological opportunity reduces firms’ patenting applications.


B.2    Effect of Hold-up on Patenting
Here we show that Proposition 2 holds. Consider the following cross-partial derivatives for the effects of
higher legal costs L due to hold-up:

                         ∂ 2 πk    ∂L(γ̂k , ŝk , hk )
                                =−                     <0 ,                                                (B.26)
                        ∂ô∂hk           ∂hk
                         ∂ 2 πk
                                          2
                                                                 ∂ 2L
                                                                                 
                                   ôpk ˜           ∂ L
                                =−        Fk                 +          (1 − η̂k ) < 0 .                   (B.27)
                        ∂ fˆ∂hk     F˜k           ∂γ̂k ∂hk     ∂ŝk ∂hk

The first of these conditions shows that the expected legal costs of hold-up reduce the number of opportu-
nities a firm invests in, in equilibrium. The second condition shows that firms with larger portfolios will be
more exposed to hold up and will benefit less from the share of patents they have patented per opportunity.
Both of these effects reduce the number of facets each firm applies for.


B.3    Free Entry Equilibirum
Proposition 3
There is a free entry equilibrium at which the marginal entrant can just break even, if R&D fixed costs per
opportunity (Co ) increase in the number of entrants.

   In a free entry equilibrium it must be the case that the following conditions hold:

                πk (ôk , fˆk , N̂k ) > 0            ∧                  πk (ôk , fˆk , N̂k + 1) < 0 .     (B.28)

   The effect of entry on profits at the first stage of game G∗ can be shown to be:

  ∂π(ô, fˆ)              ŝk ∂ F˜k
                                                                  
                  ∂NO                   ∆(ŝk )      ˜    ∂∆    ∂L
             = ô                    Vµ         − V (Fk )     −
   ∂Nk            ∂Nk     F˜k ∂NO        ŝk              ∂ŝk ∂ŝk




                                                         5
                                       "                                       #            !
                                ∂pk fˆ
                                                                   
                                                  ∂∆    ∂L            ∂L             ∂C o
                              +          V (F˜k )     −       − F˜k        + Ca    −        ô . (B.29)
                                    ˜
                                ∂NO Fk            ∂ŝk ∂ŝk           ∂γ̂k           ∂No ô

This expression can be further simplified:
                                                                                                                    !
  ∂π(ô, fˆ)
                                                                                                
                        ŝk                                          ∆(ŝk )           ∂L            ∂Co No ô
                                                                               µk − ξˆk +
                                                           
             = ôNO ,N           F˜k ,No − pk ,No η̂k           V                                 −                  . (B.30)
   ∂Nk                  N                                             ŝk                 ∂ŝk         ∂No ô ŝk

The first two terms in brackets in this derivative are positive and so is the third term. We can show that
the limits of F˜k ,No and F˜k ,f in No are both zero. Therefore the above derivative is negative as long as the
R&D fixed costs per opportunity are increasing in No . This is the condition set out in Proposition 3.


B.4    Uniqueness of the second stage equilibrium
We show that stage 2 of game G∗ is supermodular. This implies that there exists at least one equilibrium of
the stage game. An alternative way of deriving existence of the second stage equilibrium for game G∗ is to
analyze the conditions under which the Hessian of second derivatives of the profit function (Hπ ) is negative
semidefinite. This matrix consists of four derivatives of which only one leads to additional restrictions on
the model.
                           ∂2π
    It is easy to see that ∂o   2 < 0 due to the coordination costs Cc (oi ) and the restrictions we impose with
                              i

assumption (FVC). The two cross-partial derivatives are both zero in equilibrium - refer to equation B.15.
                                                                  ∂2π
    Therefore, the only expression that remains to analyze is ∂f    i
                                                                      2.




               "                  !2
  ∂ 2π    oi pk ∂ 2 V     ∂ F˜k        ∆F˜k      ∂V ∂ F˜k d∆                  d2 ∆ pk
        =                                    +2                (1 − ηik ) + V 2        (1 − ηik )2
  ∂fi 2    F˜k ∂ F˜k 2    ∂fi           pk         ˜ ∂f
                                                 ∂ Fk i ikds                   s    ˜
                                                                                 ik Fk
                                                                                                           #
                                                                     2
                                            ∂ 2L 2    ∂ 2 L ∂sik
                                                                                         
                                                                                 d∆      ∂L (1 − ηik ) ηik
                                        −        p −                   −2 V          −                                       .
                                           ∂γik 2 k ∂sik 2 ∂fi                  dsik ∂sik          fi

   This can be further simplified:
               "                  !2
  ∂ 2π    oi pk ∂ 2 V     ∂ F˜k   ∆F˜k       d2 ∆ pk                  ∂ 2L 2
        =                                +V 2         (1 − ηik )2 −        p
  ∂fi 2    F˜k ∂ F˜k 2    ∂fi       pk        sik F˜k                ∂γik 2 k
                                                                                                      #
                            ∂ 2 L pk
                                                                                  
                                                          ∆                   ∂L     (1 − η ik ) η ik
                          −            (1 − ηik )2 − 2 V      ξik (1 − µk ) −                                           . (B.31)
                            ∂sik 2 F˜k                    sik                 ∂sik        fi

    If we impose the restriction that the second derivative of the value function is negative and that the
elasticity of the value function, µk < 1, then the first and the last terms in the above expression are
                                                                           ∂2∆
negative. The sign of the second term in the expression depends on sign{ ∂s     2 }, which we will assume is
                                                                             ik

negative. The third and fourth terms in the above expression are negative given the conditions imposed on
the legal cost function above.



                                                                     6
B.5        Entry and Incumbency
In this section we analyze a game in which incumbents have lower costs of entry and demonstrate that our
main predictions are robust.
    We assume that a fraction λ (0 < λ < 1) of the previously active N P firms remain as incumbents. The
firms enter until the marginal profit from entry is reduced to zero.

Objective Functions

First, consider the objective functions of incumbents and entrants and the patenting game they are involved
in. We analyze this game and show when it is supermodular.
    Given symmetry of technological opportunities (Assumption S) the expected value of patenting for
entrant and incumbent firm’s in a technology area k is:
                                                                                                             
                                                                            N P λ−1+N
                                                                                 X
                                                                                      E

    I
   πik (oIi , fiI ) =oIi V (F̃k )∆(sIik ) − L(γik
                                                I
                                                   , sIik ) − Co (                       oj ) − Ψ − fiI pk Ca  − Cc (oIi )   .
                                                                               j=1

                                                                                                                           (B.32)
                                                                                                      
                                                                          N P λ+N E
                                                                               X −1
   E E
  πik (oi , fiE )   =oE
                      i
                          V   (F̃k )∆(sE
                                        ik )   −      E E
                                                   L(γik , sik )   − Co (             oj ) − fiE pk Ca  − Cc (oE
                                                                                                                i )    .   (B.33)
                                                                              j=1


       Define a game GE in which:

   • There are N P λ incumbent firms and the number of entrants, N E , is determined by free entry.

   • Entrants and incumbents simultaneously choose the number of technological opportunities oIi , oE     i ∈
     [0, On ] and the number of facets applied for per opportunity fiI , fiE ∈ [0, F n ]. Firms’ strategy sets
     Sn are elements of R4 .

   • Firms’ payoff functions πik , defined at (B.32,B.33), are twice continuously differentiable and depend
     only on rivals’ aggregate strategies.

   • Assumptions (VF, eqn. 1) and (LC, eqn. 4) describe how the expected value and the expected cost
     of patenting depend on the number of facets owned per opportunity.

    Firms’ payoffs depend on their rivals’ aggregate strategies because the probability of obtaining a patent
on a given facet is a function of all rivals’ patent applications. Note that the game is symmetric within
the two groups of firms as it is exchangeable in permutations of the players. This implies that symmetric
equilibria exist, if the game can be shown to be supermodular (Vives, 2005).1

   1
       Note also that only symmetric equilibria exist as the strategy spaces of players are completely ordered.




                                                                      7
First order conditions for game GE :
                                                                          
         I                                          N P λ−1+N E
       ∂πik                                              X                       ∂Cc
              = V ∆(sik ) − L(γik , sik ) − Co (           oj ) − Ψ − γik Ca − I = 0 ,            (B.34)
       ∂oIi                                           j=1
                                                                                 ∂oi
         I
                oIi pk
                                                            h                              
       ∂πik                          4(sik )   ˜    ∂L               ∂4(sik )    ∂L i
              =           V µF˜k fi         − Fk        + Ca    + V           −      (1 − ηik ) = 0 ,
       ∂fiI      F˜k                  sik           ∂γik               ∂sik      ∂sik
                                                                                                    (B.35)
                                                    P     E
          E
       ∂πik                                           X −1
                                                   N λ+N
                                                                           ∂Cc
         E
            = V ∆(s ik ) −  L(γ     ,
                                 ik iks  ) − C o (          oj ) − γik Ca − E = 0 ,                     (B.36)
       ∂oi                                            j=1
                                                                           ∂o i
          E    E
                                                               h                               
       ∂πik   oi pk                 4(sik )      ˜     ∂L                 ∂4(sik )   ∂L i
            =            V µF˜k fi          − Fk          + Ca     + V            −      (1 − ηik ) = 0 .
       ∂fiE    F˜k                     sik            ∂γik                 ∂sik      ∂sik
                                                                                                        (B.37)

Proposition 7
In game GE the equilibrium number of facets chosen by incumbents and entrants is the same: fˆI = fˆE .

    We show in Appendix A.2 that in the game with incumbents the number of rivals per opportunity ÑO
becomes a function of both ôI , ôE . The first order conditions determining fˆI , fˆE both depend on the total
number of entrants per technological opportunity ÑO and so both on ôI , ôE . This is the only way in which
rivals’ choices of the number of opportunities to pursue enter these first order conditions2 . Therefore the
two conditions are identical and Proposition 7 holds.
Proposition 8
The second stage of game GE is smooth supermodular under the same conditions as game G∗ . Comparative
statics results for game G∗ also apply to game GE .

The first order conditions characterizing the game with incumbents and entrants are identical to those
for the game without incumbents as long as Ψ = 0. As this variable is a constant it does not enter
into the second order conditions which we analyze to establish supermodularity and which underpin the
comparative statics predictions in Propositions 4-6.
Proposition 9
In the second stage of game GE incumbents enter more technological opportunities, if they have a cost
advantage in undertaking R&D (Ψ > 0).

The first order conditions determining the equilibrium number of opportunities chosen by incumbents and
entrants are identical if firms R&D fixed costs per opportunity are the same (Ψ = 0). Therefore ôI|Ψ=0 = ôE .
As the cost advantage of incumbents in undertaking R&D grows this increases the number of opportunities
chosen by incumbents:

                                                     ∂ 2 πik
                                                          I
                                                             =1>0 .                                                      (B.38)
                                                    ∂oI ∂Ψ
   2
     Clearly the factors outside the brackets in equations (B.35), (B.37) also depend on these variables, but these do not affect
the equilibrium values of fiE , fjI .



                                                               8
Proposition 10
In the second stage of game GE the number of entrants decreases as the cost advantage of incumbents
increases.

    Due to the supermodularity of the second stage game, increases in incumbents’ choices of the number
of opportunities to invest in will raise the number of opportunities entrants invest in as well as the numbers
of facets entrants and incumbents seek to patent in equilibrium. The increases in ôI and ôE will raise the
fixed costs of entry into new opportunities, Co , which then reduces entry.


C     Data
Our analysis relies on an updated version of the Oxford-Firm-Level-Database, which combines information
on patents (UK and EPO) with firm-level information obtained from Bureau van Dijks Financial Analysis
Made Easy (FAME) database (for more details see Helmers et al. (2011) from which the data description
in this section draws).
    The integrated database consists of two components: a firm-level data set and IP data. The firm-level
data is the FAME database that covers the entire population of registered UK firms. The original version
of the database, which formed the basis for the update carried out by the UKIPO, relied on two versions of
the FAME database: FAME October 2005 and March 2009. The main motivation for using two different
versions of FAME is that FAME keeps details of inactive firms (see below) for a period of four years.
If only the 2009 version of FAME were used, intellectual property could not be allocated to any firm
that has exited the market before 2005, which would bias the matching results. FAME is available since
2000, which defines the earliest year for which the integrated data set can be constructed consistently.
The update undertaken by the UKIPO used the April 2011 version of FAME. However, since there are
significant reporting delays by companies, even using the FAME 2011 version means that the latest year
for which firm-level data can be used reliably is 2009.
    FAME contains basic information on all firms, such as name, registered address, firm type, industry
code, as well as entry and exit dates. Availability of financial information varies substantially across firms.
In the UK, the smallest firms are legally required to report only very basic balance sheet information
(shareholders’ funds and total assets). The largest firms provide a much broader range of profit and loss
information, as well as detailed balance sheet data including overseas turnover. Lack of these kinds of data
for small and medium-sized firms means that our study focuses on total assets as a measure of firm size
and growth.
    The patent data come from the EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT). Data on UK
and EPO patent publications by British entities were downloaded from PATSTAT version April 2011.
Due to the average 18 months delay between the filing and publication date of a patent, using the April
2011 version means that the patent data are presumably only complete up to the third quarter in 2009.
This effectively means that we can use the patent data only up to 2009 under the caveat that it might be
somewhat incomplete for 2009. Patent data are allocated to firms by the year in which a firm applied for
the patent.
    Since patent records do not include any kind of registered number of a company, it is not possible to

                                                      9
merge data sets using a unique firm identifier; instead, applicant names in the IP documents and firm names
in FAME have to be matched. Both a firm’s current and previous name(s) were used for matching in order
to account for changes in firm names. Matching on the basis of company names requires names in both data
sets to be ‘standardized’ prior to the matching process in order to ensure that small (but often systematic)
differences in the way names are recorded in the two data sets do not impede the correct matching. For
more details on the matching see Helmers et al. (2011).

            Table C-1: Number of TF34 sectors entered between 2002 and 2009
            Number of sectors   Number of firms                 Number of entries
                    1                2,531                            2,531
                    2                1,347                            2,694
                    3                647                              1,941
                    4                271                              1,084
                    5                155                               775
                    6                 71                               426
                    7                 45                               315
                    8                 29                               232
                    9                 20                               180
                   10                 14                               140
                   11                  4                               44
                   12                  2                               24
                   13                  3                               39
                   14                  0                                0
               15 or more             13                               240
                  Total              5,152                           10,665




                                                    10
             Table C-2: Sample Population of Firms, by industry
     2-digit SIC3                Number of      Number of   Share patenting   Number of
     Industry                      firms        patenters     2001-2009        patents
1    Basic metals                  2,836           52           1.83%           231
2    Chemicals                     3,834          246           6.42%           126
3    Electrical machinery          2,948          281           9.53%           727
4    Electronics & instruments     9,298          561           6.03%           444
5    Fabricated metals            24,681          606           2.46%            70
6    Food, beverage, & tobacco     8331           102           1.22%            29
7    Machinery                     9,365          608           6.49%           313
8    Mining, oil&gas              83,491           15           0.02%            96
9    Motor vehicles                2,337          117           5.01%            22
10   Other manufacturing          94,952          1362          1.43%           150
11   Pharmaceuticals               1,008          105          10.42%           551
12   Rubber & plastics             6,094          398           6.53%           590
13   Construction                 295596          372           0.13%            59
14   Other transport               3,292           89           2.70%           6274
15   Repairs & retail trade       128,266         251           0.20%           2324
16   Telecommunications           14,348          133           0.93%           2096
17   Transportation               60,837           75           0.12%           621
18   Utilities                    12,880           75           0.58%           428
19   Wholesale trade              138,398         728           0.53%           3608
20   Business services            689,942         1639          0.24%           6757
21   Computer services            177,319         716           0.40%           1132
22   Financial services           183,042         219           0.12%           4930
23   Medicalservices              38,424          103           0.27%           1419
24   Personal services            94,791          196           0.21%           1194
25   R&D services                  7,915          713           9.01%           168
26   inactive                     37,525          271           0.72%           5673
     Total                       2,131,750       10,033         0.47%          40,032




                                           11
                            Table C-3: Entry into techology area 2002-2009
                                                 Numbers                                        Shares
                            Total patenting in    First time   Pat’d previously   Total   First time   Pat’d previously
Technology                  sector by GB firms    patenter     in another tech.   entry   patenter     in another tech
Elec machinery, energy           1763.7              214             250          26.3%    12.1%           14.2%
Audio-visual tech                 788.3              148             192          43.1%    18.8%           24.4%
Telecommunications               1874.4              146             179          17.3%     7.8%            9.5%
Digital communication            1054.0              92              141          22.1%     8.7%           13.4%
Basic comm processes              256.5              21              93           44.4%     8.2%           36.3%
Computer technology              2167.2              291             251          25.0%    13.4%           11.6%
IT methods for mgt                283.2              117             157          96.7%    41.3%           55.4%
Semiconductors                    347.2              38              118          44.9%    10.9%           34.0%
Optics                            584.7              55              130          31.6%     9.4%           22.2%
Measurement                      1765.3              226             269          28.0%    12.8%           15.2%
Analysis bio materials            339.0              39              111          44.3%    11.5%           32.7%
Control                           712.1              165             241          57.0%    23.2%           33.8%
Medical technology               1668.4              184             209          23.6%    11.0%           12.5%
Organic fine chemistry           1569.4              36              83           7.6%      2.3%            5.3%
Biotechnology                     701.6              41              99           20.0%     5.8%           14.1%
Pharmaceuticals                  1700.7              54              80           7.9%      3.2%            4.7%
Polymers                          224.4              27              112          61.9%    12.0%           49.9%
Food chemistry                    492.7              36              87           25.0%     7.3%           17.7%
Basic materials chemistry        1020.2              85              144          22.4%     8.3%           14.1%
Materials metallurgy              360.8              54              109          45.2%    15.0%           30.2%
Surface tech coating              400.7              77              195          67.9%    19.2%           48.7%
Chemical engineering              842.7              142             213          42.1%    16.9%           25.3%
Environmental tech                446.6              106             166          60.9%    23.7%           37.2%
Handling                         1326.3              274             290          42.5%    20.7%           21.9%
Machine tools                     577.8              106             180          49.5%    18.3%           31.2%
Engines,pumps,turbine            1443.4              82              160          16.8%     5.7%           11.1%
Textile and paper mach            442.0              77              137          48.4%    17.4%           31.0%
Other spec machines               847.4              180             234          48.9%    21.2%           27.6%
Thermal process and app           455.7              105             159          57.9%    23.0%           34.9%
Mechanical elements              1445.9              223             317          37.3%    15.4%           21.9%
Transport                        1288.2              213             236          34.9%    16.5%           18.3%
Furniture, games                 1239.2              288             223          41.2%    23.2%           18.0%
Other consumer goods              788.1              194             246          55.8%    24.6%           31.2%
Civil engineering                2045.8              463             255          35.1%    22.6%           12.5%
Total                            33263.6            4599            6066          32.1%    13.8%           18.2%




                                                       12
D     Robustness Tests on Network Density and Triples
This section examines how the addition of the network density measure to the analysis undertaken in
Graevenitz et al. (2013) changes the coefficient and sign of the triples measure reported there. They exam-
ine how complexity, technological opportunity and other variables affect the number of patents firms apply
for. Graevenitz et al. (2013) do not distinguish between hold-up and complexity in their model and use the
triples measure to capture complexity. The model presented in this paper separates the effects of hold-up
and complexity and predicts that hold-up will reduce firms’ patenting incentives, while complexity raises
these. In this paper, the network density measure is introduced as a measure of technological complexity,
while we argue that the triples measure captures hold-up.
    The exercise undertaken in this appendix is a validation of these two measures in light of the updated
model we present in this paper. The evidence provided is based on two data sets: first we report regression
results obtained by adding the network density measure to the data used by (Graevenitz et al., 2013),
second we report results obtained from a new dataset. This dataset covers the same period as that used by
(Graevenitz et al., 2013), but it is based on the same more recent technology area classification as that used
in this paper. Furthermore, it is based on the same measure of triples as that used in this paper.
    The models presented below are system GMM models which include a lagged dependent variable. We
demonstrate that regardless of how the data are constructed the triples measure reduces patenting while
the network density measure increases patenting efforts in our data. This supports our view that the triples
measure is a measure of hold-up.
    In the results presented below we instrument potentially endogenous variables using lagged values. Ex-
ogeneity of the instruments is tested using difference in Hansen tests. We instrument the lagged dependent
variable and its interaction with fourth order lags. All other variables are instrumented with third order
lags or higher. We include only year and area dummies in the levels equations as it is likely that the fixed
effects are correlated with differences in the remaining explanatory variables.
    Instrument sets are collapsed in order to reduce the number of instruments used. Throughout we rely
on the Hansen test to determine whether instruments are exogenous. Where the statistic indicated that this
was not the case we rejected the models. We report only those models that were not rejected by the test
for which the lagged dependent variable was within the range one would expect from estimation of OLS
models with the same specification.


D.1    Sample and Definition of Variables
The sample used for both tables below consists of all firms that have at least one hundred patent applications
at EPO across all teachnology areas between 1987 and 2002 and who have applied for patents in at least
three years in the sample period in a technology area.
    The two tables below include a number of variables that we do not use in this paper other than here.
We briefly discuss these variables next:

Dependent variable In both tables below the dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of
patents each firm has applied for in a technology area and year. To deal with missing values arising


                                                     13
from firms not having patent applications in some years we add one to all patent counts before taking the
logarithm.

Triples count In Table D-1 below we use the triples count employed by Graevenitz et al. (2013). They
count how often firm triples arise, such that each firm in a triple holds patents that are cited as limiting
one or more patent applications submitted by each of the other two firms. Their measure of triples is
constructed using only the ten most frequently cited firms in each applicant’s patent portfolio in any area
and year. In Table D-2 we use the same triples count as in this paper, i.e. the restriction to the most
frequently cited firms is removed.

Fragmentation The fragmentation measure used here is based on Ziedonis (2004). The measure is based
only on critical references and captures the concentration of prior art cited in the patent portfolio of a firm
in a year and area.

Large / Relative Size In Table D-1 below we use a dummy variable that is one for all firms above the
median firm by size of patent portfolio in each area and year. In Table D-2 we capture relative size by
measuring the size of each firm’s patent portfolio by area up to a given year relative to the total number of
all firms’ patent applications in that area and year.


D.2    Data used by Graevenitz et al. (2013)
The results presented here are based on adding the network density measure of complexity constructed for
this paper from US patent data to the data used by Graevenitz et al. (2013). They study the determinants
of the level of patent applications at EPO.
    Column E in Table D-1 below is reported by Graevenitz et al. (2013) and is presented here as a reference
point. Models K,L,M contain new results. Model K replicates model E closely, differences are likely due
to updates to the code used to estimate these models. Model L is like model K with the network density
measure added. In model M we adjust the set of instruments to obtain a model with a lagged dependent
variable that is significantly below 1 at the 5% level at the mean of the triples variable.
    These results show that adding the network density measure to the data does not change the sign
or significance of the other variables reported in Table D-1. Network density itself has a positive and
significant effect on patenting in models L and M. We would expect to see this, if this measure captures
complexity.
    Adding network density does have an important and not immediately obvious effect. The range of
values of non-patent references for which an increase in the hold-up measure (triples) reduces patenting
incentives is larger in model M than model E at the mean of the patent count: in model E non-patent
references must lie beyond 1.22 for an increase in triples to have a negative effect on patenting incentives,
while in model M non-patent references beyond 1.1 have the same effect. Similarly the range of values
of the patent count for which an increase in the hold-up measure (triples) reduces patenting incentives is
larger in model M than model E at the mean of non patent references. This shows that the triples measure



                                                      14
contained in this data has a negative effect on patenting incentives in sufficiently complex technologies.
We would expect to see this, if triples is a measure of hold-up.

                Table D-1: GMM Models for Patent Applications - Old Data
  Variable                         SGMM E         SGMM K             SGMM L            SGMM M
  log Patentcountt−1                   0.749∗∗∗           0.879∗∗∗       1.020∗∗∗            0.976∗∗∗
                                      (0.093)            (0.099)        (0.113)             (0.106)
  log Patentcountt−1 × Triples       −0.017∗∗∗          −0.017∗∗∗      −0.013∗∗∗           −0.012∗∗∗
                                      (0.003)            (0.002)        (0.002)             (0.002)
  Non Patent References (NPR)          1.553∗∗∗           1.863∗∗∗       1.648∗∗∗            1.389∗∗∗
                                      (0.254)            (0.252)        (0.240)             (0.183)
  NPR × Triples                      −0.036∗∗∗          −0.038∗∗∗      −0.033∗∗∗           −0.028∗∗∗
                                      (0.006)            (0.005)        (0.005)             (0.004)
  NPR × Triples × Large                0.007∗∗∗           0.006∗∗∗       0.005∗∗∗            0.005∗∗∗
                                      (0.002)            (0.001)        (0.001)             (0.001)
  NPR × Large                        −0.366∗∗∗          −0.386∗∗∗      −0.339∗∗∗           −0.340∗∗∗
                                      (0.081)            (0.062)        (0.051)             (0.043)
  Fragmentation                      −0.474∗∗           −0.521∗∗       −0.543∗∗            −0.490∗∗∗
                                      (0.170)            (0.182)        (0.174)             (0.129)
  Fragmentation × Triples              0.006              0.009∗         0.005               0.004
                                      (0.006)            (0.004)        (0.004)             (0.004)
  Triples                              0.055∗∗∗           0.052∗∗∗       0.046∗∗∗            0.039∗∗∗
                                      (0.010)            (0.007)        (0.007)             (0.005)
  Areas                                0.096∗∗∗           0.084∗∗∗       0.049∗∗             0.050∗∗
                                      (0.012)            (0.010)        (0.017)             (0.016)
  Large                                0.342∗∗            0.476∗∗∗       0.427∗∗∗            0.424∗∗∗
                                      (0.117)            (0.105)        (0.091)             (0.072)
  Network Density                                                        0.002∗∗             0.002∗∗
                                                                        (0.001)             (0.001)
  Year dummies                       YES             YES               YES                YES
  Primary area dummies               YES             YES               YES                YES
  Constant                           −1.443∗∗∗       −1.846∗∗∗         −2.017∗∗∗           −1.772∗∗∗
                                      (0.319)         (0.267)           (0.270)             (0.237)
  N                              173448           173448             173448            173448
  m1                                −10.860          −10.470            −9.318              −9.634
  m2                                  4.739            6.307             6.2                 6.305
  m3                                   .896             .509             −.071               −.302
  Hansen                             10.988            2.017             4.454              12.506
  p-value                              .052             .569              .216                .052
  Degrees of freedom                  5                3                 3                   6
  * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

                                                   15
  1. Asymptotic standard errors, asymptotically robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses
  2. m1-m3 are tests for first- to third-order serial correlation in the first differenced residuals.
  3. Hansen is a test of overidentifying restrictions. It is distributed as χ2 under the null of instrument
       validity, with degrees of freedom reported below.
  4. In all cases GMM instrument sets were collapsed and lags were limited.


D.3      New Data at 34 Area Level
Here we present results based on an updated dataset of patenting in Europe that is based on PATSTAT,
October 2014, but covers the same range of years (1987-2002), for better comparability with the data
presented in the previous section.

                 Table D-2: GMM Models for Patent Applications - New Data
 Variable                              SGMM E                   SGMM K                     SGMM L
 log Patentcountt−1                      0.454 ∗ ∗∗                0.799 ∗ ∗∗                0.808 ∗ ∗∗
                                        (0.111)                   (0.080)                   (0.082)
 Non Patent References (NPR)           −0.014 ∗ ∗∗               −0.014 ∗ ∗∗               −0.014 ∗ ∗∗
                                        (0.001)                   (0.001)                   (0.001)
 Triples                               −0.091 ∗ ∗∗               −0.100 ∗ ∗∗               −0.117 ∗ ∗∗
                                        (0.016)                   (0.011)                   (0.012)
 Network Density                       −0.216                      0.195                     0.217∗
                                        (0.129)                   (0.101)                   (0.107)
 Fragmentation                           0.899 ∗ ∗∗                0.658 ∗ ∗∗                0.804 ∗ ∗∗
                                        (0.155)                   (0.093)                   (0.085)
 Areas                                   0.020∗                    0.016 ∗ ∗               −0.001
                                        (0.009)                   (0.006)                   (0.006)
 Relative Size                         −0.010 ∗ ∗∗                 0.000                   −0.000
                                        (0.003)                   (0.003)                   (0.002)
 Constant                              −0.033                    −0.208 ∗ ∗∗               −0.149 ∗ ∗
                                        (0.045)                   (0.052)                   (0.046)
 N                                168066                    168066                    168066
 m1                                    −7.598                  −12.948                   −13.08
 m2                                     3.871                    9.964                     9.896
 m3                                    −1.450                     .538                      .055
 Hansen                                 3.49                     3.79                      2.1
 p-value                                 .48                      .29                       .55
 Degrees of freedom                     4                        3                         3
 * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
 1. Asymptotic standard errors, asymptotically robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses
 2. m1-m3 are tests for first- to third-order serial correlation in the first differenced residuals.
 3. Hansen is a test of overidentifying restrictions. It is distributed as χ2 under the null of instrument

                                                      16
      validity, with degrees of freedom reported below.
 4. In all cases GMM instrument sets were collapsed and lags were limited.

     The main difference between the data used here and the older data used by Graevenitz et al. (2013)
is that we now rely on a more recent, slightly finer specification of the number of technology areas: the
current classification contains 34 rather than 30 areas. In addition, the triples measure we use now captures
all triples and not just those affecting each firm and its ten closest technology rivals as in the earlier data.
Due to the larger number of areas we now exclude slightly more patentees when applying the criterion that
a firm must have at least one hundred patents in a technology area and must have at least three years of
patent activity in an area to be included in the analysis.
     Table D-2 demonstrates that the predicted negative effects of triples and non-patent references are
present in all specifications we report. We also show that network density is either not significant or
positive and significant. The model in which the measure is positive and significant is our prefered model,
due to the low instrument count and the better test of overidentifying restrictions.
     Overall, both sets of models demonstrate that an interpretation of the triples measure as a measure of
hold-up only, and of the network density as a measure of complexity, is consistent with the effects we
observe in the data on patent applications presented here.


E     Estimating Survival Models
This appendix gives some further information about the various survival models we estimated and the
robustness checks that were performed. We estimated two general classes of failure or survival models: 1)
proportional hazard, where the hazard of failure over time has the same shape for all firms, but the overall
level is proportional to an index that depends on firm characteristics; and 2) accelerated failure time, where
the survival rate is accelerated or decelerated by the characteristics of the firm. We transform (2) to a
hazard rate model for comparison with (1), using the usual identity between the probability of survival to
time t and the probability of failure at t given survival to t − 1. The first model has the following form:



                        P r (i first patents in j at t | i has no patents in j ∀s < t, Xi )
                        h(Xi , t) = h(t) exp (Xi , β)

    where i denotes a firm, j denotes a technology sector, and t denotes the time since entry into the sample.
h(t) is the baseline hazard, which is either a non-parametric or a parametric function of time since entry
into the sample. The impact of any characteristic x on the hazard can be computed as follows:


                        ∂h(Xi , t)                                  ∂h(Xi , t) 1
                                   = h(t) exp (Xi , β)β       or                 =β                      (E.39)
                          ∂xi                                         ∂xi Xi , t

    Thus if x is measured in logs, β measures the elasticity of the hazard rate with respect to x. Note that
this quantity does not depend on the baseline hazard h(t), but is the same for any t. We use two choices for

                                                        17
h(t): the semi-parametric Cox estimate and the Weibull distribution ptp−1 . By allowing the Cox h(t) or
p to vary freely across the industrial sectors, we can allow the shape of the hazard function to be different
for different industries while retaining the proportionality assumption.
    In order to allow even more flexibility across the different industrial sectors, we also use two accelerated
failure time models, the log-normal model and the log-logistic model. These have the following basic form:

                                                                                                
                                                                                    ln (t) − µ
                                           Log-normal :S(t) = 1 − Φ                                                         (E.40)
                                                                                         σ
                                                                            1
                                          Log-logistic :S(t) =                      1                                       (E.41)
                                                                     1 + (λt) γ )

    where S(t) is the survival function and λi = exp (Xi β). We allow the parameters σ (log-normal) or γ
(log-logistic) to vary freely across industries (j). That is, for these models, both the mean and the variance
of the survival distribution are specific to the 2-digit industry. In the case of these two models, the elasticity
of the hazard with respect to a characteristic x depends on time and on the industry-specific parameter (σ
or γ), yielding a more flexible model. For example, the hazard rate for the log-logistic model is given by
the following expression:


                                                                                    1   1
                                                   −d log S(t)     λ γ t γ −1
                                            h(t) =             =             1
                                                                                                                           (E.42)
                                                       dt       γ 1 + (λt) )  γ




       From this we can derive the elasticity of the hazard rate with respect to a regressor x:4


                                                   ∂ log hij (t)       −β
                                                                 =          1
                                                                                                                           (E.43)
                                                       ∂xi          1 + (λt) γ




    One implication of this model is therefore that both the hazard and the elasticity of the hazard with
respect to the regressors depend on t, the time since the firm was at risk of patenting. We sample the firms
during a single decade, the 2000s, but some of the firms have been in existence since the 19th century.
This fact creates a bit of a problem for estimation, because there is no reason to think that the patenting
environment has remained stable during that period. We explored variations in the assumed first date at
risk in Tables E-1(1978) and E-2 (1900), finding that the choice made little difference. Accordingly, we
have used a minimum at risk year of 1978 for estimation in the main table in the text.




   4
       We assume that x is in logarithms, as is true for our key variables, so this can be interepreted as an elasticity.


                                                                   18
                                            Table E-1
               Hazard of entry into patenting in a TF34 Class - Comparing models
                         538,452 firm-TF34 observations with 10,665 entries (20,384 firms)
                                      Proportional hazard                                  AFT
Variable                            Cox PH           Weibull               Log logistic           Log normal
Log (network density)                0.108 ∗ ∗∗          0.111 ∗ ∗∗           0.308 ∗ ∗∗               0.247 ∗ ∗∗
                                    (0.021)             (0.021)              (0.096)                 (0.040)
Log (triples density               −0.100 ∗ ∗∗         −0.098 ∗ ∗∗          −0.511 ∗ ∗∗             −0.258 ∗ ∗∗
in class)                           (0.010)             (0.010)              (0.071)                 (0.024)
Log (patents in class)               0.513 ∗ ∗∗          0.513 ∗ ∗∗           2.177 ∗ ∗∗               1.095 ∗ ∗∗
                                    (0.027)             (0.027)              (0.304)                 (0.089)
5-year growth of non-patent         (0.013)            −0.001               −0.077                  −0.039
refs in class                       (0.022)             (0.021)              (0.084)                 (0.038)
Log assets                           0.149 ∗ ∗∗          0.130 ∗ ∗∗           0.529 ∗ ∗∗               0.198 ∗ ∗∗
                                    (0.013)             (0.013)              (0.082)                 (0.024)
Log (pats applied for                0.848 ∗ ∗∗          0.860 ∗ ∗∗           5.685 ∗ ∗∗               3.973 ∗ ∗∗
by firm previously)                 (0.021)             (0.019)              (0.917)                 (0.368)
Industry dummies                    stratified         stratified           stratified              stratified
Year dummies                           yes                yes                  yes                     yes
Log likelihood                   −58.8            −96, 051.0          −114, 127.0           −111, 662.1
Degrees of freedom                 13                   38                   38                    38
Chi-squared                      3183.2              4560.1                 168.4                 300.1
All estimates are weighted estimates, weighted by sampling probability. For the Cox and Weibull
models, coefficients shown are elasticities of the hazard w.r.t. the variable. For the log-logistic, -beta is shown.
*** (**) denote significance at the 1% (5%) level.
Time period is 2002-2009 and minimum entry year is 1978. Sample is all UK firms with nonmissing assets.
AFT - Accelerated Failure Time models
# Estimates are stratified by industry - each industry has its own baseline hazard.




                                                     19
                                           Table E-2
                  Hazard of entry into patenting in a TF34 Class - Robustness
Variable                 (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           Big firms
Log (network density)    0.107∗∗∗     −0.008            0.114∗∗∗      0.107∗∗∗      0.108∗∗∗       0.390∗∗∗
                        (0.021)        (0.019)         (0.024)       (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.145)
Log (triples density   −0.101∗∗∗      −0.183∗∗∗       −0.114∗∗∗     −0.103∗∗∗     −0.103∗∗∗      −0.099∗
in class)               (0.010)        (0.008)         (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.055)
Log (patents in class)   0.514∗∗∗       0.623∗∗∗        0.605∗∗∗      0.520∗∗∗      0.518∗∗∗       0.390∗∗
                        (0.027)        (0.024)         (0.031)       (0.027)       (0.027)        (0.157)
5-year growth of non- −0.009          −0.196∗∗∗       −0.002        −0.012        −0.012         −0.125
patent refs in class    (0.021)        (0.020)         (0.025)       (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.135)
Log assets               0.142∗∗∗       0.138∗∗∗        0.186∗∗∗      0.139∗∗∗      0.146∗∗∗       0.303
                        (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.018)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.233)
Log firm age in years    0.773∗∗∗       0.588∗∗∗        0.739∗∗∗      0.778∗∗∗      0.021          0.710
                        (0.130)        (0.145)         (0.155)       (0.131)       (0.246)        (0.672)
Log (lagged firm-level) 0.836∗∗∗        0.947∗∗∗        0.954∗∗∗      0.840∗∗∗      0.878∗∗∗       0.512∗∗∗
patent stock            (0.021)        (0.019)         (0.033)       (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.132)
Industry dummies          yes           yes             yes           yes           yes            yes
Observations              538,452     692,038       452,313         523,547       538,452        5,655
Firms                      20,384      20,384        17,993          20,384        20,384         255
Entries                    10,665      10,665         8,149          10,340        10,665         219
Entry rate                  1.98%       1.54%          1.96%          1.97%         1.98%         3.87%
Log likelihood          −58.69       −54.60        −40.59          −56.94        −53.81          −0.21
Degrees of freedom        14           14            14              14            14            14
Chi-squared             3465.1       5065.8        1688.8          3459.1        3137.4          51.3
All estimates are weighted estimates, weighted by sampling probability. Coefficients shown are negative
of the estimates (larger coefficient increases entry probability).
*** (**) denote significance at the 1% (5%) level.
Time period is 2002-2009. Sample in (1) is all UK firms with nonmissing assets.
Log-logistic model stratified by industry.
(1) Estimates from Table 3, for comparison.
(2) Observations for tech sectors of firms whose industry has no such patenting (Lybbert and Zolas, 2014) and
where there is no entry by any UK firm in that industry are dropped.
(3) SMEs: firms with assets > 12.5 million GBP removed.
(4) The Telecom tech sector is removed.
(5) The minimum founding year is 1900 instead of 1978.




                                                 20
References
G RAEVENITZ , G., S. WAGNER , AND D. H ARHOFF (2013): “Incidence and Growth of Patent Thickets: The Impact
  of Technological Opportunities and Complexity,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 61, 521–563.

H ELMERS , C., M. ROGERS ,    AND   P. S CHAUTSCHICK (2011): “Intellectual Property at the Firm-level in the UK:
  The Oxford Firm-level Intellectual Property Database,” Tech. Rep. DP 546.

LYBBERT, T. J.   AND   N. J. Z OLAS (2014): “Getting Patents and Economic Data to Speak to each other: An Al-
  gorithmic Links with Probabilities Approach for Joint Analyses of Patenting and Economic Activity,” Research
  Policy, 43, 530–542.

V IVES , X. (2005): “Complementarities and Games: New Developments,” Journal of Economic Literature, XLIII,
  437–479.

Z IEDONIS , R. H. (2004): “Don’t Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and the Patent Acquisition
  Strategies of Firms,” Management Science, 50, 804–820.




                                                       21
