                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HOUSE PRICES, HOME EQUITY AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
                   EVIDENCE FROM U.S. CENSUS MICRO DATA

                                           Sari Kerr
                                        William R. Kerr
                                        Ramana Nanda

                                      Working Paper 21458
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21458


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2015, Revised October 2019

Previously circulated as “House Money and Entrepreneurship.” Comments are appreciated and
can be sent to skerr3@wellesley.edu, wkerr@hbs.edu, and rnanda@hbs.edu. We thank Erik Hurst
for valuable advice and are grateful to Manuel Adelino, Nava Ashraf, Thomas Astebro, Jim
Davis, Iftekhar Hasan, Ari Hyytinen, Ross Levine, Debarshi Nandy, Martin Schmalz, Olmo
Silva, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh and to seminar participants at the Bank of Finland, Columbia
GSB, the Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Fordham University, Georgia Tech, Harvard Business School, Imperial College London,
the IZA Institute for the Study of Labor, London School of Economics, the National Bureau of
Economic Research, New York University Stern, L’Université du Québec à Montréal, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, and the University of Chicago for helpful comments. The research in this
paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the US Census
Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research from the
NSF grant ITR-0427889 [BRDC], Kauffman Foundation and the Division of Research and
Faculty Development at Harvard Business School is gratefully acknowledged. Research results
and conclusions expressed are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census
Bureau or the NSF. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sari Kerr, William R. Kerr, and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
House Prices, Home Equity and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from U.S. Census Micro Data
Sari Kerr, William R. Kerr, and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 21458
August 2015, Revised October 2019
JEL No. E44,G21,L26,M13,R12,R31,R32

                                          ABSTRACT

We use Census micro data to shed new light on how growth in house prices boosts US
entrepreneurship. At the height of the 2007 real estate boom, 5% of self-employed individuals
and 12% of employer-businesses used home equity to partly or wholly finance a new business.
Despite this frequency, several analyses suggest that little of the observed city-level relationship
between house price increases and entrepreneurship operates through expansion of the home
equity collateral channel. First, home equity gains mostly appear to substitute against loans from
friends and family. The vast majority of entrepreneurs used personal savings to finance their
business, and these individuals usually hold sufficient start-up capital absent the house price
increases. Second, we estimate that over 90% of the relationship between house price increases
and entrepreneurship observed in city-level analyses comes from higher local demand that boosts
entry. Our results provide a nuanced picture: while housing collateral is important for some
entrepreneurs to access needed credit, the empirical relationship between house price increases
and start-up activity is more about local demand than about financing constraints.

Sari Kerr                                        Ramana Nanda
Wellesley College                                Harvard Business School
106 Central Street                               Rock Center 317
Wellesley, MA 02481                              Soldiers Field
skerr3@wellesley.edu                             Boston, MA 02163
                                                 and NBER
William R. Kerr                                  rnanda@hbs.edu
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1       Introduction
Given the pivotal role of new …rms in driving economic growth (Decker et al., 2014; Pugsley
and Sahin, 2019), the magnitude of …nancing constraints facing potential entrepreneurs is a
central question for academics and policy makers (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989). While potential
entrepreneurs do not always receive as much capital as they would like, there is also increasing
evidence of heterogeneity in the motivations of founders, as well as the aggregate implications
of these constraints (Kerr and Nanda, 2010). Recent academic work shows, for example, that
a large share of individuals starting a new business are in (i) the top percentiles of the wealth
distribution starting …rms in industries with low capital needs (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004) and/or
(ii) have little ambition to innovate or grow their businesses (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004; Hurst and
Pugsley, 2011). Consistent with this, Decker et al. (2014) point out that older small businesses
in the US do not exhibit the strong up-or-out dynamic associated with job creation and economic
dynamism.
     These facts suggest that the sub-population of …rms that are both …nancially constrained
and likely to be important for productivity growth could be much smaller than the overall set of
entrants in the economy. Indeed, Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and Guzman and Stern (2017)
draw attention to the small number of high-potential entrepreneurs and highlight that these
individuals tend to be among the few entrepreneurs who incorporate their …rms at founding.
     What role does housing collateral play in alleviating …nancial constraints for high-potential
entrepreneurs? Related, to what extent do house price increases lead to aggregate entrepre-
neurship by increasing individuals’ ability to borrow against housing equity? These questions
are not only important in the context of understanding heterogeneity in the …nancing frictions
facing entrepreneurs, but are also tied to the renewed interest in the role of the housing sector in
driving aggregate outcomes following the rapid increase of house prices during the early 2000s
and their subsequent decline after the 2008 …nancial crisis. Debt …nancing is the principal form
of external …nance for most businesses raising money (Robb and Robinson, 2014). The degree
to which the collateral channel alleviates credit constraints— and the extent to which this is a
broad-based e¤ect vs. restricted to a small sub-set of individuals— is also of interest to policy
makers, because subsidies to mortgage …nancing or homestead exemptions in bankruptcy proce-
dures impact the relative costs of owning a home and the value of housing collateral to a bank,
and thereby potentially shaping the access of small businesses to external …nance.1
     A growing body of research examining the role of housing collateral in entrepreneurship
has exploited regional variation in house price changes to quantify the impact of the collateral
    1
    For example, Berkowitz and White (2000), Berger, Cerqueiro and Penas (2011), Cerqueiro et al. (2017),
Cerqueiro and Penas (2017), and Bracke, Hilber, and Silva (2018). See also Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), Berger
and Udell (1998), and Chaney, Sraer and Thesmar (2012).


                                                     3
channel. Fairlie and Krashinksky (2012), Corradin and Popov (2015), Harding and Rosenthal
(2017), and Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017) …nd large elasticities when examining entry
into entrepreneurship. Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015) trace the collateral channel to job
creation by small …rms in the US, and Hyytinen and Ylhäinen (2014) …nd related evidence in
Finland. Black, de Meza and Je¤reys (1996) provide some of the earliest evidence in this regard.
    While our paper is related to this prior work, features of our data allow us to take a new
empirical approach. In particular, we draw on three di¤erent micro datasets from the US Census
Bureau to characterize the home equity channel for entrepreneurial …nance in greater detail. We
further analyze legal changes in pledgeability of housing collateral to enable tighter controls for
unobserved heterogeneity.
    We …rst consider the 2007 Survey of Business Owners (SBO), a representative survey that
covers the universe of over 26 million employer and non-employer businesses in the US. The SBO
contains a question about home equity as a source of external …nance, providing direct evidence
on its typical use. At the height of the 2000-2007 real estate boom, about 12% of US employer
businesses used home equity …nancing partly or wholly for start-up capital; the share for self-
employed entrepeneurs was lower at 5%. This frequency is not trivial compared to other forms
of external …nance (e.g., 16% of employer businesses used bank loans), but it is small compared
to the reliance on personal savings by 75% entrepreneurs that needed start-up …nancing.
    While frequent in use, the SBO data describe how ventures reliant on home equity …nancing
tend to less productive, run by less educated business owners, and more likely to be family-based
businesses. Moreover, there is also little action in terms of house price growth: our estimations
…nd that every 10% increase in house prices between 2000 and 2007 was associated with just a
0.3% increase in the share of home equity use. This modest increase represented some shift away
from business loans from friends and family, while business loans from banks were stable. When
compared to the work documenting how growing house prices unlocked personal consumption,
these patterns suggest a muted response for unlocking collateral for business creation.
    While extremely useful in providing direct evidence of home equity …nancing, the SBO data
are cross-sectional in nature. In order to better identify the dynamic role of housing collateral
in enabling entrepreneurial entry, we therefore turn to two other micro datasets to examine the
role of housing collateral in enabling entrepreneurship.
    Our next analysis exploits legal changes in the pledgeability of housing collateral in Texas
relative to neighboring states to isolate the impact of housing collateral on entrepreneurship.
We exploit a 1997 constitutional amendment in Texas that relaxed stringent constraints on the
ability of banks to lend against housing collateral. Prior to 1997, the home could only be used as
collateral for an individual’s primary mortgage and related home improvement loans. The Texas
amendment in 1997 …rst allowed for home equity loans to be used for business or consumption


                                                4
purposes, and a subsequent reform in 2003 further allowed for home equity lines of credit. Texas
was the only state with such restrictions, which enables us to compare the relationship between
house prices and entry rates in Texas relative to its neighbors, before and after the reform.
    We use the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to study this question over the twenty-
year period spanning 1988 to 2007. Our empirical strategy decomposes the aggregate relationship
between house prices and entrepreneurship into the part stemming from relaxed collateral con-
straints versus other factors such as increased aggregate demand. If intra-city aggregate demand
is an important driver of the relationship between house prices and entrepreneurship— such that
booming local areas are raising house prices and encouraging the creation of new …rms— studies
using regional-level data will be unable to separate the speci…c role of the bank collateral channel
even if they isolate exogenous shifts in collateral values at the regional level.
    We …nd that relative to neighboring states, cities in Texas showed a statistically similar
link between entrepreneurship and house price changes in the decade prior to 1997. In the
decade following the constitutional reforms, the responsiveness of entry rates in Texas to house
price changes increased relative to neighbors, a pattern that is consistent with relaxed liquidity
constraints spurring entry.
    In regressions that control for aggregate demand only at the regional level, a 10% increase
in house prices is associated with a 6% increase in employment among entering …rms, estimates
comparable to the prior literature. When we use the Texas reform to isolate the part of the
6% attributable to the collateral channel as opposed to other factors correlated with house price
increases, we estimate that 0.6%— one-tenth of the overall relationship between house prices
and entering employment— is attributable to housing collateral. Our estimates highlight that
regional analyses of house prices and …rm entry capture much more than just relaxed …nancing
constraints on the entrepreneur’s side.
    Next, we combine the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database and the
2000 Decennial Census of Population to create a dataset with detailed individual-level covariates
and employment histories for a representative subset of the population. This unique dataset
allows us to study heterogeneity in the individual response to house price increases, using zip-
code level price changes and information about the earnings, wealth, estimated loan-to-value
(LTV) ratio for the mortgage, and other demographic attributes of the household. We compare
the responses of those who are able to tap into rising home values with those limited by LTV
ratios that are too high or who experience rare local price declines. We show that controlling for
individual covariates attenuates our estimates substantially, again pointing to a small aggregate
link of house price gains to entry via the collateral channel. We trace the small overall relationship
on the collateral channel to a large response among the 5% of the working population who were
highly levered prior to rising house prices and experienced home equity gains in excess of $75,000.


                                                  5
    These three analyses combine to yield a nuanced story of how house price changes connect
to entrepreneurship. Returning to our …rst results, entrepreneurs use home equity loans at
rates modestly less than bank loans or credit cards, even at the height of the real estate boom.
Consistent with prior research, we document that increases in home values connect to greater
entrepreneurship, but we also show that these changes are substantially smaller once we control
for intra-city aggregate demand and individual-level covariates. The increase in collateral value
accounts for perhaps one-tenth of the overall relationship between house prices and entrepre-
neurship because most home owners already have su¢ cient wealth and home equity to start a
typical business, without any need for additional collateral through house price increases. The
small aggregate e¤ects combine a ‘null’response among most founders with very large elasticities
among the 5% of home owners who had high LTVs and experienced extremely rapid house price
gains.
    This granular perspective is important for policy makers. There may be good reasons to
favor (or oppose) broad-based policies to boost home ownership, but potential connections to the
bank lending channel for entrepreneurs appear too weak to be a material factor. Instead, policy
interventions are likely to be more e¤ective if they target the lending challenges experienced by
the small share of constrained individuals dependent on the home equity channel.
    Our results also speak to the growing literature looking to understand heterogeneity in the
population of potential entrepreneurs and the degree to which …nancing constraints bind for
them. A number of models suggest that individuals are either precluded from entry or that
…rms enter small and then grow because of the fact that they face initial …nancing constraints.2
At the …rm level, changes in local banking conditions have been connected with entrepreneurship
(e.g., Black and Strahan, 2002; Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006; Kerr and Nanda, 2009). On the
other hand, studies looking at entry have questioned the extent to which …nancing constraints
are the leading driver behind entry decisions (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004). We …nd a causal e¤ect
of an exogenous increase in home equity on entrepreneurship, but also …nd that the average
e¤ect is relatively small and heterogeneous. Our limited e¤ects parallel the …ndings of Bracke,
Hilber, and Silva (2018) for the UK and Jensen, Leth-Petersen and Nanda (2014) for Denmark.
    Beyond entrepreneurship, our work is relevant to literature documenting the link between
the value of housing assets and the impact through household balance sheets on aggregate
   2
     Classic and recent work includes Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994),
Rajan and Zingales (1998), Cooley and Quadrini (2001), Gentry and Hubbard (2004), Cabral and Mata (2004),
Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Chatterji and Seamens (2012), and Barrot (2016).
  Greenstone, Mas, and Nguyen (2014), Krishnan, Nandy and Puri (2015), Tsoutsoura (2015), and Nguyen
(2019) are recent contributions to a parallel literature on local lending conditions and existing …rm and small
business access to credit (Petersen and Rajan, 1994, 1995; Paravisini, 2008). Similar to entrepreneurship studies,
this work emphasizes the very localized nature of lending relationships to small businesses.




                                                        6
consumption, employment, and household investment.3 To the extent that entrepreneurship
holds non-pecuniary bene…t (e.g., being one’s own boss) and ‘consumption value’ (Astebro et
al., 2014), some of the entry in this period likely stems from such ‘entrepreneurial consumption’.
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides baseline evidence on use of
home equity …nancing by entrepreneurs with the 2007 Survey of Business Owners. Sections 3
and 4 describe our analyses connecting house prices and entrepreneurship through the collateral
channel using the LBD and LEHD, respectively. Section 5 compares the economic magnitudes
of various empirical exercises, and the last section concludes.


2       Start-up Reliance on Home Equity Loans
We …rst document the use of home equity loans among start-up …rms using the 2007 Survey of
Business Owners (SBO), which contains a direct question regarding use of home equity …nancing
by entrepreneurs. We use the publicly available micro data released by the Census Bureau for
the 2007 SBO.4 The …le contains over two million observations on employer and non-employer
…rms, and the data contain detailed information about the …rm and its owners. Each …rm has
a recorded state and industry; sales and receipts, employment, and payroll from 2007; the year
the business was established; and the sources of …nancing for start-up capital and for expansion
capital. For each business owner, the SBO reports the owner’s age in 2007, the highest level
of education they completed, the number of hours per week spent working in the business, the
owner’s primary functions in the business, and when and how each owner acquired or started
the business.
    The total number of …rms represented by the data (weighted) is about 26.4 million, of which
5.3 million are employer …rms. The Census Bureau has applied statistical safeguards to ensure
that the public-use data do not identify any individuals or businesses. Most important for our
purposes, the data do not separately identify the District of Columbia and seven states: North
Dakota, South Dakota, Rhode Island, Vermont, Alaska, Wyoming, and Delaware. Our sample
thus focuses on 43 states that are separately identi…ed, and we focus on businesses that were
founded between 2000 and 2007. We exclude …rms with missing or unknown start-up …nancing
history (accounting for about 12.5% of the base sample), and we merge at the state-level house
price indices during this period from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA, described in
greater detail in the next section).
    3
     For example, Hurst and Sta¤ord (2004), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), Leth-Petersen (2010), Mian
and Su… (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao and Su… (2013), Glaeser and Nathanson (2014), Mian, Su… and Trebbi (2015),
and Favilukis, Ludvigson and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017).
   4
     Data and descriptions are available at https://www.census.gov/econ/sbo/pums.html.




                                                    7
2.1     Descriptive Features
Column 1 of Table 1 shows that over 90% of employer …rms report using some form of start-up …-
nancing, with three-quarters reporting personal savings were used for start-up capital. Following
personal savings, credit cards (18%), bank loans (16%), other personal assets (12%), and home
equity (12%) are the most frequently mentioned sources. Respondents can check as many types
of …nancing as applicable, and these raw statistics can represent modest or large contributions.
    The total value of start-up …nancing is not split by source, but interesting di¤erences emerge
among the …rms depending on which sources they report having used. Among employer-…rm
start-ups, those relying on personal savings and credit cards report the smallest totals on average
($77,756 and $91,500, respectively), followed by home equity loans at $140,931. This level is
comparable to businesses backed by loans from friends and family and smaller than banks or
venture investors. Thus, home equity appears to be a source that can be accessed by businesses
with mid-sized …nancing needs.5
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 report similar statistics for non-employer …rms, with only 5% of
self-employed using home equity to support their business start. While documenting this share
for completeness, the remainder of this paper focuses on employer …rms exclusively. While there
are millions of self-employed individuals, they represent a small share of employment and output.
For example, the Census Bureau estimates that non-employer …rms account for less than 4% of
annual US sales6 and they are excluded from the LBD or LEHD datasets that we use later. The
limited use of home equity by self-employed and their small economic footprint make them an
unlikely channel for signi…cant collateral e¤ects on the economy.
    While the SBO data do not record what share of …nancing comes from home equity loans
among those who use them, we can provide some complementary evidence through a second data
source. Among entrepreneurs surveyed by the 2001 and 2003 Panel Study of Entrepreneurial
Dynamics (PSED), which includes non-employer …rms, 7% report using home equity loans for an
average of $20,000 in investment capital or roughly 40% of business …nancing. The PSED data
are sparse and should be viewed with caution. Nonetheless, the PSED’s 7% is consistent with
our SBO …gures (5% for self-employed and 12% for employer …rms), and the 40% …gure would
suggest typical home equity usage of around $33,000-$56,000, although the variation would be
substantial.7
    Table 2 describes the types of businesses that are started with home equity …nancing. Firms
   5
     The relatively small use of home equity as a source of capital is not necessarily due to …xed costs in starting
…rms. Home equity loans are used considerably less frequently to expand businesses, where the quantum of
capital required might be expected to be less. Among …rms reporting that they expanded in 2007, home equity
loans are reported as a …nancing source by 9% of the businesses.
   6
     See https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/nonemployer-statistics/about.html.
   7
     Similarly, regressions of SBO …nancing amounts on indicators for the types of …nancing used by the entre-
preneurs returns marginal increments of around $50,000 associated with home equity use.


                                                         8
that rely on home equity …nancing tend to slightly larger than average (6.4 employees versus 6.0
overall). They are bigger than those not using …nancing or relying on personal savings and credit
cards, but they are also one-third smaller than those backed by bank loans. Interestingly, …rms
backed by home equity loans are among the least productive in terms of revenue per employee
and support lower paying jobs. Column 4 shows that some of this could be due to a high
propensity for family-based or husband-wife businesses to use home equity for loans. Owners
using home equity …nancing are less likely to have a bachelors or higher degree than the average
start-up raising external …nance between 2000 and 2007.


2.2     House Prices and Use of Home Equity Financing
While the cross-sectional portrait suggests a modest role for home equity …nancing in new
ventures, we next turn to a more dynamic perspective of whether sources of start-up …nancing
shift substantially when house prices move.8 As we only have a cross-section of data, our
empirical approach explores cross-state variation in house price swings leading up to 2007 (among
the 43 states separately identi…ed).
    Table 3 reports regressions of state-level …nancing behavior for start-up capital. The depen-
dent variable in each analysis is a type of start-up …nancing used by entrants since 2000 in each
state (e.g., the share of recent entrants using home equity loans). Our explanatory variables
control for the type of start-up …nancing used by older …rms that entered before 2000 in each
state (e.g., the share of pre-2000 entrants that used home equity loans for start-up capital). We
thus analyze whether strong house price growth during 2000-2007 for a state is correlated with
a major shift in how young …rms access capital in the state compared to how older …rms did
when they got started. We test whether young …rms in states with high house price appreciation
show a pronounced shift towards home equity …nancing than older …rms nearby, compared to
states with less house price growth. We will also consider any connected shifts related to other
…nancial sources.
    Table 3 considers the share of …rms entering during 2000-2007 indicating reported …nancing,
focusing attention on the composition of start-up …nancing. Columns 1-3 divide the sample
into businesses not raising external …nance, those using home equity as a source of start-up
…nancing, and those whose start-up …nancing does not include home equity. These categories
are collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive, such that the coe¢ cients sum to zero, and the
means of the dependent variables sum to one (weighted state-level averages): 8% of respondents
did not raise external …nance, 80% raised external …nance that does not include home equity
   8
    Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015) demonstrate rising home prices connect to greater re…nancing and use
of home equity lines of credit in cities. The important di¤erence in our estimations is that we are isolating the
use of home equity loans for start-up capital speci…cally.


                                                       9
loans, and 12% raised …nance that includes home equity loans.
    We regress these shares on the log state-level house price change during 2000-2007, as well
as unreported covariate controls for log house price levels in 2000, the log count of pre-2000
entrants by state, and the share of older …rms in each state that used the forms of …nancing
listed in Table 1 (seven regressors in total). These unreported regressors are held constant over
speci…cations to provide a consistent baseline estimation and control for long-standing …nancing
behavior in the state. We weight states by their count of pre-2000 respondents.
    House price growth during 2000-2007 is positively associated with a greater share of ventures
in the state using home equity for start-up …nancing compared to pre-2000 entrants. This pattern
suggests an intuitive substitution towards home equity …nancing as it becomes more available
and is statistically signi…cant. However, the magnitude of these e¤ect is rather modest. A 10%
price growth is associated with a 0.3% increase in the share of …rms using home equity …nancing,
or a 2.6% relative increase in home equity …nancing o¤ of the 12% baseline. These e¤ects suggest
that an enormous run-up in prices, along the lines of the 59% average state house price growth
from 2000 to 2007, would be associated with just a 1%-2% increase in the share of the state’s
entrants using home equity.
    Table 4 provides additional examples of capital included in a venture’s initial …nancing. These
other …ve outcomes are a subset of varieties of capital reported, and other forms of capital may
be used as well; these coe¢ cients are comparable to home equity loans regression in Column
2 of Table 3. Table 4 shows that house price growth leads to some substitution towards home
equity loans instead of using business loans from friends or family. These sources are perhaps
good substitutes from the perspective of business owners, as Tables 1 and 2 show similar types
of businesses rely on them.9
    In summary, the SBO analysis identi…es that employer …rms using home equity for start-up
…nancing tend to be of slightly larger size but also less productive and more family-based. An
increase in house prices is associated with an increase in the share of …rms using home equity,
possibly away from friends and family loans, but the magnitude is small. It is also noteworthy
that the share of ventures backed by bank loans does not increase, suggesting that house price
growth facilitates home equity loans to the entrepreneurs themselves more readily than it boosts
collateral for other forms of credit via personal guarantees and similar.
   9
    Estimations that use log counts of …rms reliant on various …nancing forms as outcome variables reach similar
conclusions. We also …nd an even smaller link of home price growth to use of home equity for expansion capital
than what is shown here for start-up capital.




                                                      10
2.3     House Prices, Collateral and Entrepreneurship
While the SBO data provides a baseline level of home equity …nancing used by start-ups, it
conditions on …rms that have entered rather than looking at the entry decision. We next analyze
more broadly house price increases, housing collateral, and new …rm entry.
    While house price appreciation leads to higher collateral values and hence a higher likeli-
hood of receiving bank …nancing if requested, exploiting house price appreciation as a source
of identi…cation faces several challenges. Areas with high or rising levels of economic activity
will generally be the ones where house prices increase and where entrepreneurship is likely to be
particularly attractive. This could simply follow from strong local economic performance in‡u-
encing many measures, with business starts and house prices being two of them. There could
also be a systematic relationship, but with the causal connection being outside of loan markets
for entrepreneurs. For example, entrepreneurs could be responding to changes in household con-
sumption following adjustments in housing wealth (e.g., Mian and Su…, 2011; Mian, Rao, and
Su…, 2013). Likewise, Stroebel and Vavra (2019) link house price growth to increases in local
mark-ups, which could make new businesses more attractive. Thus, separating the impact of
aggregate demand from the supply side drivers of credit is particularly important.10
    Moreover, those who experience larger dollar increases in housing equity are likely to be
wealthier, since the same percentage price increase unlocks greater equity in a more valuable
home. If wealthier individuals have a di¤erential response to business cycles (e.g., they are able
to recognize or take advantage of opportunities more easily) then this and related individual-
level covariates will confound the relationship between house price increases and entrepreneurial
entry due speci…cally to the collateral channel.11
    We approach these challenges in several ways. First, we exploit legal changes in the pledge-
ability of home collateral in Texas to isolate the role of the collateral channel in entrepreneur-
ship from broader economic factors related to house price increases. This setting provides a
well-identi…ed approach for isolating the collateral channel due to home equity when study-
ing …rm-level entry, along with a natural benchmark for comparison in the overall relationship
between house prices and entry. Second, we use individual-level micro data on homeowners
combined with zip-code level variation in prices to identify individual-level entry into entrepre-
  10
     Some recent e¤orts in this regard have used geographic constraints of cities for housing supply growth, …rst
measured by Saiz (2010), as instruments for credit growth. Davido¤ (2016) describes the challenges to this
approach, and we …nd this does not provide well-grounded identi…cation in our setting.
  11
     For example, home equity gains may make individuals more willing to experiment with entrepreneurship
through lower risk aversion (e.g., Kihlstrom and La¤ont, 1979; Evans and Jovanovic, 1989) and/or changing
occupational preferences to “be one’s own boss” (e.g., Hamilton, 2000; Hurst and Lusardi, 2004; Åstebro and
Thompson, 2011; Hurst and Pugsley, 2011; Åstebro et al., 2014). These mechanisms can lead to a positive
association between wealth and entrepreneurship that is independent of the ability of the potential entrepreneur
to access bank loans.



                                                       11
neurship. This allows us to control for unobserved heterogeneity at much …ner levels of analysis
and isolate sub-populations where our average e¤ects are stemming from.
    These analyses draw upon di¤erent datasets, each with unique elements and constraints. To
facilitate readability, we report our results based on each dataset separately, and then bring the
combined magnitudes and insights together in Section 5.


3      Longitudinal Business Database Analysis
Our next analysis uses the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), a dataset available within
the Census Bureau to approved researchers that provides annual employments for every private-
sector establishment with payroll from 1976 onward. The underlying data are sourced from US
tax records and Census Bureau surveys, and the LBD’s complete accounting of very small …rms
and establishments, which are often excluded or sub-sampled in corporate surveys, is important
for our analysis of entry patterns. The data focus on employer …rms (those reported in Column
2 of Table 1) and thus exclude self-employed individuals who …le tax returns via Schedule C or
private household employees. The LBD also lists physical locations of establishments instead
of states of incorporation, circumventing issues such as higher incorporation rates in Delaware.
Jarmin and Miranda (2002) provide further details on the LBD construction.
    The LBD assigns a …rm identi…er to each establishment that allows us to distinguish stand-
alone …rms from facilities of multi-unit …rms. Our dependent variables focus on the entry of
new single-unit …rms by location, industry, and year spanning the period 1987–2007, which
constitutes ten years before and after the Texas lending reform that we outline in Section 3.1
below.12
    The LBD identi…es the county location of each establishment, which we aggregate to Core
Based Statistical Areas (CBSA).13 We focus on CBSAs in the Texas region, de…ned to be Texas
and its neighbors of Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, and Oklahoma. This
region contains 56 CBSAs that we can match with housing price data over the 1987-2007 period.
A small number of included CBSAs lack house prices in early years, with the sample becoming
  12
     We use the entry rate of facility expansions as a control for local economic activity in many speci…cations.
In various analyses, we further separate entrants by establishment size in year of entry. For each establishment,
we de…ne its entry year to be the …rst year of positive employment, and our analyses are robust to whether we
include or drop the new …rms believed to be spin-outs of existing corporations, which can be assessed through
the establishment identi…ers existing before a …rm is born.
  13
     Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) are a geographic unit de…ned by the O¢ ce of Management and
Budget to replace the prior focus on Metropolitan Statistical Areas. CBSAs consist of one or more counties
that have an urban center of at least 10,000 people. Adjacent counties are included in the CBSA when they are
socioeconomically tied to the urban center by worker commuting. There are over 900 CBSAs currently de…ned,
and these include 388 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs, urban core over 50,000) and Micropolitan Statistical
Areas.



                                                       12
a full panel from 1994 onwards.
    Our housing price data come from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), follow-
ing Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015). The FHFA data are reported at di¤erent levels of
geographic detail and are considered reasonably representative of the overall house price devel-
opment, although they are based on sales of single-family homes and do not include condos.14


3.1     Texas Reform
We draw extensively on Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012), who provide a detailed account of
the restrictions in mortgage …nancing in Texas prior to 1998 and the political economy related
to the Texas Constitutional Amendment to Article XVI, Section 50, which was approved by
Texas voters on November 4, 1997 and became e¤ective January 1, 1998. The constitutional
amendment of 1998 allowed home equity loans for the …rst time in Texas, up to a loan-to-value
ratio of 80% (inclusive of primary mortgage), without restrictions on how the funds could be
used.
    The sanctity of the homestead has been viewed as an essential right for Texas citizens ever
since the Texas Homestead Act of 1839, and it was enshrined into Texas’original Constitution in
1845. As Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012) note, “Article XVI, Section 50 of the Texas Constitution
of 1876, the …fth version of the document since statehood, protected homesteads from foreclosure
except for nonpayment of the original loan to purchase the home or for debt incurred to …nance
home improvements.” This e¤ectively restricted housing collateral to the mortgage and related
home improvement credit, and housing collateral could not be used to …nance consumption
or investment beyond the home. Related products like “cash out” re…nancings and reverse
mortgages were also prohibited. Although home equity lending in the rest of the US boomed
following the federal Tax Reform Act of 1986, which eliminated income tax deductibility on
interest payments related to all forms of consumer credit other than mortgages, the constitutional
restriction prevented such home equity lending from taking e¤ect in Texas.
    Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012) provide a detailed discussion on the appropriateness of using
January 1, 1998 as the start of the period, highlighting how Section 50 had been amended only
twice between 1876 and 1997, and that the actual passage of the law remained uncertain, having
failed to receive legislative support when it had been …rst proposed in 1995. The details of the
reform remained unclear even after its passage, with several rules being ironed out in the few
years after 1998. One of these changes was a rule in 2003 that further loosened restrictions to
  14
    The FHFA website states: “The FHFA House Price Index (HPI) is a broad measure of the movement of
single-family house prices. The HPI is a weighted, repeat-sales index, meaning that it measures average price
changes in repeat sales or re…nancings on the same properties. This information is obtained by reviewing repeat
mortgage transactions on single-family properties whose mortgages have been purchased or securitized by Fannie
Mae or Freddie Mac since January 1975.”


                                                      13
allow home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). Throughout this period, however, the 80% loan-to-
value remained the maximum borrowing limit, a legal restriction on pledgeability that did not
exist in other states in the Texas region.
    We use these three features of the Texas reforms— the introduction of home equity loans in
1998, the further introduction of home equity lines of credit in 2003, and the 80% loan-to-value
restriction— as sources of variation in our analyses below. Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012) show
that these reforms had bite for consumer spending in Texas, with sustained increases of 2%-3% in
retail sales. Moreover, they demonstrate that the underlying heterogeneity in spending responses
is consistent with house price gains and the unlocking of housing collateral. We analyze whether
a similar e¤ect exists for entry into new businesses.


3.2    Empirical Results
Table 5 provides the simplest evidence of the limited impact of the Texas reforms that opened
up the home equity collateral channel for entrepreneurship. Using a technique dating back
to Holmes (1998), we look at counties that are part of CBSAs on the Texas border with its
neighbors. The core identi…cation assumption in a state border analysis is that the counties
on either side of the border would behave similarly excepting the legal change in Texas. If
the neighboring entrepreneurs are subject to the same economic shocks and changes in local
economic opportunities, we can look for evidence in changes in behavior on the Texas side that
would indicate collateral being opened up.
    Our tabulations simply aggregate activity on either side of the Texas border in the three
time periods, normalizing by what is observed in the pre-period. If an interior county is part of
a CBSA that touches the Texas border, it is retained in the sample. The …rst two columns show
that house price changes on both sides of the border look similar through 2007. The next two
columns show that entry counts behave quite similarly. Entry counts as measured by the LBD
have been in decline nationally since the 1970s (e.g., Decker et al., 2014), and we see this in our
sample too. The more important trait is the parallel trends in entry rates on either side of the
border. The same again holds for entry employment in Columns 5 and 6.
    We have conducted an extensive regression analysis on the border region. These unreported
analyses consistently …nd a null e¤ect on the border, which is not too surprising given the
tabulations in Table 5. Of course, while the identi…cation provided by a border discontinuity is
attractive, the amount of activity on the Texas border is limited compared to the big cities of
Dallas, Houston, Denver, etc., and so we instead turn towards testing whether we observe an
entrepreneurship response in the larger sample.
    Speci…cally, we run triple di¤erences-in-di¤erences estimations comparing the elasticity of a
CBSA’s entry rate with respect to local house prices in Texas to the neighboring states in the

                                                14
pre and post periods. Our baseline LBD estimation takes the form:

                         ln(Yc;t ) = 'c +    t   + ln(HP Ic;t )                                 (1)
                                       + ln(HP Ic;t ) P ostt
                                       + ln(HP Ic;t ) T Xc
                                       + ln(HP Ic;t ) T Xc P ostt + "c;t ;

where c indexes CBSAs and t indexes years. The dependent variable Yc;t is the log entrant count
or log employment in new single-unit entrants in the CBSA by year. Panel estimations control
for CBSA and year …xed e¤ects. T Xc is an indicator variable for a CBSA being located in Texas,
and P ostt is an indicator variable for a year after 1998. ln(HP Ic;t ) is the log house price index
for the CBSA by year.
    The coe¢ cient captures the base relationship between house prices and entry outside of
Texas, with the coe¢ cient being the change in correlation of house prices and entry in the
second half of the sample period common over the region. The coe¢ cient measures the degree
that Texan CBSAs behave systematically di¤erent throughout the twenty years. Last, but most
important, the coe¢ cient captures the change in the connection of house prices to entry that
occurs in Texas after the Constitutional amendment.
    Column 1 of Table 6a shows that entry counts had a limited relationship to CBSA house
prices in the Texas region before 1998, but that this connection became quite strong after 1998.
Throughout the twenty year period, Texan CBSAs don’t behave that di¤erently than CBSAs in
neighboring states, and continues to be the case after the 1998 amendment. Thus, the estimations
in Table 6a show no discernible di¤erence in the relative change in entry for Texas in the post
period compared to neighboring states. Such an elasticity may have been present, for example, if
there was pent up demand in the pre-period from an inability to use housing collateral that was
released with the legal change and surge in home values nation wide. These results are robust
if we add controls for local economic activity or use employment in start-ups as the dependent
variable.
    To discern whether this limited …nding is due to the time taken to enact the Texas reform
and have it di¤use to loan decisions, Table 6b divides the post period into two separate …ve-year
periods. The period 1998-2002 corresponds to when the reform took place but only home equity
loans were legalized. The period 2003-2007 comes after home equity lines of credit also became
legal. The greater granularity shows an increased sensitivity to house prices in Texas in the 2003-
2007 period relative to neighboring states. Even here, though, the magnitude is small. Column
2 shows a 0.14% higher entry count in Texas in the 2003-2007 period for every 10% increase in
house prices. Column 4 shows a corresponding 0.6% increase in employment in entering …rms.


                                                  15
This compares to the overall relationship of 3% and 6% for entry and employment, respectively,
to a 10% increase in house prices. In other words, even well after the reform and at the height
of the real estate boom, the collateral channel appears to account for about 4% of the overall
relationship between house prices and entry and about 10% of the overall relationship between
house prices and entering employment.
    Table 7 evaluates this e¤ect by entrant size and industry, reporting just the interactions.
The smallest entrants with 1-2 persons behave quite similarly to the overall e¤ect, as they
constitute a large share of entrants. Entrants with 3-9 employees show the weakest response. The
strongest e¤ect is evident in entrants with 10 or more employees. These e¤ects are statistically
signi…cant, albeit still rather small in economic size, and could be consistent with both reduced
collateral constraints for a segment of entrepreneurs or local consumption e¤ects, as described
further below. The remaining columns quantify responses by sector of the economy. Entry in the
manufacturing sector in 2003-2007 shows the most signi…cant uptick for Texas after the reforms
relative to other states. Across the region, entry into the construction sector is highly sensitive
to house prices swings, but Texan CBSAs do not display a di¤erential to CBSAs in neighboring
states.
    Taken as a whole, these estimations suggest a limited impact of the Texan home equity
lending reforms on entrepreneurship. We reach similar …ndings in many robustness checks:
dropping the size weights given to the CBSAs, expanding the CBSA sample to include the
whole US versus a focus on the Texan region, and so on. Most estimations show a statistical
di¤erence for Texas after 2003, indicative of the collateral channel being opened up, but the
results remain modest in overall economic size. Unreported analyses also consider extending the
sample onwards through 2012, when the LBD data end. The e¤ects we measure in 2003-2007 are
present in 2008-2012. Given the onset of the Great Recession and the increased time elapsing
since the date of the Texas reform, we hesitate to emphasize these results too much, but the
results suggest a persistent change that is of the magnitude evident by 2003-2007.
    Our magnitudes imply that “unlocking” housing collateral in Texas led to 0.6% higher em-
ployment in start-ups for every 10% increase in house prices. Importantly, this home equity
channel accounted for one-tenth of the overall (6%) house price-employment relationship we
estimated in the LBD for every 10% increase in house prices. These estimates highlight that fac-
tors like intra-city aggregate demand operate alongside the collateral channel when considering
regional relationships between house prices and entry.
    While the LBD analysis is well-identi…ed, there are two important questions that we cannot
address at this level of analysis. First, unlocking housing collateral also has an impact on
household consumption (e.g., Mian and Su…, 2011). Speci…c to this Texas reform, Abdallah and
Lastrapes (2012) …nd a signi…cant increase in retail sales stemming from an increase in household


                                                16
expenditure, and some of this demand could have led to increased …rm entry independent of the
entrepreneur’s home equity being unlocked. Only a small fraction of home equity loans are
used for business purposes (e.g., Benito, 2009), with most going towards home improvements or
consumer purchases. Thus, our coe¢ cients may even still pick up both the demand and supply
e¤ects of a relaxed collateral channel. Second, the supply-side e¤ect of the home equity channel
re‡ects both the collateral channel and wealth e¤ects. This ambiguity is similar to studies
of other windfall gains leading workers to be more willing to experiment with starting a new
business (e.g., Lindh and Ohlsson, 1996; Anderson and Nielsen, 2012; Manso, 2016), which we
cannot isolate using …rm-level data. We therefore turn to understanding these features through
micro data at the individual level.


4       Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Database
We complement the LBD’s longitudinal analysis of the Texas reform with a quite di¤erent
approach using the LEHD. The individual-level data on home values in the Decennial Census
and entrepreneurial transitions present in the LEHD allow for sharp empirical analyses but also
require that we exploit cross-sectional variation across individuals and states. We begin with a
depiction of the data and then the empirical strategy.


4.1      LEHD Data Platform
Our analysis combines the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database and
the 2000 Decennial Census of Population. Similar to the LBD, these datasets are con…dential
and housed by the US Census Bureau. The LEHD is built from quarterly worker-level …lings by
employers for the administration of state unemployment insurance bene…t programs, identifying
the employees of each US …rm and their quarterly compensation. It is longitudinally linked at
both the …rm and employee levels, allowing one to model how …rm employment structures adjust
over time, how new start-ups form, and how individuals transition into entrepreneurship. This
rich data source is currently available for 31 states for research purposes. The initial dates di¤er
across states in terms of inclusion in the LEHD, and we focus on states that have records that
begin in 1995 or earlier to allow us to measure meaningful income accumulation over the prior
decade.15 The LEHD directly records some information about individuals, such as age, gender,
race, place of birth, and citizenship status as well as earnings and employment histories by job.
    We match the LEHD to individual-level records contained in the 2000 Decennial Census of
Population (Census) through unique person identi…ers. The Census has long-form responses for
 15
      Included states are CA, CO, FL, ID, IL, IN, LA, MD, NC, NM, OK, OR, TX, WA, and WI.



                                                   17
one in six of the population, and thus, roughly speaking, we can match a similar ratio of our
LEHD workers. The long form is given to a random sample of households for a nationally rep-
resentative population. With this match comes a wealth of information about individuals (e.g.,
level of education, occupation, marital status) and their households (e.g., family composition,
household income by source, home ownership and values). Importantly for our purposes, the
Census asks whether the housing unit occupied by the respondent is rented or owned, how long
the individual has been living in the residence, how much the monthly rent or mortgage payment
is, and what the market value of the unit is.16


4.2     Sample Design and Empirical Approach
We build a custom dataset for the analysis of house prices and entry, focusing our primary
analysis on homeowners (70% of the data sample, which closely compares to a national average
of 67% in 2000). We use renters to formulate control variables described below. We also restrict
our sample to individuals who are in wage employment in 2000 and examine their probability of
transitioning into entrepreneurship by 2004. Since the LEHD does not have an o¢ cial indicator
for entrepreneurship, we de…ne an individual as being an entrepreneur if they were among the
top three earners in the entry year of a new …rm. The appendix provides details on the speci…c
steps we took to create the sample and this de…nition of entrepreneurial transition.
    As seen in Table 8, our …nal regression sample is based on 529,600 individuals. The average
value of a home in our sample is approximately $188,000. Most homeowners in 2000 have a
mortgage outstanding but also hold signi…cant home equity: the average homeowner in our
sample is estimated to have about 57% of their home value as equity, or in the ballpark of
$107,000. Our 57% estimate is very close to the 52% measure found by Bracke, Hilber, and Silva
(2018) with their UK loan data. The average ratio of this home equity to household income is
also consistent with other data sources (e.g., Gentry and Hubbard, 2004).17
    Looking forward, house price growth from 2000 to 2004 is substantial and averages 43% for
  16
      The exact question in 2000 is “What is the value of this property; that is, how much do you think this house
and lot, apartment, or mobile home and lot would sell for if it were for sale?” Respondents selected from 28
ranges of values, with a minimum of “Less than $10,000” to a maximum of “$1,000,000 or more.” We convert
these to midpoints, excepting the last category, which is simply assigned $1,000,000. We perform a number of
simple cross-checks on the data that are feasible with the long form of the 1990 Decennial Census.
   17
      We estimate an individual’s home equity in 2000 based upon time since home purchase, home price growth
from time of purchase to 2000, and similar data. Speci…cally, we collect from Freddie Mac the average value,
interest rate, and number of points on 30-year …xed rate loans for the years in which homeowners in our sample
moved into their homes. Using a mortgage calculator, we then quantify the expected equity levels by year of
move-in for that cohort in 2000 against the original loan amount and price levels. Owners are assumed to have as
further equity all additional price growth from the time of their home purchase until 2000, which can be material
given the price increases in the 1990s. Moreover, if no outstanding mortgage exists, we assign home equity to be
100% of the value of the home in 2000.



                                                       18
our sample. This results in an estimated home equity gain on the order of $85,000, which is a
sizable wealth shock equal to one year’s pre-tax household income. It is important to note that
the expected nominal gain in home equity, all else equal, is independent of the individual’s 2000
home equity level. That is, if the home value appreciates by $80,000, the owners enjoys all of
this wealth gain regardless of whether their initial equity in 2000 is $10,000 or $250,000.
    Our empirical approach exploits di¤erences across individuals in their ability to take advan-
tage of the 2000-2004 upswing. We de…ne three groups of individuals that we expect to have
di¤erent responses to the increases in house prices. About 85% of the sample is part of an
“unlevered” group. These individuals moved into their home before 1998 and would be able
to access home collateral if they wanted to, both before and during the 2000-2004 run up in
prices. On average, these individuals held about $117,000 in home equity in 2000, compared to
an increase in home equity of about $80,000 during the 2000-2004 period. Along the lines of the
investment cash-‡ow sensitivity literature, we expect these individuals to have a small response,
if any, to the 2000-2004 house price growth as they were already relatively unconstrained in
2000.
    A second “levered”group represents about 13% of the sample and contains individuals who
moved into their home after 1998. These individuals are the most sensitive to increases in house
prices if they are …nancially constrained, as they have very little home equity available to borrow
against in 2000. The …nal “lending constrained” group is about 2% of the sample. These are
individuals who would be unlikely to borrow against any changes in home equity over this period,
either because of legal limits on borrowing (e.g., to keep a loan-to-value ratio less than 0.8) or
because their zip codes experienced price declines during the 2000-2004 period.18
    We use cross-sectional variation across groups interacted with 2000-2004 house price changes
as our source of identi…cation. Speci…cally, the lending-constrained group serves as our baseline,
as these are individuals with very limited access to …nancial markets via home equity gains in
the 2000-2004 period. We anticipate the levered group to have the strongest response. Finally,
in the spirit of the investment-cash ‡ow sensitivity literature, our unlevered group can be seen
as a placebo that we would expect to provide a null response. Such a null response can pro-
vide reassurance that our e¤ects are indeed capturing supply-side changes stemming from the
collateral channel as opposed to also capturing demand-side factors.19
  18
     In de…ning these groups, there is some temptation to use additional features like the mortgage payment to
infer whether the individual has loaded up more debt or substantially paid down the original loan. It is better,
however, to stay with the baseline formulation as these adjustments, such as remodelling the kitchen, are often
endogenous with entrepreneurial ambitions.
  19
     In some of our estimations, we also use renters and their entrepreneurial transitions to project the expected
behavior for homeowners. These calculations model the housing stock of renters through their monthly rental
payment. To assign an implied value to rental properties, we simply use 20 times the annual rent. In 2000, the
average multiple was 21.6, using quarterly reports from Case-Shiller and FHFA data. Comparing the implied
value of homes for renters with the actual home values of owners shows that renters tend to live in dwellings of


                                                       19
    Table 8 provides descriptive statistics on the LEHD sample. Column 1 reports averages for
the key variables across all groups, and the next two columns split them by group. Disclosure
restrictions on the Census data prevent us from splitting the sample into the three groups we
use in our analysis for all of these traits. Instead, we provide descriptive statistics separately
for the unlevered group (which we expect not to be …nancially constrained and therefore not as
responsive to house price increases) and those potentially constrained. This latter set contains
the levered and lending-constrained groups outlined above.
    Due to the large sample size, virtually all traits are statistically di¤erent between the two
reported groups, even when the di¤erences are small in magnitude. Rows 4-10 show that the
potentially constrained group is somewhat younger, more male, more minority and immigrant,
and more single than the baseline group. The potentially constrained group is more educated
on average, partly re‡ecting their younger average age. Rows 12-17 show traits of income and
home values of the groups. Potentially constrained individuals live in more valuable homes, on
average, and with recent move-in dates. Their household income in 2000 and LEHD earnings
are roughly comparable to the unlevered set, but their estimated wealth in 2000 is substantially
lower due to limited home equity. The …nal rows show that price increases and estimated home
equity gains are also comparable across groups. There is a small positive correlation of zip code
price growth to higher home values in 2000.


4.3     Empirical Results
Table 9 reports estimates of the transition into business ownership by 2004 for homeowners not in
entrepreneurship in 2000 due to home equity gains. We group expected home equity gains from
2000 to 2004 into four levels: <$25,000, $25,000-$75,000, $75,000-$150,000, and >$150,000. The
middle bins include the ballpark range from the SBO for typical home equity usage in business
formation capital when this form of …nancing is present. We model these gains separately for
the levered and unlevered groups, with the lending constrained control group serving as the
reference category.
    Column 1 models region …xed e¤ects and indicator variables developed by initial …nancial
status in 2000 and home equity gains during 2000-2004, allowing non-parametric measurement of
e¤ects relative to the lending-constrained group. An intuitive coe¢ cient pattern emerges: entry
transition is rising in the size of home equity gain for both the baseline and levered groups. The
coe¢ cients are monotonic within each group and statistically signi…cant for groups with home
equity gains greater than $25,000. These results hold with the substitution of tighter geographic
modestly less value, but that the distributions overlap substantially. Owners have a signi…cantly longer average
tenure in their properties than renters.




                                                      20
…xed e¤ects zip codes in Columns 2.20
    Column 3 adds the four indicator variables for initial wealth levels in 2000, aggregating home
equity and household income. Up to this point, we have not incorporated controls to model that
wealthy individuals are more likely to experience larger home equity gains (as they own more
valuable properties) but are also more likely to enter into entrepreneurship for many reasons
beyond house price changes. Column 3 also includes explanatory variables for demographics,
earnings histories, and mortgage payments and interact these variables with zip code price
growth.21
    These simple additions wipe out all of the transition e¤ects evident for the unlevered group.
This is an important …nding, as this group accounts for 85% of the total sample of homeowners.
The estimations show that this group does not transition to entrepreneurship at a di¤erent rate
as house prices rise, even for very large house price shocks, when compared to a group for which
lending is constrained. At a more intuitive level, it simply highlights that most homeowners
in 2000 already held borrowing capacity if they wanted it, and so the subsequent house price
changes are not unlocking a collateral channel that had been previously closed to them. Column
4 further shows that the results are robust to including a projection of the likelihood of transition,
given a homeowner’s traits, based upon what we observe for renters with similar traits during
2000-2004.
    The response of the levered group is even more interesting. These are individuals who have
moved into their home recently, have much smaller home equity, and face no local price or legal
constraints to bene…ting from house price gains. This group, when achieving equity gains in
excess of $75,000, continues to show a heightened rate of entrepreneurial transition compared
to the lending-constrained group. Even with the many controls in place, the house price gains
are su¢ cient to boost entry rates by 50% compared to the sample average rate. This segment
is conceptually the most likely to bene…t from house price growth, and the e¤ects are strongest
here. For those experiencing weaker home equity gains of less than $75,000, the response is much
more muted.
  20
     While our focus is on heterogeneity, the LEHD sample behaves much like the LBD analysis in terms of
aggregate relationships. We derive a 0.0039 (0.0008) coe¢ cient when simply regressing the transition probability
on the zip code level price growth for an individual and region …xed e¤ects. This coe¢ cient is 0.0119 (0.0016)
when using CBSA prices. Compared to the baseline entry rate of 0.0159, these coe¢ cients would suggest a 10%
increase in local prices boosts overall entry by a relative rate of 2.5%-7.5%.
  21
     We model …xed e¤ects for estimated initial wealth levels in 2000 that use the same four increments as
home equity gains: {<$25,000, $25,000-$75,000, $75,000-$150,000, >$150,000}. Additional covariates are also
introduced as …xed e¤ects, with category counts in parenthesis: age (9), education (6), gender (1), race (4),
immigration status (1), marital status (1), LEHD earnings in 2000 (10), accumulated LEHD earnings to 2000 (10),
and monthly mortgage payment levels (9). The latter are included due to the challenges that debt repayment
creates for entrepreneurial transitions (Bracke, Hilber, and Silva, 2018). Accumulated earnings are measured
relative to the respondent’s state due to di¤erent durations of states in the LEHD sample. Each of these control
variables is also interacted with the individual’s zip code price growth.



                                                       21
    This contrast provides the essence of our LEHD results and connects back to the limited
response we estimated in a longitudinal manner with the LBD. For most homeowners, it is
hard to identify an entry e¤ect following house price growth relative to the group with lending
constraints. For the baseline set of homeowners moving in before 1998, which constitutes 85% of
the sample, this is not too surprising (at least in hindsight) because they already had su¢ cient
home equity capacity if they wanted to use it. Similarly, 6% of homeowners are individuals
who could have bene…ted from home equity gains but simply did not experience them in a very
large way. On the other hand, for the 6% who experienced big gains and were highly levered
beforehand, the growth in entrepreneurship was signi…cant. Figure 1 captures these core …ndings
graphically.
    A few extensions are noteworthy to report. In addition to looking at actual house price
gains, we …nd similar outcomes when using an exogenous element of house price gains due to
frothy markets developed by Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2017, 2018).22 Complementary
analyses also show that levered individuals experience large home equity gains become less likely
to join an existing early stage company compared to starting a new one (e.g., Campbell et al.,
2012; Roach and Sauermann, 2015). Joiners likely face a lot of the same rewards and risks
associated with entrepreneurial ventures, but they do not need to put up starting capital. Thus,
the absence of a tight linkage of home equity gains for joiners suggests that we can place greater
con…dence in the limited e¤ects that are present in Table 9. Finally, the entry response persists
when examining entry to 2008.
    In summary, we use an empirical strategy that is inspired by the investment-cash ‡ow sensi-
tivity literature to document that the large majority of individuals, including many who expe-
rienced substantial increases in home equity due to house price run-ups, were no more likely to
become entrepreneurs than our control group that was lending-constrained due to legal limits or
local price declines. A small group of individuals who were highly levered and also experienced
large house price gains did increase their entry rate substantially.
    While house price increases are important in alleviating …nancing constraints for some home-
owners, these …ndings suggest that the aggregate e¤ects measured in Tables 6a and 6b are
modest because most homeowners already have su¢ cient equity in their homes (consistent with
the SBO) and thus house price increases do not alleviate any binding credit constraints. Our
setting is particularly attractive in this regard, as we can show that the response is a null ef-
fect for 85% of our sample. This includes a number of individuals with home equity gains over
$150,000, which is well beyond the starting capital required for a typical new venture (Hurst
  22
     Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2017, 2018) note that local real estate markets often entered a hot run-up
period during 2000-2005 where the price gains were escalating too fast to be a consequence of slower-moving
fundamentals. Their work estimated on a city-by-city basis where trend breaks exist, and then isolate the price
escalation that happens around that trend break.


                                                      22
and Lusardi, 2004). In other words, our zero response is not due to home equity gains being
insu¢ ciently large to overcome potential …nancing constraints.


5    Magnitudes of Results
We have used three datasets, multiple levels of analysis, di¤erent sources of identi…cation, and
somewhat di¤erent time periods to study the relationship between house prices and entrepre-
neurship. Although the magnitudes are not directly comparable across approaches due to these
di¤erences, we next verify that they provide a consistent picture in terms of the implied size
of e¤ects. This is …rst done with a focus on elasticities, by comparing the e¤ect through the
collateral channel of a 10% increase in house prices for entrepreneurship. We also quantify the
share of the house price and entry relationship that is explained by the collateral channel in our
context.
    Focusing …rst on Column 4 of Table 6b, our LBD estimations measure that a 10% increase in
house prices in the overall Texas region was associated with a 6% increase in entering employment
in the 2003-2007 period. The Texas interactions that isolate the role of home equity collateral
channels yield responses of 0.6%. Thus, about one-tenth of the overall relationship between
house prices and entrepreneurship is attributed to the collateral channel.
    The LEHD estimations model individual-level entry into entrepreneurship in the 2000-2004
period among homeowners in wage work, but nevertheless …nd comparable results. Column 3
of Table 9 shows that levered individuals with over $75,000 in home equity gains experienced
a 0.008 increase in entrepreneurial transitions, a sizeable boost of slightly more than 50% to
the baseline entry rate of 0.0159 shown in Table 8. These individuals account for 6% of the
population, and strong responses are not evident for other groups. The estimates thus suggest a
3% aggregate (50% 6%) increase in entry during a period that experienced a 43% increase in
house prices. Reporting this in terms of a 10% increase, therefore, we estimate a 0.7% increase in
entry, which is very consistent with the 0.6% number found in the LBD. If we re-do this exercise
where we model zip code …xed e¤ects but do not control for individual covariates, we obtain a
6% impact that is more than eight times larger, similar to the LBD analysis.
    The SBO analysis is not directly comparable to the LBD and LEHD estimations, since the
SBO data condition on being an entrepreneur in 2007. Yet, the implied entry elasticities are
again quite consistent. This can be seen through a sample model where 100 of every 1000
entering …rms in 2000 used home equity (the exact fraction is 10.4% for 2000-2002 entrants alive
in 2007). In unreported regressions, we …nd that a 10% increase in prices would have led to a
5% increase in entry among …rms using home equity. These extra …ve …rms would constitute
0.5% of the 1000 …rm baseline. While this type of calculation is not exact, it suggests that the


                                               23
magnitude evident within the SBO using cross-sectional variation over states is comparable to
the panel variation in other datasets.
    In summary, our estimated e¤ects of housing collateral on entry are aligned over the three
approaches, consistently pointing to about a 0.6% increase in start-up activity for every 10%
gain in house prices due speci…cally to the collateral channel. The comparability is reassuring
given the very di¤erent empirical strategies, levels of analyses, and time periods. These results
portray how the collateral channel operates for the entry of employer …rms, which would be
the core channel for the collateral e¤ect to in‡uence broad economic outcomes. Self-employed
entrepreneurs may show di¤erent dependencies on house prices growth. However, as the SBO
data show an overall lower reliance among this group to home equity loans for start-up capital,
sizable economic e¤ects in this category are unlikely to emerge.


6    Conclusions
The …nancing conditions of entrepreneurs is a topic of central importance given the link of
young …rms to economic growth. The massive recent swings in house prices in the US and other
countries have brought renewed interest to the role of adjustments in home equity in decisions to
start new …rms. Home equity has the potential to play an important role since it is amenable to
pledging against bank loans and because its swings can provide substantial windfalls or losses.
Entrepreneurs also use home equity at a frequency that is similar to, if a bit less than, bank
loans or credit cards. Yet, looking at the massive price growth in the early 2000s, we …nd only
modest connections between house price changes and rates of entrepreneurship that we can link
to home equity growth experienced by individuals.
    We use three di¤erent approaches: looking at employment in entering …rms, individual-level
transition rates, and the sources of …nancing used by new entrants. Overall, the three approaches
show that in the US during the 2000-2008 period, (i) most entrepreneurs did not rely on home
equity to …nance their businesses; (ii) most homeowners already had su¢ cient housing collateral
to pledge for a bank loan even in the absence of house price increases; and (iii) because of these
two facts, the substantial house price increases in the 2000s impacted only a fraction of potential
entrepreneurs via the collateral channel.
    Nevertheless, similar to prior work, we also …nd a strong overall relationship between house
price increases and entry. In fact, the 6% increase in entry that we …nd to be associated with a
10% increase in house prices is close to the magnitude reported by several other papers. Once we
account for aggregate demand and control of individual covariates, however, we estimate that the
collateral channel is perhaps one-tenth of this overall e¤ect. While housing collateral is clearly
important for some entrepreneurs in accessing bank credit, the role of house price increases in


                                                24
alleviating …nancing constraints appears small in aggregate and highly correlated with many
other factors that in‡uence potential entrepreneurs’entry decisions. We hope that future work
can further study in a related manner other forms of entry like Schedule C self-employment, to
complement our analysis of employer …rms.
    There are several opportunities for future research. Our analysis ends before the Great Re-
cession and the relative collapse of housing prices in many areas of the US. It is important in
future work to consider whether price expansions and contractions have di¤erent properties for
the collateral channel, as the latter could undermine the entrepreneurial e¤orts of existing bor-
rowers if banks retract lending in a contagion e¤ect that operates along the intensive margin of
borrowers (e.g., Makridis and Ohlrogge, 2017). Second, a longer panel of employment data will
allow a consideration of the long-term career implications for those drawn into entrepreneurship
or the joining of young …rms by house price gains. The nature of entrepreneurial experimentation
suggests the ability to test business ownership as a career has bene…ts beyond the immediate
job consequences (e.g., Manso, 2016; Dillon, and Stanton, 2016). Third, work by Levine and
Rubinstein (2017) and Guzman and Stern (2017) highlights new ways to di¤erentiate entrepre-
neurs entering with high growth ambitions for their …rms, and it would be attractive to marry
the LEHD transitions with these types of quality indicators as they become incorporated into
the Census Bureau data family. These extensions will better de…ne how house price changes link
into local economic growth.




References
 [1] Abdallah, C. S. and W. D. Lastrapes. “Home Equity Lending and Retail Spending: Evidence
     from a Natural Experiment in Texas.”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, no.
     4 (2012): 94–125.

 [2] Adelino, M., A. Schoar and F. Severino. “House Prices, Collateral and Self-Employment.”
     Journal of Financial Economics 117, no. 2 (2015): 288–306.

 [3] Anderson, S. and K. M. Nielsen. “Ability or Finances as Constraints on Entrepreneurship?
     Evidence from Survival Rates in a Natural Experiment.” Review of Financial Studies 25,
     no. 12 (2012): 3684–710.

 [4] Åstebro, T. and P. Thompson. “Entrepreneurs: Jacks of all Trades or Hobos?” Research
     Policy 40, (2011): 637–64.



                                               25
 [5] Åstebro, T., H. Herz, R. Nanda and R. A. Weber. “Seeking the Roots of Entrepreneurship:
     Insights from Behavioral Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, no. 3 (2014):
     49–70.

 [6] Barrot, J. N. “Trade Credit and Industry Dynamics: Evidence from Trucking Firms.”
     Journal of Finance 71, no. 5 (2016): 1975–2016.

 [7] Benito, A. “Who Withdraws Housing Equity and Why?” Economica 76, no. 301 (2009):
     51–70.

 [8] Berger, A. N., G. Cerqueiro and M. F. Penas. “Does Debtor Protection Really Protect
     Debtors? Evidence from the Small Business Credit Market.” Journal of Banking and Fi-
     nance 35, no. 7 (2011): 1843–57.

 [9] Berger, A. N. and G. F. Udell. “The Economics of Small Business Finance: The Roles of
     Private Equity and Debt Markets in the Financial Growth Cycle.” Journal of Banking &
     Finance 22, no. 6-8 (1998): 613–73.

[10] Berkowitz, J. and M. J. White. “Bankruptcy and Small Firms’Access to Credit.” RAND
     Journal of Economics 35, no. 1 (2004): 69–84.

[11] Black, J., D. de Meza and D. Je¤reys. “House Price, the Supply of Collateral and the
     Enterprise Economy.”Economic Journal 106, no. 434 (1996): 60–75.

[12] Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan. “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability.” Journal
     of Finance 57, no. 6 (2002): 2807–33.

[13] Bracke, P., C. Hilber and O. Silva. “Mortgage Debt and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of
     Urban Economics 103, no. 1 (2018), 52–66.

[14] Buera, F., J. Kaboski and Y. Shin. “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors.”
     American Economic Review 101, no. 5 (2011): 1964–2002.

[15] Cabral, L. M. B. and J. Mata. “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
     Theory.”American Economic Review 93, no. 4 (2003): 1075–90.

[16] Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi. “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth.” Journal of Po-
     litical Economy 114, no. 5 (2006): 835–70.

[17] Campbell, B., M. Ganco, A. Franco and R. Agarwal. “Who Leaves, Where to, and Does
     It Matter?: Employee Mobility, Entrepreneurship, and the E¤ects on Source Firm Perfor-
     mance.”Strategic Management Journal 33, no. 1 (2012), 65–87.

                                             26
[18] Cerqueiro, G., D. Hegde, M. F. Penas and R. Seamans. “Debtor Rights, Credit Supply, and
     Innovation.”Management Science 63, no. 10 (2017): 3311–27.

[19] Cerqueiro, G. and M. F. Penas. “How Does Personal Bankruptcy Law A¤ect Start-Ups?”
     Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 7 (2017): 2523–54.

[20] Cetorelli, N. and P. E. Strahan. “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition and
     Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets.”Journal of Finance 61, no. 1 (2006): 437–61.

[21] Chaney, T., D. Sraer and D. Thesmar. “The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks
     A¤ect Corporate Investment.”American Economic Review 102, no. 6 (2012): 2381–409.

[22] Charles, K., E. Hurst and M. Notowidigdo. “Housing Booms and Busts: Labor Market
     Opportunities, and College Attendance,” American Economic Review 108, no. 10 (2018):
     2947–94.

[23] Charles, K., E. Hurst and M. Notowidigdo. “Housing Booms, Manufacturing Decline and
     Labor Market Outcomes.”Economic Journal (2017), forthcoming.

[24] Chatterji, A. and R. Seamens. “Entrepreneurial Finance, Credit Cards and Race.”Journal
     of Financial Economics 106, no. 1 (2012): 182–95.

[25] Cooley, T. F. and V. Quadrini. “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics.” American Eco-
     nomic Review 91, no. 5 (2001): 1286–310.

[26] Corradin, S. and A. Popov. “House Prices, Home Equity Borrowing and Entrepreneurship.”
     Review of Financial Studies 28, no. 8 (2015): 2399–428.

[27] Davido¤, T. “Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home Prices
     Because They Are Correlated With Many Demand Factors.”Critical Finance Review 5, no.
     2 (2016): 177–206.

[28] Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin and J. Miranda. “The Role of Entrepreneurship in
     US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, no. 3
     (2014): 3–24.

[29] Dillon, E. and C. Stanton. “Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to Entrepreneur-
     ship.”Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 17-022 (2016).

[30] Evans, D. S. and B. Jovanovic. “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
     Liquidity Constraints.”Journal of Political Economy 97, no. 4 (1989): 808–27.



                                            27
[31] Fairlie, R. and H. Krashinksky. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepre-
     neurship Revisited.”Review of Income and Wealth 58, no. 2 (2012): 279–306.

[32] Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson and S. Van Nieuwerburgh. “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of
     Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General Equilibrium.”
     Journal of Political Economy 125, no. 1 (2017): 140–22.

[33] Gentry, W. M. and R. G. Hubbard. “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving.” Advances
     in Economic Policy and Analysis 4, no. 1 (2004).

[34] Glaeser, E. L. and C. G. Nathanson. “Housing Bubbles.”NBER Working Paper No. 20426
     (2014).

[35] Greenstone, M., A. Mas and H.-L. Nguyen. “Do Credit Market Shocks A¤ect the Real
     Economy? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Great Recession and ‘Normal’Economic
     Times.”NBER Working Paper No. 20704 (2014).

[36] Guerrieri, V., D. Hartley and E. Hurst. “Endogenous Gentri…cation and Housing Price
     Dynamics.”Journal of Public Economics 103, no. 5 (2013): 1664–96.

[37] Guzman, J. and S. Stern. “The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
     Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 34 US States, 1988-2014.” Working Paper
     (2017).

[38] Haltiwanger J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda. “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young.”
     Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 2 (2013): 347–61.

[39] Harding, J. and S. S. Rosenthal. “Homeownership, Housing Capital Gains, and Self-
     Employment.”Journal of Urban Economics 99, (2017): 120–35.

[40] Hamilton, B. H. “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
     Self-Employment.”Journal of Political Economy 108, no. 3 (2000): 604–31.

[41] Holmes, T. “The E¤ects of State Policies on the Location of Industry: Evidence from State
     Borders.”Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 4 (1998): 667–705.

[42] Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian and H. S. Rosen. “Sticking It Out: Entrepreneurial Survival
     and Liquidity Constraints.”Journal of Political Economy 102, no. 1 (1994): 53–75.

[43] Hurst, E. and A. Lusardi. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneur-
     ship.”Journal of Political Economy 112, no. 2 (2004): 319–47.



                                             28
[44] Hurst, E. and B. Pugsley. “What Do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity (Fall 2011).

[45] Hurst, E. and F. Sta¤ord. “Home is Where the Equity Is: Liquidity Constraints, Re…nancing
     and Consumption.”Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36, no. 6 (2004): 985–1014.

[46] Hyatt, H., E. McEntarfer, K. McKinney, S. Tibbets and D. Walton. “Job-to-Job (J2J)
     Flows: New Labor Market Statistics from Linked Employer-Employee Data.”CES Working
     Paper 14-34. Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau, Washington DC (2014).

[47] Hyytinen, A. and I. Ylhäinen. “Collateral Channel and Small Business Lending.”Working
     paper (2014).

[48] Jensen, T., S. Leth-Petersen and R. Nanda. “Housing Collateral, Credit Constraints and
     Entrepreneurship: Evidence from a Mortgage Reform.”Working paper (2014).

[49] Kerr, W. and R. Nanda. “Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulation, Financing Con-
     straints and Entrepreneurship.”Journal of Financial Economics 94, no. 1 (2009): 124–49.

[50] Kihlstrom, R. E. and J. J. La¤ont. “General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm
     Formation Based on Risk Aversion.”Journal of Political Economy 87, no. 4 (1979): 719–48.

[51] Krishnan, K., D. Nandy and M. Puri. “Does Financing Spur Small Business Productivity?
     Evidence from a Natural Experiment.”Review of Financial Studies 28, no. 6 (2015): 1768–
     809.

[52] Leth-Petersen, S. “Intertemporal Consumption and Credit Constraints: Does Total Expen-
     diture Respond to An Exogenous Shock to Credit?” American Economic Review 100, no.
     3 (2010): 1080–103.

[53] Levine, R. and Y. Rubinstein. “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do
     They Earn More?”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 2 (2017): 963–1018.

[54] Lindh, T. and H. Ohlsson. “Self-Employment and Windfall Gains: Evidence from the
     Swedish Lottery.”Economic Journal 106, no. 439 (1996): 1515–26.

[55] Lustig, H. N. and S. G. Van Nieuwerburgh. “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance,
     and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective.” Journal of Finance 60, no. 3 (2005): 1167–
     219.

[56] Makridis, C. A. and M. Ohlrogge. “The E¤ects of Foreclosures on the Labor Market.”
     Working Paper (2017).

                                             29
[57] Manso, G. “Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship.” Review of Financial
     Studies 29 (2016): 2319–40.

[58] McKinney, K. and L. Vilhuber. “LEHD Data Documentation LEHD-OVERVIEW-S2008-
     rev1 LEHD Infrastructure …les in the Census RDC – Overview Revision.” CES Working
     Paper 11-43. Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau, Washington DC (2011).

[59] Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Su…. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
     Slump.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, no. 4 (2013): 1687–726.

[60] Mian, A. and A. Su…. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the
     U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4 (2009): 1449–96.

[61] Mian, A. and A. Su…. “House Prices, Home Equity Based Borrowing and the U.S. Household
     Leverage Crisis.”American Economic Review 101, no. 5 (2011): 2132–56.

[62] Mian, A. and A. Su…. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?”Econometrica
     82, no. 6 (2014): 2197–23.

[63] Mian, A., A. Su… and F. Trebbi. “Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy.”
     Journal of Finance 70, no. 6 (2015): 2587–634.

[64] Moskowitz, T. J. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. “The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment:
     A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?”American Economic Review 92, no. 4 (2002): 745–78.

[65] Nguyen, H.-L. “Are Credit Markets Still Local? Evidence from Bank Branch Closings.”
     American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11, no. 1 (2019): 1-32.

[66] Paravisini, D. “Local Bank Financial Constraints and Firm Access to External Finance.”
     Journal of Finance 63, no. 5 (2008): 2161–93.

[67] Paravisini, D., V. Rappoport and E. Ravina. “Risk Aversion and Wealth: Evidence from
     Person-to-Person Lending Portfolios.”Management Science (2015), forthcoming.

[68] Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan. “The Bene…ts of Lending Relationships –Evidence from
     Small Business Data.”Journal of Finance 49, no. 1 (1994): 3–37.

[69] Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan. “The E¤ect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
     Relationships.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1995): 407–43.

[70] Pugsley, B. W. and A. Sahin. “Grown-Up Business Cycles.” Review of Financial Studies
     32, no. 3 (2019): 1102–47.


                                             30
[71] Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American Economic
     Review 88, no. 3 (1998): 559–86.

[72] Roach, M. and H. Sauermann. “Founder or Joiner? The Role of Preferences and Context in
     Shaping Di¤erent Entrepreneurial Interests.”Management Science 61, no. 9 (2015): 2160–
     84.

[73] Robb, A. M. and D. T. Robinson. “The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms.”Review
     of Financial Studies 27, no. 1 (2014): 695–722.

[74] Saiz, A. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 125, no. 3 (2010): 1253–96.

[75] Schmalz, M. C., D. A. Sraer and D. Thesmar. “Housing Collateral and Entrepreneurship.”
     Journal of Finance 72, no. 1 (2017), 99-132

[76] Stevens, D. W. “Employment That Is Not Covered by State Unemployment Insurance
     Laws.”Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Technical Paper No. TP-2007-04. US
     Census Bureau, Suitland, MD.

[77] Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information.”
     American Economic Review 71, no. 3 (1981): 393–410.

[78] Stroebel, J. and J. Vavra. “House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices.” Journal of
     Political Economy 127, no. 3 (2019): 1391–436.

[79] Tsoutsoura, M. “The E¤ect of Succession Taxes on Family Firm Investment: Evidence from
     a Natural Experiment.”Journal of Finance 70, no. 2 (2015): 649–88.




                                            31
Appendix: LEHD Sample Construction
    We start by retaining individuals who have positive earnings in any of our 15 states in
each of the three focal years 2000, 2004, and 2008. We require individuals be present in the
LEHD throughout the sample period to understand the medium-term career transitions of these
workers. As the LEHD covers only a subset of states, and only businesses paying payroll tax
within these states, we cannot verify whether a person who is not present is unemployed, an
independent contractor, self-employed, working in an uncovered state, working in the uncovered
public sector, or similar. Our focus on employer …rms does not include Schedule C self-employed
activity. While one could worry that this state selection procedure might limit the types of
individuals considered (e.g., selecting less-mobile people who are then less inclined to start
something new), this is not a material concern given the very large states we consider and the
proximity of included states. Our sample is also not behaving di¤erently with respect to mobility
in the 2000 Census compared to the nation as a whole.
    We match the LEHD individuals to the Census and retain those covered by the long-form
questionnaire.23 From the Census, we extract individual-level characteristics from the Person
File, household and housing-unit characteristics from the Household File, and geographic location
details from the Geocode File. We further restrict our sample to individuals aged 25 to 50 in
2000 with non-missing and non-imputed information on all key variables. This age restriction
is such that we stay reasonably far away from retirement decisions, as the oldest member of
the cohort in 2008 will be 58. Likewise, the minimum age of 25 in 2000 means that we can
compute reasonable pre-period earnings for the sample. We …nally require that the individual
live in a CBSA for which we have house price data from 2000 to 2008, which we describe next.
After these steps, we have a complete sample of 976,900 individuals. All observation counts in
this paper are disguised and rounded to the nearest 100 according to Census Bureau disclosure
restrictions.
    We extract the geographical location of the household at the spatial levels of states, counties,
and …ve-digit zip codes. Similar to the LBD analysis, we merge in FHFA data for the 173 CBSAs
in the 15 states covered by the LEHD sample. For about 85% of the persons in our base sample,
we are further able to collect house price data from Zillow at the zip code level. Zillow is an
online real estate database that uses information from the Multiple Listing Service (MLS) and
public record. Zillow maintains data on average home sale prices and estimates of the average
home values for zip codes. The coverage of the Zillow data is in part limited by the fact that
the data for small zip codes may be sparse to the extent that few home sales occur.24 Despite
  23
     The Census Bureau creates unique person identi…ers (PIKs) that are based on Social Security Numbers
(SSNs) and allow the linking of individuals across demographic surveys, censuses and administrative records.
PIKs are internal Census identi…ers that have a one-to-one correspondence with the SSNs.
  24
     Zillow has data on 110 million homes across the United States, and so its value series is not limited to

                                                     32
these issues, zip code prices carry the advantages of allowing us to estimate more precisely the
expected price appreciation of an individual’s home and to control for CBSA-level aggregate
demand, thus making sharper assessments about the impact of prices through housing collateral
versus other channels. Guerrieri, Hartley, and Hurst (2013) document features of the variation
in house price appreciation across zip codes within MSAs and demonstrate the high correlations
across data sources for these localized measures.
    Our sample is quite representative of the US housing market, and the opinions of respondents
about their home values appear reasonable. To show this, we …rst take an unweighted average of
the respondents’estimated home values by zip code. Our unweighted average across zip codes
is $188,000, compared to $186,000 for the US as a whole in the 2000 Zillow data. Second, for
the zip codes in our sample, the correlation of the average estimated 2000 value to that reported
by Zillow is 0.91.
    While quite representative, the LEHD sample of one million people is small compared to
the 15 included states, and it is helpful to review the numbers in greater detail to place our
sample within the broader population. The 15 states in our sample account for about 133
million people in the public-use 2000 Census IPUMS. This number declines to 52 million when
considering those aged 25 to 50, and then further to about 21 million when restricted to people
in known MSAs with private-sector employment who are living outside of group quarters. This
21 million includes irregular workers, and one would …nd a base of 18 million individuals if
additionally screening for a wage income of $10,000 or more, usual weeks worked of 40 or more,
and usual hours worked per week of 20 or more. A 1-in-6 sample of this latter group would be
about 3 million people, or three times larger than our core LEHD sample.
    Three factors are mostly responsible for the di¤erence. First, we require individuals be
present in the data in 2004 and 2008, thereby excluding those who leave the private sector or
migrate out of the 15 covered states. The annual migration rate (interstate and globally) during
the 2000-2008 period averages 2.7%, as measured by the American Community Survey, and
cumulatively this rate would reduce the sample size by 20%. There are multiple reasons why
this 20% would not be exact— e.g., we focus on employed adults and not sedentary elderly or
transient college students— but the benchmark provides a useful reference point. Transitions to
being unemployed, out of the labor force, or being employed in an uncovered sector (e.g., public
sector) would also result in additional sample reductions.
    Second, we require that the individual’s SEIN match in the LEHD to the LBD to obtain the
important information in that database and to align with our LBD-based results. This LEHD-
just those homes that were recently sold or currently for sale. While the value estimates of a single home have
measurement error, the Zillow price trend data can be quite representative of actual changes in market values for
local areas and may also be a better proxy for the exogenous component of house price appreciation, independent
of changes in value due to home improvement and the like.


                                                       33
LBD establishment match rate is a little under 80% in the Business Registry Bridge, as the
LEHD contains more types of legal entities than the LBD. While these LEHD-LBD di¤erences
lie along several dimensions, the most important factor for this study relates to the elimination
of private employer households (e.g., legal employment of a nanny by a household) that are
contained in the LEHD (and IPUMS) but excluded from the LBD. This LEHD-LBD match
must again be present in 2000, 2004, and 2008, and we estimate that the cumulative impact of
this requirement is about a third of potential individuals being eliminated. Additional resources
on these issues include Stevens (2007), McKinney and Vilhuber (2011) and Hyatt et al. (2014).
    With both of these requirements, it is important to highlight that illegal immigrants are
not captured in our sample as they are not part of o¢ cial administrative payrolls. It is often
estimated that 10% of California workers are illegal immigrants. Over half of our sample comes
from California, Florida and Texas, where illegal immigration could play a non-trivial factor.
    A …nal and mundane requirement is to have full house price series for the CBSA of the
individual from 2000 to 2008, which a¤ects about 20% of the workforce.
    These di¤erences account for the size of this study’s sample compared to IPUMS, and some
of these di¤erences are important in framing the types of entrepreneurial transitions captured.
Overall, the sample still lines up quite well with what one observes from IPUMS (the following
traits are listed as LEHD vs. IPUMS and use the home owners grouping): average age of 39.4
vs. 38.4, male share of 53% vs. 59%, Hispanic share of 10.8% vs. 14.2%, African American share
of 5.3% vs. 7.6%, Asian share of 5.3% vs. 6.2%, immigrant share of 14.3% vs. 17.2%, married
share of 83% vs. 73%, college-educated share of 42% vs. 32%, household income of $88,575
vs. $84,669, home value of $187,947 vs. $178,919, and move-in date of 1992.5 vs. 1992.9. The
di¤erences that exist are usually intuitive in terms of the requirement to match LEHD-LBD
linked work over the eight years and other sample traits set out.
    From this, we identify entrepreneurial transitions through a combination of the LEHD and
LBD, which can be linked through State Employer Identi…cation Numbers (SEINs) and the
federal counterpart (EINs), which are created for tax purposes, and the Census Bureau’s overall
company identi…er (ALPHA) that links the establishments of multi-unit companies together.25
Following the procedures described in Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) and Decker
et al. (2014), we trace each establishment to its parent …rm and identify the …rst year the
…rm was in operation. We also measure the number of employees that the LBD reports were
working for this …rm in the initial year. Approaching entrant de…nition in this way accomplishes
several things— it builds o¤ of the national LBD database to avoid issues related to the partial
LEHD state coverage, connects SEINs as appropriate into parent …rms, and ensures a consistent
  25
    The data structure of the LEHD and LBD allow for establishments within each …rm to have di¤erent industries
and locations. Where used in this study, we de…ne the main industry and main location of a multi-unit …rm
through the facility with the largest number of employees.


                                                      34
de…nition of entry with prior academic work using the Census Bureau data. Thus, our approach
focuses on the formation of employer establishments, excluding Schedule C self-employed activity
and also private employer households. This set of entrants connects most directly to job creation
and economic growth, but does not encompass all form of entrepreneurial activities, which is
important to bear in mind when comparing our work to other studies.
    More formally, our de…nition of “entrepreneur” requires a person be 1) in an entering …rm
per the Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) de…nition, 2) present in the LEHD in the
…rst year that the …rm enters and among the top three earners of the …rm in that entry year,
and 3) in a …rm that entered after 1995. We can think of our work as describing the formation
of a top founding team and key early hires. While noisy, this approach captures a substantive
element of entrepreneurship. About 1.6% of our sample enters as an entrepreneur by 2004. As
an external benchmark, entry rates into employer …rms are typically estimated to be about 0.6%
per year. Without any churn, this would lead to a 2.4% entry rate from 2000-2004. However,
about half of entrants fail within the …rst four years of entry, so accounting for such churn makes
the entry rates we measure via the LEHD very reasonable. Second, we show in the main text a
very di¤erent connection between house price growth and joining an early stage company versus
being one the initial three top earners.




                                                35
             Table 1 - Sources of start-up financing for businesses founded between 2000 and 2007
Notes: The sample includes firms founded in 43 states that are separately recorded by the public-use 2007 Survey of Business Owners. Row titles
indicate forms of financing, and business owners can check as many boxes as applicable. Start-up capital amounts include all financing raised by
ventures using that type of financing. Observations with missing records or the respondents not knowing the financing history of their business are
excluded from these shares (accounting for about 12.5% of the base sample).

                                                                  Employer firms                                  Non-employer firms
                                                        (firms with at least one employee)                 (self-employed business owners)
           Source of financing used                Share using type of Start-up capital when          Share using type of       Start-up capital
                                                   financing for start-  type of financing            financing for start-       when type of
                                                       up capital              used                       up capital            financing used
                                                             (1)                     (2)                        (3)                    (4)
No financing                                                8%                       n.a.                      27%                     n.a.
Any external financing                                      92%                    87,023                      73%                   33,689

   Home equity loan                                         12%                   140,931                      5%                    82,095

   Personal savings                                         75%                    77,756                      63%                   28,988
   Other personal assets                                    12%                   131,258                      7%                    68,450
   Bank loan                                                16%                   188,994                      5%                   154,742
   Credit card                                              18%                    91,590                      13%                   30,780
   Business loan from friend or family                     4.3%                   163,746                     1.5%                   94,877
   Angel or venture financing                              0.7%                   370,973                     0.2%                  265,324
                      Table 2 - Attributes of businesses founded between 2000 and 2007, by source of financing
Notes: See Table 1.

                                                           Firm attributes in 2007                           Attributes of primary owner

                                                         Payroll per     Receipts per    Family business                     Owner has
                                          Number of
                                                         employee         employee       or run jointly by   Owner's age      Bachelor's
                                          employees
                                                          ($ 000s)         ($ 000s)     husband and wife                   degree or higher

                                              (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)
All firms                                    6.0            32.6            171.4             35%               45.1             52%
 No financing                                4.6            38.2            166.8             25%               45.7             54%
 Any external financing                      6.1            32.1            171.8             36%               45.0             52%

   Home equity loan                          6.4            27.4            155.7             47%               44.7             46%

   Personal savings                          5.6            32.4            171.8             35%               45.0             54%
   Other personal assets                     7.3            30.1            164.4             46%               45.4             48%
   Bank loan                                 9.8            31.8            176.5             40%               44.9             54%
   Credit card                               5.2            27.1            141.8             41%               43.3             47%
   Business loan from friend or family       8.7            31.8            178.2             40%               42.4             49%
   Angel or venture financing                15.1           52.4            269.3             27%               45.5             67%
     Table 3 - House price growth and use of home equity loans for start-up financing
Notes: This table reports regressions of state-level financing behavior for start-up capital of non-public companies
recorded in the 2007 Survey of Business Owners (SBO). The sample includes 43 states that are separately recorded by the
public-use 2007 SBO. Column headers indicate forms of financing. Observations with missing records or the respondents
not knowing the financing history of their business are excluded from these shares (accounting for about 12.5% of the base
sample). The categories in Columns 1-3 are collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive, such that the coefficients sum to
zero. Unreported explanatory variables include the log count of SBO businesses among the pre-2000 firms and the shares
by state of pre-2000 entrants using each form of financing listed in Table 1; these regressors are held constant over
specifications for consistent baseline estimation and to control for long-standing financing behavior in the state.
Estimations have 43 observations, are weighted by count of pre-2000 respondents, and report robust standard errors.

                                                       Share of firms entering between 2000 and 2007 indicating
                                                                           reported financing
                                                                             Start-up capital  Start-up capital does
                                                        No start-up
                                                                          includes home equity not include home
                                                       capital raised
                                                                                  loans            equity loans
                                                             (1)                    (2)                       (3)


Log house price growth 2000-2007                           0.007                  0.031*                  -0.037**
                                                          (0.013)                 (0.019)                  (0.018)

Mean of dependent variable                                 7.9%                   12.1%                     80.0%
10% price growth effect relative to mean of
                                                           0.8%                    2.4%                     -0.4%
dependent variable
                      Table 4 - House price growth and other forms of start-up financing
Notes: See Table 3.

                                                                                                               Start-up capital
                                                                             Start-up capital
                                           Start-up capital Start-up capital                  Start-up capital     includes
                                                                                 includes
                                               includes     includes other                     used includes    business loan
                                                                              business loan
                                           personal savings personal assets                     credit cards   from family or
                                                                               from a bank
                                                                                                                    friends

                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)


Log house price growth 2000-2007                -0.004           -0.003           -0.027           -0.006         -0.019***
                                               (0.024)          (0.014)          (0.040)          (0.019)           (0.007)

Mean of dependent variable                       75%              12%              16%              18%              4%
10% price growth effect relative to mean
                                                -0.1%            -0.2%            -1.6%            -0.3%            -4.2%
of dependent variable
                 Table 5 - Price changes and entry rates for CBSAs on Texas border
Notes: This table documents descriptive statistics of house price index, count of new entrants, and employment in entering
firms for the three periods: 1987-1997, 1998-2002, and 2003-2007. Reforms in 1998 and 2003 unlocked the use of home
equity loans for business purposes in Texas, which was previously possible in all other states. Counties part of CBSAs along
the Texas state border are grouped into those on the Texas side versus opposite. The table compares Texas and non-Texas
counties by showing each measure relative to the baseline rate observed in 1987-1997.

                         House price index                         Entry count                    Entry employment
                    non-Texas           Texas            non-Texas            Texas           non-Texas            Texas
                        (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)              (5)               (6)

1987-1997              1.000             1.000              1.000             1.000              1.000             1.000
1998-2002              1.048            1.048               0.763             0.777              0.790             0.772
2003-2007              1.103             1.098              0.737             0.732              0.750             0.716
   Table 6a - Analysis of collateral's effect on entrepreneurship using Texas reform
Notes: This table reports regressions of log entrant counts and log entrant employment with log CBSA-level home
prices from 1987-2007. Sample includes CBSAs in Texas and bordering states. The dependent variables are given by
column headers. Estimations include CBSA and year fixed effects, such that coefficients measure the correlation
between changes in entry activity with changes in house prices. The Post period is defined to be after 1998, which
marked the first reform to allow home equity lending for business purposes in Texas. The first row captures the key
interaction: whether entry in Texan CBSAs becomes closer linked to house price growth after the collateral channel
becomes available. Estimations have 1,132 observations, report standard errors clustered by CBSA, and are weighted
by CBSA size. Columns 2 and 4 include controls for lagged total firm count and contemporaneous multi-unit firm
establishment expansion rate in the CBSA.


                                                    Log new entrants               Log employment in entrants

                                                   (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
Log house price x Texas x Post                    0.005             0.003              0.020            0.018
                                                 (0.005)           (0.004)            (0.016)          (0.016)
Log house price x Post                           0.725***          0.294***           0.825**          0.387*
                                                 (0.113)           (0.050)            (0.283)          (0.232)
Log house price x Texas                           0.100             0.029              0.228            0.158
                                                 (0.100)           (0.046)            (0.150)          (0.155)
Log house price                                   0.041             0.053             0.530**           0.170
                                                 (0.173)           (0.099)            (0.250)          (0.260)
Log firm count in prior year                                      0.941***                            0.965***
                                                                   (0.079)                             (0.183)
Log new plants for multi-unit firms                               0.055**                               0.042
                                                                   (0.024)                             (0.092)
            Table 6b - Table 6a with separate time periods for stages of Texas reform
Notes: See Table 6a. Estimations break the Post period into 1998-2002 (after the initial 1998 reform to allow home equity
lending in Texas) and 2003-2007 (after the 2003 reform to allow home equity lines of credit).

                                                         Log new entrants                  Log employment in entrants

                                                        (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)
Log house price x Texas x 2003-2007                    0.015           0.014**              0.064**             0.063**
                                                      (0.012)          (0.007)              (0.030)             (0.031)
Log house price x Texas x 1998-2002                    0.006            0.005                0.025               0.024
                                                      (0.007)          (0.004)              (0.017)             (0.016)

Log house price x 2003-2007                         0.788***           0.320***             1.080**             0.604*
                                                     (0.150)            (0.067)             (0.413)             (0.354)
Log house price x 1998-2002                         0.710***           0.326***             0.782**              0.395
                                                     (0.093)            (0.056)             (0.313)             (0.288)

Log house price x Texas                                0.027             -0.053               -0.094             -0.173
                                                      (0.148)           (0.067)              (0.206)            (0.224)

Log house price                                      0.408**             0.050              0.515**              0.156
                                                     (0.172)            (0.091)             (0.220)             (0.232)

Log firm count in prior year                                           0.946***                                 0.965**
                                                                        (0.078)                                 (0.189)
Log new plants for multi-unit firms                                     0.053*                                   0.042
                                                                        (0.024)                                 (0.095)
            Table 7 - Firm-level analysis of collateral's effect on size and sector of entrants following Texas reform
Notes: See Table 6a. Columns 1-3 aggregate employment by size of entrant; Column 4-7 aggregate employment by sector.

                                                  Log employment by size of entrant                               Log employment by sector
                                                                                                                                  Transport and
                                              1-2 empl.        3-9 empl.        10+ empl.       Construction            Mfg.                      Services
                                                                                                                                      trade
                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)         (7)
PANEL A: LOG ENTRY COUNTS

Log house price x Texas x 2003-2007              0.014**         0.003           0.050***           0.002               -0.001        0.001        0.007
                                                (0.007)         (0.008)          (0.016)           (0.017)             (0.014)       (0.008)      (0.006)

Log house price x Texas x 1998-2002              0.005           0.003           0.026***           0.007               -0.007        -0.004       0.000
                                                (0.004)         (0.007)          (0.009)           (0.013)             (0.009)       (0.005)      (0.003)

PANEL B: LOG EMPLOYMENT IN ENTERING FIRMS

Log house price x Texas x 2003-2007             0.035***         0.000           0.087**            -0.004              0.127**       0.032        0.045
                                                (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.042)           (0.048)             (0.064)       (0.037)      (0.041)

Log house price x Texas x 1998-2002            0.017***          0.001            0.036             0.010               0.054         0.007        0.023
                                               (0.006)          (0.007)          (0.023)           (0.032)             (0.051)       (0.016)      (0.025)
                                  Table 8 - Descriptive statistics on LEHD sample
Notes: The LEHD sample includes working individuals present in 2000, 2004, and 2008 in one of 15 states: CA, CO, FL, ID, IL, IN, LA,
MD, NC, NM, OK, OR, TX, WA, and WI. Sample focuses on wage workers in 2000 with home locations to which we can map zip code
prices. Demographic traits are measured in 2000. Per Census Bureau disclosure requirements, the listed observation counts are
rounded. Most traits are statistically different between Columns 2 and 3.
                                                                                                                     Potentially
                                                                             All              Unlevered
                                                                                                                    constrained
                                                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)
(1)      N                                                                529,600               452,100               77,500
(2)      Share                                                                                    0.85                  0.15
(3)      Entry as an entrepreneur                                         0.0159                0.0154                0.0189
(4)      Age                                                               39.41                 39.99                 36.03
(5)      Male                                                             0.5281                0.5224                0.5612
(6)      Hispanic                                                         0.1082                0.1056                0.1235
(7)      African American                                                 0.0533                0.0523                0.0593
(8)      Asian                                                            0.0527                0.0511                0.0614
(9)      Immigrant                                                        0.1432                0.1388                0.1685
(10)     Married                                                          0.8262                0.8343                0.7785
(11)     Bachelor's education and higher                                  0.4173                0.4085                0.4685
(12)     Household income (max=$2.5 million)                              88,575                89,086                85,594
(13)     Home value (max=$1 million)                                      187,947               185,284               203,485
(14)     Move-in date                                                     1992.5                1991.3                1999.0
(15)     Wealth                                                           194,397               205,630               128,848
(16)     LEHD earnings 2000                                               51,253                51,088                52,219
(17)     LEHD earnings 2004                                               61,153                60,825                63,067
(18)     Zip code price growth 2000-2004                                  0.4262                0.4266                0.4240
(19)     Estimated home equity gains                                      85,481                84,519                91,093
       Table 9 - House prices and entry into entrepreneurship at the individual level
Notes: Table reports coefficients from regression of entry into business ownership by 2004 for home owners not in
entrepreneurship in 2000. The sample only includes people working for wages in 2000 who joined a company three or
more years after that firm's founding. The explanatory variables are indicator variables for the estimated dollar value of
home equity increase during 2000-2004 using the local price growth and the value of the property in 2000. Separate
indicator variables are included for "unlevered" and "levered" groups, with effects measured relative to lending-
constrained individuals. The unlevered group includes people who would not be constrained towards home equity
borrowing based upon move-in dates before 1998 or owning their home outright. The levered group have post-1998 move-
in dates and face no state-level legal limits on borrowing and experience positive local price growth. The omitted group
have post-1998 move-in dates and face either state-level limits on borrowing or local price declines. Wealth FE are built by
group and use increments similar to home equity gains. Covariates include demographics, earnings histories, and
mortgage payments and interact these variables with zip code price growth. The entry projection used in Column 4 is
based upon the entrepreneurial transitions of renters during 2000-2004 with traits similar to individuals. Estimations have
529,600 observations and cluster standard errors by zip code.
                                                                                                             Wealth +
                                        Sample                                              Wealth +
                                                        CBSA FE         Zip code FE                         covariates +
                                         share                                             covariates
                                                                                                             projection
                                                           (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)

LENDING-CONSTRAINED CONTROL GROUP: Local Price Declines or Legal Limits [2% of sample]

UNLEVERED, Pre-1998 Move-In with Local Price Growth
Home equity gains <$25k                   25%            -0.002            -0.001             -0.006            -0.005
                                                        (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.008)           (0.008)
Home equity gains $25k-$75k               30%           0.003**            0.003              -0.004            -0.003
                                                        (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.008)           (0.008)
Home equity gains $75k-$150k              16%           0.009***          0.008***            -0.001            -0.001
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.008)           (0.008)
Home equity gains >$150k                  15%           0.015***          0.012***            0.001             0.000
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.008)           (0.008)


LEVERED, Post-1998 Move-In with Local Price Growth and No Legal Limits
Home equity gains <$25k                    3%            0.001             0.001              0.002             0.002
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.005)           (0.005)
Home equity gains $25k-$75k                5%           0.005***          0.005***            0.004             0.004
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.005)           (0.005)
Home equity gains $75k-$150k               3%            0.013***         0.012***           0.008*            0.008*
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.005)           (0.005)
Home equity gains >$150k                   3%            0.020***          0.017***           0.008             0.008
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.005)           (0.005)
      Figure 1a: Entry response without individual controls
              Transition increase measured relative to lending-constrained control group



                          Sample average transition rate to entrepreneurship




                              t-stat=1.00
                                                        t-stat=1.80          t-stat=4.53     t-stat=6.72   0.53 2.65 6.05 7.73
                                                                                                                 t-stats

                                        Unlevered individuals [85%]                                        Levered [13%]

Notes: Figures plots coefficients from Column 2 of Table 9. Effects are measured relative to a lending-constrained control group that
faced either local price declines or legal limits for borrowing [2% of sample]. Sample is restricted to home owners in 2000 who are
working as a wage employee in a firm that they did not found or join within the first three years. Group size indicated by bar width.
          Figure 1b: Entry response with individual controls
              Transition increase measured relative to lending-constrained control group


                          Sample average transition rate to entrepreneurship




                               t-stat=0.77              t-stat=0.47          t-stat=0.07
                                                                                           t-stat=0.18   0.43 0.74 1.65 1.58
                                                                                                               t-stats




                                        Unlevered individuals [85%]                                      Levered [13%]

Notes: See Figure 1a. Figures plots coefficients from Column 3 of Table 9.
