NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPENSATION AND FIRM PERFORMANCE

Ronald 0. Ehrenberg
George T. Milkovich

Working Paper No. 2145

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1060 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

To appear in the 1987 IRRA Research Volume edited by Morris
Kleiner, et al . Human Resources and the Performance of the Finn.
We are grateful to numerous colleagues at Cornell and the editors
for their comments on earlier drafts. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opin-

ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the

National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2145
February 1987

Compensation and Firm Performance

ABSTRACT

relatlons,ip between the ceneatlon policies a fin, pura.s and
the fin's economic performance i of central hortance to both
The

researchers

and practitioners.

about the effects
evidence

of variate

exIsts a,.

Yet, wt.ile

exist

. ensation policies, Mirprisingly little

the extent to

fire and, e inortantly,

a variety of theories

which

ceneation policies

on th, effect. of pursiing

vary across

alternative

ccensatjon strategies. This paper attewts to anarize the aval able
evidence, drawing on research from the economics, finance, and personnel

literatures. It also

Ronald 6. Ehrenberg
NYSSILR

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851—0952

(607) —S026

lays

out an agenda for future research.

George T. Nilkovich
NYSSILR

Cornell University

ithaca,

NY 14861—0952

(607) 5—447V

I. IntrtjCtioo
The relationship between the ct.ipensation policies a firm pursues
and the firlirs econanic performance Is a central issue in industrial

relations. Yet, while a variety of theories exist about

the

effects of

various ccuiipensatton policies, surprisingly little evidence exists on

the extent to which caipensation p01 cies vary across firms and more

inçortantly on the effects of puriing alternative cipensation
strategies.1 This paper attenpts to sim.uarize the available ejipirical

evidence and to lay out an agenda for future research.

The study of employee cawensation has a long history in the
literatures of labor econanics and personnel. Wages are at the core of
employment relationships; consequently, their determination is a

central issue of interest in both fields. At the risk of over
simplifying to draw a contrast, econciiilsts have tended to focus on wage

differentials and their correlates. Much of the work in the 40's and
So's examIned employer's wage policies and their relationship to
industry, union, regional and occupational characteristics.2 During the
1960s and 19?Os the association between human capital characteristics
such as age, experience, education, gender and the I Ike and wage

differentials were studied. Only recently has econaElsts' focus

shifted to why alternative censatIon policies mltt arise and their
effects on firm performance.

In contrast, the study of personnel has traditionally dealt with
the techniques involved in alninistration of eiç,loyee caipensation.
Much of this work focuses on caliparisons

of the properties of various

techniques, and their effects on employee work attitudes and

behaviors.3 Censation research in the personnel

iterature draws

heavily upon econanic and psychological theories. Studies report the
relationships of pay with employees' satisfaction, as well as their
decisions to apply, join and remain

with

a firm. Further, relying

heavily on motivation theories, personnel research also examines
ciipensat'on's role as a reward or incentive to influence employee

performance. More recently, interest has expanded to examine the
effects that strategic choices ii, ccmpensation policies and practices

may have on finns'

economic performance, as well as employees' behavior

and atti tudes.

The effect of differences in compensation policies and practices
on the firm's thottan line1 is perhaps the most inportant measure of
their economic impact.

bfriile the literature in both fields speculates

about the effects of various caipensation policies and practices on

firm performance little research has been directed to assess this
relationship. One reason for the lack of such research is that the
data required, detailed Individual compensation and performance data

gathered across firms, is difficult to collect. Another reason is that
relationship between any personnel system, be it conpensation. staffing

or training and a firm's economic performance is indirect. At best.
personnel p01 icies and practices operate directly upon other more

intermedLate variables such as employee behavior and perhaps on local

plant or subunit performance. These in turn affect overall economic
performance.

Granted some nieajres eilwloyed may be considered proxies for a

firm's performance. Size. measred by nunter of ewployees, assets, or

$

sales revenues, Is an exawle. But typically thes. measures are
considered in terms of their effects on a firm's cciiipensatior,

decisions, such as its wage level and the shape of its employees'

experience—earning profile., rather than focusing on how cpensatIon
policies and changes an them affects a firm's financial performance and

its value to shareholders.4 As we shall discuss in the next section,
most of the work on the direct effects of cailpensation policies has

been limited to high—level executive cpensation. Beyond executive
pay, the plain fact is that we know very little about whether different

employee ctpensation policies and practices affect firm performance.
Speculation is rife; research rare.

At the onset, it is lucortant to stress that calcensation policies

may vary on several dimensions. First, the 'level' of clI,en.atlon
varies. From a policy perspective, the level refers to the average
cuiensatjon paid Dy a firm relative to that paid by its competitors.
Evidence suggests that firms pursue different policies, some lead,

others match and still others pay less than their cetitors. hiy the
level

of conç.ensation should vary across finite, has been the subject of

considerable research by economists.5 However,

of a

while

the consequences

firm's relative compensation level on Its ability to attract.

motivate and retain a stable workforce has received ewirical
attention, the consequences for the firm's financial performance has
not been studied.6

Second, it is well known that the caiensation structure varies
firms.7

Structures refer to the distribution of rates or

internal pay hierarchies. In Sr finns, the hl.est paid work

4

receives

over 100 times the c.Tjpensation of the lowest paid and the

differentials in other finns may be less than ID times, Of importance
to us is the implications of these different structures for employees
work behaviors and firm performance.8
A third dimension of a firm's caiiensation strategy pertains to

the forms or the mix of various elements of total censation. Total
cc.,pensatjon may include base pay, a variety of Incentive schemes,

COLAs, various farms

of

stock options and an Increasing array of

benefits. Firms differ in terms of the number of pay forms offered.
the degree to which employees are offered a choice among different
forms, the relative Importance of each form (e.g. base wage/total

canpensatlon ratio or incentive/base wage ratio,) and the proportion
of the workforce eligible for each form beyond the legal requirements,

Ce.. in sane firms all employees receive profltsharlng, in others only

a handful of executives are covered). Various types of employee
benefits, such as pensions, may have Important Incentive effects that
can influence employee behavior and firm performance.9

Fourth, policies for granting cpensation Increases vary among
firms and, even within a firm, among occupational groups. Scme firms
grant increases across the board, based strictly on time worked, while
others base increases on incentive mechani.uis such as profit—sharing,

team awards, gain—sharing, or pay for individual performance. Such
performance—based
(e.g.

schemes vary widely. Some

emphasize the short term,

merit pay increases and bonus awards to key performers) others

long term (e.g. stock options). Scie

firms use subjective measure of

performance (e.g. merit ratings, project cletion), others used

5
quantitative meaakres <unit, produced, return on equity, stock value).
the unit of analysis employed in performance n,eaairement also vary

(e.g. individual employee, work teams or cells and unit/organization

wide). Some extend eligibility to cover all employees, others limit
participation depending on the incentive plan Involved. Once again,
the effects of such differences on the performance of the firm is not

well investigated)0

Finally, the or by which

compensation is athlnistered

also

differs. AU,iinistratiye processes may vary on several dimensions.

Anng these are the extent to which pay Information (e.g.. rates,
ranges, rationales, market data) is disclosed to employees, the nature
of employee participation in the determination and alministratlon of
pay, the existence of dispute resolution proceóares and the degree to

which policy design and implementation is decentralized. Scme firms
have formalized job evaluation systems that aid In determining internal

pay hierarchies, while other firms allow for considerable wage

flexibility across positions. Some firms operate in a unionized
environment: others do not. Similarly, some allow for employee
participation and disclosure in compensation decisions, while others do

not. Since several papers in this volume address these latter two
differences, our treatment of them will be brief.11

These five basic dimensions of cnpensation policy——the level,
reflecting

the competitiveness

reflecting

the internal pay hierarchies; the mix of different

of total couipensation; the structure

compensation forms; the nature of pay increases and the process

employed to aUuinister censation——can serve as the framework for

6

examining the relationship between catipensation and ftrm performance.

But disentangling the effects of each of these dimensions will be a

a firm's

difficult and perhaps unfeasible task. It is possible that

economic performance is affected by its ccoipensation strategy in tntn.
If this is the case then we need to examine a

firm's behavior

policy dimensions simultaneously rather than

reating each as discrete

on these

decisions. Empirically, a firi's censat ion strategy nee to be
measured as a tt. of interrelated dimensions.

Once the censation policy variable is focused on

issue is how to measure firm performance. In
should be with a measure of

organization. So, as

relating

the next

general, ones concern

the overall ecoimli ic well—being of the

we shall see below, many

studies

primarily those

to executive comp en sa tion, focus on the total return

(dividends • capital gains) on shareholders' equ ity. Others focus on

accounting measures, such as

what is relevant is

ow

after controlling for

stock

general

conditions; these studies

eported

Sti

others

argue that

market or accounti ng measures are doi 09
and inthjstry sped ftc econ,ic

ofte

industry performance measures

profits.

use relative (to other firms) in the
(A more complete

discussion

of the

measurement of firm performance is found in the Becker—Olson paper in

this volume.)
As noted earlier, studies of non—executive employee
have
them)

compensation

not examined how compensation policies or practices (or changes in

affect

the overall

economic well—being of an organi2ation. The

unstated premise underlying these studies is that ccensation systems
can directly affect variables such as employee productivity,

7

absenteeio.

turnover and job satisfaction. The issue of the indirect

effects of caipensation policies and practices on more general
accounting or market return measures has been left unaddressed.

It is

possible that direct affects can be observed only for executive jobs
where decisions may directly affect econcelic measures, while decisions

by non—executive employees have at best very distant relationships to a

firms performance.
It s important to stress that a causal relationship between

crensatlon policy and firm performance cannot be inferred directly
from simple correlations of the two variables. So, for example, a
positive correlation between

wage levels

and firm profitability might

indicate that a high wage policy causes high profits gj that high

profits

provide a surplus ihich

wages. ht.lle sane

workers can share In the form of high

of the studies we discuss below provide correlations

between firm performance and co.wensation policies, very few actually
provide

convincin; evidence that coiiipensatlon policy affects firm

per formance.
We

begin

in the next section with a discussion of the evidence on

the relationship between the compensation of high—level executives and

firm performance. There

is

a substantial body of research findings

here that draw heavily on both the finance and economics literature.
Section III discusses the evidence on employee cpensation and firm

performance; in the main the research findings here draw heavily frau
the human resource and personnel literatures, although the economic5

literature also has sthir.g to add. Finally, section IV

provides a

8

sumary

of what we have learned from these literatures and a discussion

of research Issues that still need to be addressed.

11.

Executive Censation
Given the widely (but as we will see below not always correctly)

perceived separation between the ownership and management of
corporations, concern has been expressed that corporate executives may
pursue objectives such as sales maximization, growth maximization, or
market share maximization that are not necessarily in the

interests

best

of shareholders who are concerned with short run (accounting

profits) and long—run (total stock market return) measures of the

economic profitability of the corporation. Theoretical models that

seek optimal ways to resolve this Drincinal—ant problem, that Is ways
to provide incentives for executives to take actions that are In the
best interests of shareholders, always come to the conclusion that
executive compensation somehow should be structured to provide such
i ncent

i yes.

Early

12

empirical studies of

executive

compensation were cross-

section in nature and focused on whether across firms, executive
compensation was more highly correlated with sales or accounting

profits. In

the main the

suggesting, at

correlations with sales were highest

first glance, that corporate executives' ca,ensation

was not structured in such a way to maximize stockholders' well—

being.13 However, these correlations may reflect only that arge firj
employ more ab'e executives and thus nnast pay them more. These

9

correlations

then, tell us little about

the incentives facing any given

executive at a point in time.

Note recently, a number of studies have used longitudinal data and
examtned whether changes in tøp level executives' caTpensation tends to

be correlated with changes In the economic performance of firms.14 The
aefinition of economic performance varies across studies. Salle use

accounting measures like reported profits, while others use measures of
the total return on a firm's securities; salle use absolute performance

measures while others use performance measures relative to other firms
in the same industry (most theoretical models suggest that executive

performance should be measured net of industry effects). The
definition of censatlon also varies; salle use salaries and bonuses,
*ile others try to include the values of stock options exercised
and/or

deferred payments.

Virtually all of these studies find, however, that changes In
executive camensation are hiiy positively correlated with the
econanic

performance measures. That is.

caipensation does seem to

provide

corporate executives'

be at least inplicitly

structured

in a way to

them with incentives to maximize the economic performance of

their firms. Several studies also show that relatively poor economic
performance in one yeat is associated with a higher probability of
executive turnover in later years; this further siggests that

incentives that operate in the cortect direction exist.5
Of course to say that a correlation exists between executives

censation changes and their firms' economic performance Is in Itself
not evidence that tying their compensation to performance will lead to

10

improved economic performance. One possibility is that corporations
initially don't know what the true productivity of their executives

are. However, to the extent that executives productivity can be
imperfectly sional Led by corporate performance1 relating their
ccoipensation to corporate performance is a way of 'paying them ithat

they're worth', If this is occurring, the cnensation—performance
nexus would reflect learning about executives' 'true ability' over
time, not necessarily any Incentive arrangement to stimulate economic

performance,16 Furthermore, even if appropriate incentives

exist,

it doesn't necessarily follow that they will have their intended
effect.

Disentangling whether the observed correlation is ae to

incentives" or 'learning" is not an easy task. One study that
attempted to do this used InformatIon on the stage of the executives'

careers (presumably earning occurs primarily at early stages) and the
variability of executives' ccaçensation over their life cycles (if
learning a, driving the process, an executive's variability in earnings
should decline over time) and concluded that while both 'incentives'

and 'learning" may exist, there was sane evidence that 'learning

effects were most wortant,7 Other studies, however, showed that the
correlation

of measures of performance and comipensation growth were

highest for better performing firms,

which is at

least suggestive that

better incentives in executive compensation do lead to better corporate
performance. '
Another

strand of research, which draws heavily on the

literature, focuses

on particular provisions. of

executive

finance

ca,ipensation

II

agreements and examines whether adoption of such provisions is

associated with abnormally high stock market returns for

shareholders.

For exaile, studies of the adoption of executive stock option plans
and executive

incentive cropensation agreements based on short—run or

long—run accounting profits measures have all shown that

announcement of the plan, lead to increases in
At

one study has also

least

found

the

shareholder

wealth.19

that corporate capital investments

tend to tncrease after the adoption of long—run executive incentive
calipensation (or performance plan) agreements.20

At least

three explanations can be given for these findings. The

first is that these provisions S have favorable incentive effects and
that the increases in shareholder wealth reflect anticipated increases

in profits that will occur &e to the adoption of the provisions.
The second is that
adopted

by boar

will benefit

of

these provisions are proposed

by management and

directors only when management believes management

fr the provisions. As such their adoption siiaIs to

the market that management expects good times are ahead; this would
have

a positive effect on

positive

shareholder wealth (since It conveys new

Information) even If no incentive effects were

Involved.

Finally, the provisions may be adopted for Sa reasons.

To the

extent that capital gains historically have been taxed at lower rates

than earned ince (at least up until 1987). adoption of stock option
plans may have allcc.ted corporations to provide management with

increased (or equal to preadoption) after—tax cçensatIon levels at
l.,er

total costs to the corporation.

wealth would of course increase.

If

this occurred shareholder

12

As above, disentangling c.A.ich subset of these expanatlons I,

'correct'

is a difficult task. One study has provided some evidence in

favor of the incentive hypothesis.2t Specifically, it found that the
adoption of forms of stock option plans that do not have tax advantages
led to increases in shareholder wealth, that boards of directors'

statements often claimed anticipated incentive effects would result
fran stock option adoptions, and that privately held firms often have

stock option plans for executives. The former two forms of evidence,
however, do not enable one to strongly discriminate between the
incentive and s,cnallinn hypotheses.

To take another example, a second set of studies has analyzed

golden parachute'

agreements; agreements that provide for (often

substantial)

calipensation for a corporate executive if

ownership

voting stock and/or shift in the majority of

of

a change In
the board of

directors of a corporation occurs that leads to the termination of the

executive's enployment. No hypotheses have been put forth

existence

for the

of these agreements. On the one hand, these arrangements may

increase the costs of takeover bids and reduce their probability of

occurring. This would make the executive's position more secure but
would not necessarily be in the best interests of shareholders; in a
sense

it is argued then these agreements transfer wealth

from

shareholders to management.

On the other hand, one might argue that these plans help to alii
the

incentives

of executives and shareholders. By protecting

management fran harm, they encourage executives to negotiate takeovers

that increase the value of shareholders' equity, This protection is

La

particularly important in situations in which management censatiori
has been structured so that cnpensation increases with

tenure,

with

part of this increase being a deferred reward for prior performance.
Such deferred canpensation schemes prove to be optimal In a theoretical
sense in situations in which estimates of an executive's performance
are very "noisy•' but

improve with his tenure.22

In fact, the available empirical evidence suggests that on balance
the second hypothesis is the correct one; the adoption of "golden

parachute agreements appears to be associated empirically with
favorable security market response (i.e., positive excess returns in

the short—runL23 ile such evidence cannot disentangle the incentive
al i.....nt

si,al

hypotheses from the hypotheses that such adoptions simply

situations In which takeover bids, and hence excess returns, are

likely, it Is Interesting that another study found that executives'

tenure—earning profiles wre steeper in firms

that had golden parachute

than they were in firms that did not, ceteris paribus.24

agreements

That Is, In situations where deferred caipensation appeared to be more
important,

golden

parachutes were more likely to exist.

One mist caution, however, that all of the studies that find an
association

between the adoption

of

particular provisions of executive

calipensat 'on agreements and abnormally hI stock market returns are

drawing conclusions about the effect,vene of executive incentive
canpensation

agreements fran short—run changes in stock market prices.

Many of these provisions are designed to encourage executives to take

the long—run interests of the firm into account when decisions are

made. Yet surprisingly, save for Larker's (3983) study, it appears

14

that these studies do not address whether the adaption of these
provisions actually alters executives' decisions in any systematic way
or leads to higher long—run accounting profits.

in addition to the research described above on the relationship
between executive ccnpensation and firm performance in the for—profit
sector of the economy, a number of studies have examined the
relationship between executive ceijipensation and 'performance in the

public ana nonprofit sectors of the econny. Of course. in the absence
of a profit—maximiztng objective, performance is much harder to define
in these sectors. Essentially each of these studies defined 'that it
considered to be a reasonable
ascertain

if

measure of performance and then sought to

executive coiwensation and/or turnover was related to this

performance measure ceteris paribus. That is. these studies asked if

the censat on of executives in the public and nonprofit sectors was
structured in such a way to encourage executives to try to Improve the
performance measure.

For example, one study of the censatlon of chief business
agents of local building trade unions, who are salaried officers
resonsible (among other things) for negotiating contracts, found that
their salaries tended to be positively related to the relative wage
advantages their members had over 'members of the same union in other

cities and over other building trades union members in the same city.25
Thus, incentives appear to have existed for the business agents to try
to maximize their members' wage Increases.

A second study focused on appointed municipal government
officials, specifically city—managers, and pal ice and fire department

15

chiefs. Performance in this study was defined in term, of how well
the officials were doing relative to what might be expected given the
socioeconco,ic characteristic, of the city ——

resi&als from estimated 1output equationr.

or Ilre precisely, by
Positive performance

for

the three officials were assumed to be, respectively, lower than
predicted property tax rates but

higher than predicted expenditure

levels (which could occur oliwitaneously only If
good

at

the

city-manager was

attracting aid fri higher levels of government), lower than

prefficted cr,me rates, and better than predicted fire insurance

ratings. For all three types of executives, salaries were positively
correlated across areas, ceteris paribus, with the performance
measures, again suggesting that somne incentives for the officials to

perform' existed.
A third study of this type focused on public school district

superintendents and defined school dlstrict
residual approach as above.27

assumed

to be those in

predicted

tax

performance using a

Distri ets that were

which student test

well

performing

scores exceeded their

values, given the character istics of the district, and where

rates were

lower than

characteristics.

again given school district

predicted,

In this longitudinaI

study both

salary changes and

the probability of moving to a better

changing job were seen to be

positively related to the performance

nleamgres. However, the

of

these relatlons.ips was sufficient ly wall

concluded that no meani ngful

,ile these three

structure

were

Incentive to

magnitude

that the authors

perform (as defined) existed.

studies all tried to infer if the inpllcit

of executive compensation in these public and nonprofit

16

sector positions

provided

incentives for the executives to pursue

specified performance objectives, none actually examined if the

existence of these Incentives did lead to liwroved performance. One
recent study, however, was able to observe several measures of
performance of local social security adninistration offices both before
ana after the adoption of formal merit

pay

plans that partially tied

managerial salary increases to these performance measures.28 Using a
quasi—experimental design and statisttcal prooeajres to eliminate
trends and cycles in the performance measires, the study found that the
adoption of the merit pay plans led to no short—run effects on

performance, the authors noted, however, that the system was stfl

In

its early stages and that effects mlt possibly be observed after it
became more institutionalized and better understood.
In concluding this section, it is interesting to note that there
appear to be no studies In either the private—for—profit, nonprofit, or
public sectors on how the level of executive compensation affects

economic performance. Similarly, there are no studies of how the
rewards for seniority, probabilities of pranotion, or salary structure
across executive positions within a firm affect economic performance.

That is. we do not know whether paying hi, salaries to attract and
retain high quality executives 'pays', whether offering executives
rewards for seniority "pays', whether offering within—firm promotional
opportunities (e.g., fran

vice

president to president or from president

to chief executive officer), 'payV and thether the caipensation levels
across executives within a firm are structured in such a way to
encourage

improved firm performance.29

I?

ILL. lovee

Censation

The purpose of this section of the paper is to examine the
literature pertaining to a firm's ccmpensation policies for employees
not covered under executive pay systems and the relationsiap of these
policies to the performance of firms.

Evidence of variations in the censation policies and practices
of firms can be found in several scarce,. Typically the data are
incomplete, collected for other purposes, or of limited use for

determining any direct effects of compensation on firm performance.
Sufficient signs of differences in firm's policies do exist and they
are considered in terms of the basic dimensions discussed earl icr.

Certainly, differences in pay levels and the cspetitive position
among firms is well established in both the economics and personnel

literatures. Reports iss'ed by private consulting firms that survey
enployer practices detail differences in pay levels by characteristics

of the firm e.g. in&stry, revenues, workforce size), Job (e.g.
function. cescription. job evaluation points and number of incumbents)

and geography and Area Was &zrvevs conjcted by the Bureau of Labor

Statistics

also show wide variations in

wages within narrowly defined

Job classifications in a metropolitan area.30
One study, which had access to a private consulting firm's survey

data frau aerospace ccqanles, reported that after controlling for
firm size (number of employees and revenues), substantial variations
existed in the average salaries paid among these firms (e.g the two
highest paying finns paid more than 16 percent above the market average
w,tch the average paid by the lowest two was more than 11 percent below

18

the market average).31 These firms also exhibited dif ferent
ciipetitive positEons for different functional special ties. For
example, in Dne, the average pay for 9 of 13 functions exceeded the
market average for each function, while in another the average pay
exceeded the market average in only 5 of the 13 functions.
These data do not permit one to distinguith whether these
differences across functions reflect differential contributions of the
functions to the fi rms objectives or to other factors such as
differences in empi oyee age or experience nistributlons across

functions. Whether conensation levei policies tend to be occupation—
specific or cnpany wide is unclear. It is possible that firms
ciipeting within an industry may have one policy for occupations
critica

to the firm's objectives and another for those less critical.

Recent evidence found by Leonard (1985) tentatively agrees with the
data reported above that occupation—weelfIc as well as company wide
p01 i des

exist.

Anecdotal accounts of different compensation policies are also

available. A study of the personnel policies of large non—union firms,
reports a variety of competitive poli cy statements about relative

cipensatiorj evej positions32 Smie firms with centralized personnel
systems reportedly adhere to corporate—wide copensation policies for
all business units, others report that each of their business units
adopt their own canpetitive posture in thei

markets. The former seem

to be most cmnon in firms with integrated lines of business, the
latter is more casnon in cong'omerates with multiple and unrelated

proict lines.

19

The efficiency wage literature In
reasons

econallics suggests various

why saoe enIoyers night set higher wages than their

canpetitors

for employees of equal quality. Examples include

differences

in turnover costs, differences in the need f or close

supervision (so—cal led 'worker shirking') and difference in employee

ccuiultment. Evidence of different pay levels within a product market
or industry is also widely available in studies of iritra-industry wage

differentials. Thanns (1906) study of the effects of firm size on wage
levels in the plastics industry, Groshen's 0906) study of employer
effects on wage dispersion in plastics, industrial chemical and woolen

yarn industries, and Leonard's (19%) study of wages in California's
high—technology sector are recent examples.

Generally these studies confirm earlier findings. For example, it

is well

known that differences In Intra—industry wage rates are

correlated with firm size. Numerous explanations are ccuipnonly advanced

to explain this relationship including (1) larger firma use more
advanced technoiogies and require greater employee skills and
discipline. (2) cc.lensating differentials are required to offset the
greater disutility of working in larger firm,, (3) labor unions in
larger

firms have been able to appropriate sane of the firm's higher

profits,

and (4) large firms

pay

shirking and thus supervision

inly

that a firm's econquic

higher

wages to

rethce e,çloyee

costs. Note that these

performance

explanations

and the conditions It faces

permit, or provide econanic Incentives for It to adopt a particular pay

posture. Unless one tautolocloally accepts these explanations as
valid, however, they do DQtI

provide

any evidence that a firm's pay

20

el/el, as part of its overall canpensation strategy, actually has had
any effect on its econanic performance.

Sane survey evidence, thoui

limited

In coverage, compares the

canpensation policies of high tech firms with 'traditional' fErms. In
one study forty percent of both the high tech firms and traditional

firms reported foIloing policies in which their pay level matched
their competition. About 20 percent In each group reported they lead
the:r competitors and the rest fol loijed ('less than market averages).

Obviously caution needs to be exercised in interpreting these data:
they are based on reports of cauipensatlon managers and the mechanics

used to translate a poZicy into practice often vary. For example, two

thirds of the firms reported they matched their range mioints with
the median rate paid in the market. However, the specific firms
included in such calculation often vary, the surveys used differ, aria

differences in average rate paid by firms may be due to demographic
differences in each firm's workforces (e.g. seniority) rather than any

intended cetittve policy differences.
Considered together, the consultant survey information, the

anecdot& accounts, the economic research and the personnel surveys
support the contention that employers' characteristics are related to
the dispersion

fl

pay level and to a firm's relative cai'ensatlon

position among its competitors. But we are interested in evidence on
the effects of differences in relative compensation policy on firms'

financial performance or shareholder value. And here the research
literature is lean.

2!

Our search of the literature yielded very few studies of the

effects of different pay levels on performance measres such as
ccnpensatlon—to—revenue ratios. labor cost—to—total cost ratios or

shareholder value. One Suomers' (1906) case study of what happened to
Ford

Motor Canpany when Henry Ford lntro&ced the

$5/day wage In the

early 20th century. found that while absenteeis,i, voluntary turnover,

ann discharges declined after the wage increase and productivity
increased, these changes probably were not sufficiently large In

themselves to allow one to conclude that the new policy Kpaid for

itselP. A second Abowas' (1985) study of recent union wage
settlements. found that unexpectedly high union wage settlements were
reflected virtually dollar for dollar in changes in shareholder value
(see the Becker and Olsen piece in this volume tor more details).

Thus, higher than expected wage settlements do not appear to improve

firm performance. Finally, interin&stry studies of the determinants
of wage levels that specify that high profits cause high wages rather
than vice versa, typically do find that Industry profit levels are an
important explanatory variable In wage equations.36
A few studies do examine the effects of pay level on eiiiployee and

employer recruiting and turnover behaviors. For example m evidence
suggests that establishing a relatively high pay level increases the
applicant queue permitting firms to select higher quality and thus

potentially more projctive employees. Evidence on the
wage/recruitment expenditure relationship seen. contradictory. One
study reports that high pay levels and high recruiting costs are

substitutes, while another suggests they are clple1lnts ——

that

22

employers who offer relatively hi,er wages also exhibit relatively

greater recruiting expenses.7

Thus, employers that search more are

likely to pay more. But the evidence here is drawn from limited low—
level occupational groups and only limited industry and firm

characteristics are considered. Obviously more work is needed, perhaps
under certain conditions (e.g., critical jobs or long—term unfilled
vacancies), pay levels and recruiting costs are complements, while
under others they are used as substitutes.

Sane evidence of the effects of pay level on job seekers and

employees choice behavior is also available. For example, studies of
the correlations between wage levels and turnover and absentee,su have

already been cited. Wage levels also appear to be an important factor
when job seekers have a wide range of pay levels fran which to choose
and higher paid workers, ceteris DariSis, report they put more effort

into their jobs and are more sattsfked. Research also exists that
shows that higher military pay leve's Increase the flow of volunteers
to the armed forces.39
Another dimension of a firms' cailpensatton strategy is its

internal wage hierarchy. Wage hierarchies differ across firms in
different industries that employ differing technologies. For examp'e.
Dreweries have relatively flat hierarchies compared to steel or

automotive firms. But within an industry or firm, managers have
considerable latitude in the design of wage structures. Relatively
flat structures (e.g. fewer grades and wider pay ranges) tend to
obscure differences in task and/or ski

Ii

requirements and offer

managers flexibility in deploying the workforce without necessarily

23
requiring pay changes. Greater hierarchical arrangements e'iiphasaze

greater specification of work rules and Sail requirements and tend to
require pay adjustments mare often.

Wage structures possess several characteristics. including the
number of levels, the differentials between

levels

and the distribution

of ewloyees among the levels. There is a tendency, especially in
larger organizations for the nwter of employees being paid higher
wages

to be less than the number paid lower

examine

wages. Several atterrpts to

this feature have been reported. For

example,

one study used

the Lorenz curve as an analog and carpared the distribution of
annualized salaries bY cumulative percent of the workforce across

firms.40 Others analyzed the nature of the differentials between
levels in the hierarchy. At least one study found the functional form
of differentials between hierarchical levels to be a constant

proportion.41 Another, based on the analysis of the discretionary
content of work and

norms ascribed to enployees, reports pay ratios of

1.3$ between adjacent managerial levels.42
Another feature of pay hierarchies is that wages often tend to be
associated with jobs rather than individual eflployees. Thus deploying

workers to new jobs often necessitates wage changes. The alternative
systeii of wages being tied to workers, regardless of

underlies knowler ba Day

the job performed,

and aturl ty curve arran...nts.

to date, no atte.ipts to systematically examine the effects of Job—based
as ccupared to employee—based pay structures have been conducted.44

There Is also a tendency, at least in larger firms,

proportion of eloyees In hi,er paid jobs to

for

a large

have been prctnoted fri

24
lower paid joos within the same firm and for new hires to enter at

specific points in the hierarchy. Auninistrative proceJres documented
as part of internal labor markets serve to reQulate these promotions

an wage hierarchies.45 Finally there is ,ne evidence that pay rates
rise with seniority and experience and that the variance of earnings

increases with experience and age.
The literature contains many explanation! for these feature. at

pay hierarchies. Theoretically, variations In internal wage
hierarchie, are seen as influencing a wide array of employees'

behaviors.7 These include their decisions to file grievances, invest
in training, take on added responsibilities, improve their performance.

turnover, form unions and the like. But to our knowledge 112 attention
has been devoted to examining empirically the effects of variations in
the pay hierarchies and workforce profiles on firms'

Recent news report,

do describe caoes

performance.

of employers' attempts to

re1ce labor casts and improve prothctivity by modifying their pay

hierarchies. They report drastic reductions in the
(grades)

nuiiter of levels

in the pay structure as wI I as workforce reduction schemes

aimed not only at shrinking the overall

workforce level but

reconfiguring the distribution of employees within the structure (e.g.
early

retirement programs and demotions). But systematic study of the

effects of

these events has not been reported.

A renewed interest in wage hierarchies within firms

occurred among labor economists. However, most

has also

of this work has

been

at the theoretical level; empirical research is much sketchier.48
Economists

have found that union policies produce reductions

in the

25
dispersion at the plant level; wage dispersion within unionized firms
(measured as standard deviations of the log of wages) averages 1/3 less
than In non—union firms.49

Considering the effects of within—firm

wage differentials, this same study found that the wider the dispersion
the more I ikey union certification drives wil I be successful. Studies
of this type, however, provide little direct evidence on how wage
differentials influence firm performance.

We turn next to research that addresses the impact that different
methods used f or determining pay increases have on performance. Much
of this work focuses on crAiçaring different methods (e.g. merit versus

across the board) rather than cnparing different caitlnatlons or mixes

of approaches in total cmpensation. For example, a recent survey by
the Conference Board reports that merit pay plans (performance
appraisal based) are in widespread use for exempt eiiployees.50 Perhaps
the most tefling result of the survey, which was based on responses

fr caipensation directors, is that there were no apparent differences
in the features of the merit plans between those who claimed their
plans were Ivery successful' and those claiming theirs to be a

Nfai lure.
Typical of the research studies are those that ciipared employee
performance
pay

in organizational

units with merit pay to those in which

increments were based on COLAs and/or seniority. In studies

carlng nurses In two hospi tals

Cone with COLA and seniority based

Increases, the other with ment) and in two paper mills (one with COLA

anc seniority Increases the other in which a merit plan replaced a
COLA/seniority plan), the employees were reported to be more productive

26
In the merit based units.5'

In another study, the discontinuation of

an incentive plan among welders in a manufacturing firm resulted in a

temporary decrease in their productivity. And in a series of studies
of tree plantets, lumber jacks and fur trappers, incentive based plans
were found to be increased performance over previous levels or when
canpared to hourly straight time pay with seniority basea Increases.52
Merit pay did not fare as well in studies in the pubLic sector.53
The most elaborate of these was the longitudinal analysis of the
effects of the Federal Ierat System in the Social Security
Anninistration, which we discussed briefly

ri section U. Unit level

performance data e.g. monthly series of types of claims processed and
time to process) were collected and while the results were not

unajitiguous ie to court challenges that delayed the implementation of
the merit plan and low merit budget funding, the authors concluded that
the merit pay plan did not have any discernable affect on unit

performance. Several reviews of merit pay plane in public education
a190 concluded that there is no systematic evidence that the
institution of merit pay plane for teachers lead to any improvements of
teaching and, more importantly, to improvements in student

performance .

Unfortunately

both the private and public sector studies utilize

nonrigorous quasi—experimental designs and suffer fran methodological
and/or measurement problems (e.g. selection bias, uncontrolled

variables). This leads us to conclude that we know very little about
the effects of merit pay schemes on enployee performance and even less
about their effects on firms' financial well being.

27

It should be
between

theories

practiced.
pay'

'merit

understood,

of

however just how great a gap exists

It actually gets

pay for performance and how

Personnel researchers have long recognized this gap. Many
schemes

are

underfunded, fail to offer pay increases that

are meaningful to employees and fail to establish a clear relationship
between performance and pay increments. Further, only a relatively

uaIl share of most employees canpensatlon is contingent on

performance under these plans. So the poor Sowang
schemes

of

merit pay

should not cl,e as too much of a surprise.

The gap between theory and practice appears to differ by
occupation. Sales incentive plans appear to be more consistent with
theory than the merit plans often used

This

suggests

study

that

sales jobs

may offer

for managers or professionals.
an attractive opportunity to

the effects of various pay for performance approaches.

Another series of studies correlates earnings levels with previous

earnings, experience. performance ratings, ejcation and other
factors.55 Using data collected within firme,

they all reached similar

conclusions: that pay level is weakiy or not significantly correlated
with performance rating and is more strongly related to seniority and

education. For example, one study reported that earnings were more
attributable to experience than performance, but

the three firms, which provided
studies reportea loi.

organizations.57

to report if

the data, used merit based pay.56 Other

correlations

salary levels for managers In

it failed

between performance ratings and

four

private and three public

28

the

Correlations in these studies reveal very little about

nature

of pay—performance relationship. It is the increments in pay, not the

pay eve), that merit pay plans to use to affect performance. Not
unexpectedly then, the correlation between the changes in pay f or

managers and thetr performance rating in one study was very much higher
(.65) than the correlation between performance and pay level <.25)58

Obviously, none of these correlation studies sheds lit on the effects
merit pay may have on individual or firm performance, Hogever, in

spite of the failure to distinguish between pay level and changes In
pay, many still refer to the weak pay level—performance relationship as
proof that merit pay does not affect performance.59
A few studies considered the effects of the all of different forms
of compensation or, employee performance. In one, merit pay and bonuses

(individual oriented pay increases), were found to be less effective
than profltsharing, stock o.rnership, and team based bonuses.60

the latter three, team based bonus were reported to be nest
This study a'so suffers fri,

Of

effective.

limitations similar to most pay—

performance studies; effectiveness was measured in terms of managers'
percept ions of turnover, ability to attract and the like rather than by

more objective measures. Further the authors recognize that the study
is based on a convenient sampie and that data imitations did not
permit them to control for different provisions in the incentive plans
such as size of awards, eligibility, timing etc.

Two other studies contrast the earnings of workers paid by the
hout and those paia by a piece—rate scheme. The first found that among
18$ male punch—press operators in Chicago. workers paid by the piece

29

percent more, even

received approximately 7

differences

after controlling for

In schooling, experience, race, and union status.61 The

second, used Bureau of Labor Statistics data on the earnings of over
100000 employees in 500
clothing inoustries and

finr

in

the footwear and men's and boys'

found that

workers paid by the piece earned

after controlling for differences in

approximately 14 percent more

sue (but not jJj) chara cteri stics of workers and firms.62
It is

unfortunately

cliff

icult to interpret what these estimated

different'as mean. In part, they may reflect an intended incentive
effect; workers employed under piece rates may work
more, and hence get
preuiiuib to

they

e

paid more.

In part, they may reflect a wage

o oiie nsate piece—rate workers

face dii r in 9

harder, produce

for

the risk of low

earni ngs

(e.g., weeks
as usual). In

times when their productivity is low

to phy sical ailments they don't produce as ml ch

they nay a Iso re fleot the most productive workers

when
part

self—selecting

themsel yes into jobs where their earnings opportunities are greatest.

In the

latter case.

not because

firms offering piece—rate plans potentially benefit

the plans induce any given worker to work harder but

rather because

hey serve to help attract higher quality workers.

Neither of these studies,

however, draw any conclusions abait the

effects of such plans on the current profitability or stock market
performance of

i

rms.

A renewed a nterest In, and even popularity of, gainsharing and

other productivi ty sharing schemes

is

evident in industrial

relations.63 WI dely perceived as an approach throu, which pay
increases can successfully affect group

and unit performance,

so

proponents claim the plans hold considerable promise and even

demonstrated success. The benefits ascribed to these plans include
Increases Ln employee and firm productivity and profitabflity. reduced

costs, improved product quality reduced absenteein and tardiness.
better use of capital assets and the facilitation of employee—
management cooperation, caiinitment and trust.64
Conceptually the notion is straightforward and appealing, as part

of an overall employee

relations philosophy, sharing the returns from

pro&ctivity gains will engender suggestions

performance.

and motivate added

for further

Typically these

the form of bonuses and are not tolled into

testimonial and

much of the

anecaotai.

literature

The substantive

gains are shared in

employees' base

increases in cth,lpensatlon costs vary direct ly

Unfortunately,

iniproveiitents,

pay. Hence

with performance levels.

productivity sharing is
empirical evaluations of

on

gainsharing have c1ie in two waves. The fi

rst

Massachusetts institute

its historical connections

to proponents

such

of Technology with

frail the

as Scanlon and Lesieur, as well as Frost and his

colleagues at Michigan State and Scanlon

dissertations and

came

Plan Associates. Beyond

technical reports itt le of this work has been

published.65

More recently the question of the eff ects

of gairisharing and

other programs was the focus of two surveys conducted
19805.66

The New

York Stock

Exchange

in

the early

survey revealed that

approximately 15% of all US companies with 500 or more enipl oyees had
sane form of productivity sharing plan

and that over

70% of

reported gainsharing lead to improving productivity. Based

these

on the

31

Office

'ninn aata of this type, the NYSE

of Econcaic Research

conclude 'On the basis of the evidence and the

theory Ceøçhasis

added),

it appears that gainsharing can play an inportant role in motivating
people to be mote productive.1

The other survey, a GAO Report, concluded that the results of
pro&ctivlty sharing plans suggest that these plans offer a viable
method of enhancing productivity and at the firm level.' This
conclusion was based on information obtained from interviews with 36

firms. However of these, only 24 fIrms provided some financial data,

formal assesnent of these plans

only 9 fInns indicated they made

and only 4 of these could document their analyses. Nevertheless, the
oft quoted GAO results are that gainsharing i'Teroved performance by

17.3% at 13 firms with sales less than 100 million and in the II ftrms
with sales of 100 million or greater, the average inprovement was

16.4%. Na, seriously one S,ould take these results is obviously open

to question. Beyond these two surveys and some earlier evaluation
studies, case descriptions of applications dominate the llterature.6?

Schuster's work C1984a, 1984b) is an exception. Be

reports

longitudinal case studies of the effects of gainsharing schemes, the
Scanlon plan, and the Rucker plan.
productivity

In the most thorou. study1

(measured as output per hour),,eloyment. voluntary

turnover, and suggestion rates by employees
basis over approximately seven years.
the

Based

were

collected on a monthly

on a time—series design,

results revealed an inmiediate upward shift in prottictivity and

suggestions upon irelementation of

a

Scanlon plan, followed by a

32

slitly positive trend thereafter. In other studies of four Scanlon
and two Rucker applications, similar flndln were reported.
This 'plateau effect. an abrupt positive shift in performance
followed by a slii,t positive trend or steady performance

consistent

level, is

with observations in the earlier descriptive literature.

Schuster notes that other coincidental changes (e.g., capital
improvements, new

union or management leader,, etc.) may have affected

productivity to a greater degree than the gainsharing schemes did. He
attenpts to account for these possibilities throui rather exhaustive
interviews of the parties involved and analysis of capital expenditure
data during the study periods.
A nuoter

of monographs on profi tsharing have been published by the

Profit Sharing Research Foundation.68 Most of them describe various

profitsharing applications and their
cppare

the financia' performance of firii with profitoharing to TMnon—

profitsharers .

In one study by Howard and Dietz <1969), financial

performance measures used

incne,

supporting philosophies. A few

include levsln and tren in operating

vanous rates of return, earnings per en,loyee, earnings per

share. aivadends per share, and market price per share. Nine
tndustries were selected using a four—digit SIC classification and data

were collected fran CONPUSTAT tapes for the 1948—66 period. The
analyses caupared the financial performance of profitsharers with non—

profttsharers. Profitsharers exhibited superior performance in 50
percent

Howard

of the

cases and inferior performance In about 24 percent.

and Dietz concluded that "the financia' performance of

$$

profitsharing cawanies was clearly superior to non—profitsharers for
the nine industries as a group.'

Limitations in COMPUSTAT data did not permit accounting for
systematic differences beyond profitsharing that could account for the

observed performance differences. Beyond such obvious ones as capital
expenditures, technological and product differences, a variety of
critical cclm,ensation and personnel factors need to be considered. A
few of the more obvious ones are differences in pay levels, employment
levels, other incentive schemes and whether profltsharing was
considered part of an eiiployees total cailpensatton (thus placing a

portion of it 9at risk" in a manner similar to gainsharing) or a

benefit (thus placing it along with pensions as an entitlement). Put
another way, simple clpartsons of mean outcalies tell us little about
the effects of profiteharing.

Our overall conclusion in this section echoes the conclusion in

our am.nary of the executive caiensation literature. It Is well known
that the basic dimensions of employee cc.wensation strategies differ

widely across organizations. Yet there are few rigorous studies of
whether these differences make a difference. We do not know if a

farm's pay position relative to Its cetltors. the nuither of pay
grades It offers, pay differentials between these grades, or the
profile of employees In a firm's pay hierarchy make any difference
regarding employee behavior or the firm's economic performance.

There is evidence that indivijal and group based incentive plans
do affect employee performance but even it is not unambiguous. We do
not

know whether changes in the mix of total compensation pay off.

34

Does it pay to shift fran a base pay system that emphasizes
entitlements (emphasis on seniority, COLA's, across the board increases
and economic security) to a contingency based system with emphasis on
short and long term incentives such as gairisharing, team awards, and

stack ownership. Unaer what conditions (e.g. stage of product life
cycle, market share. etc.) might different criiipensatton policies pay

off and what are the performance implications of changing pay policies?
Considering the resources devoted to employee compensation and its
management, we do not even know if the overall pay strategies adopted

make any difference. That is. we simply do not know whether managing
ciipensatson pays off.

Perhaps one reason is that cnpensatlon strategies do not operate
in a vacuum. Compensation is only one part, albeit an important part.
of a firm's total human resources strategy. Some firms, for example.
may emphasize contingent cc.opensation while others may emphasize

employment security. Disentangling the effects of one part of an
overafl pattern is difficult. But perhaps a more plausible reason for
the dismal state of knowledge is that industrial relation, researchers
haven

t

attempted the research. It is to a suggested research agenda

that we no'J turn.

IV. Concluding ReØjt
Our survey of

the literature on the relationship between the

cwensation policies a firm pursues and its economic performance leads
us InevitaDly to the conclusion that we know very little about this

relationship. Partially this is because compensation policies, by

35

their nature, are very caiplex. Firms differ in terms of the level of
their wage offers relative to their caupetitors. the returns within an
occupation that accrue Sje to seniority, their wage structures across
and within occupations, the level and mix of fringes they offer, their
use of indivithal or group incentive pay policies, the proceãires by
which wage increases are granted, and the processes enployed to
aflulnister caipensation. Moreover, within a firm different policies

may be followed for hi level executives, other managerial employees,
professional employees, technical

employees, office workess, and blue

collar workers, and still further

distinctions made among salaried and

hourly,

or

unionized and nonunloni zed employees. Finally. caiensation

policies are often established at the individual establ istunent level

rather than at the firm level; we return

to

the inçlicatlons of this

point belo%J.

Developing an understandIng oI why firms pursue different policies
for

various

occupations instead of a single consistent policy for all

enloyee groups is inçortant. On the one hand, It nay be that certain
strategically critical occupations

such as engineers in hi.

technology firms, or executives in most firms, have greater effects on
a firm's financial performance than do other occupations. Thus

variations in pay policies for tnt ical occupations are more likely to
affect

I ir'

economic

performance than policies directed at other

groups. On the other hand, execut lye

cpensatlon usually makes up a

very minor portion of total labor costs.

that

shift portions of employeew labor

COLA'S OC

seniority

Consequently any pay schemes

costs frau entitlements (e.g.

based) to cont ingency

based

(e.g.

gainsharing or

36

lump 1m bonuses) seem likely to have noticeable effects on financial
performance.

The vast majority of the studies we have surveyed have tended to

focus only on a single dimension of caipensatlon policy. However, a
firits econc.nic performance is undoubtedly affected by its cc.npensation

policy in tnto. Future research needs to examine a firm's

policy about

the various dimensions of cipensation policy simultaneously rather

than focusing on one policy to the exclusion of others. ipirically. a
firm's compensation strategy needs to be measured as a

of

interrelated dimensions. Developing a scheme to parmaterize such a
complex policy in terms of a manageable number of dimensions will not
be a sinple task.

Of course, one mijit think that one could eliminate the need for
such

efforts by

studying ho., chans In one dimension of compensation

policy affect changes n

firm performance. The studies cited in

Section II on the relationship between the adoption of particular
provãsions in executive crensation agreements and performance, or
those cited in Section III on the relationship between the adoption of
merit pay and public sector productivity, fall Into this class.

Unfortunately, the inferences one can draw fran such studios depend
crucially on whether other aspects of couipensation/industrial relations

policy changes at the same time; unless other critical aspects are
accounted for, causal inferences .,iiI be distorted. In addition, they
depend crucially on one's ability to control for other forces besides
compensation policy that might be expected

to influence performance.

3?

Since adoption of a particular provision may we' I be influenced by

other forces, this is also not always easy to do.

An argument might be made that each pay policy dzmension may
affect a different outcme, thus diminishing the ailportance of
analyzing all dimensions sinwiltaneously. The pay level of a firm, for
example, may principally affect its ability to attract and retain a

stable work force and the price canpetitiveness of its products, while

a finns policy regarding the methods by which employees are
canpensated (e.g. team based incentives versus seniority) may directly
affect their productivity.

If such a separation of theoretical effects

exists, then the need to consider sintiltaneously the entire pay
strategy

diminishes. Ciim,n sense suggests ho,ever, that ewe

thresholds of all pay policies may have

to exist

for the separate pay

dimensions to have any effect. Thus, for example, merit

pay schemes

may have little effect on performance if the pay level is relatively
The endogeneity of the adoption of particular provision, suggests
another thorny issue. Not only are changes over time in ocupensation
policy for a given firm likely to be nonrandcui. but so are differences

in ccupensation policies across firms at a point in time. There are
long literatures in both econn'cs and personnel that suggest the
situations in which different caipensation policies may prove optimal.
For example, the efficiency wage literature in economics suggests
that situations in which turnover costs are high, or the costs of
monitoring worker productivity are high, are the ones in which above
market—clearing wages and/or earnings profiles that increase with

38

seniority may arise. The compensation literature in personnel suggests
that business units that exhibit simi ar business strategies or operate
in the same stages of pronuct life cycles will adopt similar

compensation policies, and that these policies will differ from those
of firms in the same industry in different stages or with different
Dusiness strategies.69 Thus, variations in calipensation policies

across firms may reflect conscious decisions by firms each trying to
maximize its economic welfare.

At first glance, we appear to be left with two options. On the

one hand, researchers can treat variations in cçensation policy
across farms as being randomly determined and ignore issues of possible

simultaneity. On the other hand, researchers can acknowledge that at
least sane of the observed variations in farms' caipensation policies

are purposeful and designed to effect a firms performance and then try
to empirically model the determinants and effects of these variations.

Given the latter, the effects of censation policy on firm
performance cart be estimated only in the context of a model that treats
these policies as being endogenously determined.

Our own preferences are to go the latter route. A start has
already been made by some research. For example, economists have tried
to see if empirical explanations exist for why the prevalence and
strength of cost—of—living adjustment clauses vary across union
contracts, why the fringe benefit/wage ratio varies over time and
across areas, or why the probab, ity of observing mandatory retirement
provisions and above market clearing wages varies across individuals.70

39

These types of studies have only begun

to

scratch the surface and much

more research is needed on the determinants of compensation strategies.
We must stress, however, that pursuing this type of research will

not be easy for a number of reasons. On the one hand, it is not a
trivial matter to paraiitterize any particular caipensation policy. For
example, knowledge of the incentive/nonincentive pay dichotomy is
probably less useful than knowledge of the magnitudes of the incentives
that exist (i.e., the marginal return to the workers from altering

their behaviors). Similarly, how a plan is actually aministered may
De quite different frau what is recorded in written plan statements.

The mere process of collecting data on censation policies will
require considerable efforts.

On the other hand, once such data Is collected researchers mist

still develop enpirical models to explain variations In censation
policies. Unless such models have a good deal of explanatory power,
attempts to treat caipensation policies as encs,genous are unlikely to
lead to statistically precise estimates of the effects of ccAlpensatlon

policies on firm performance, both because of the Imprecision of the
the

instrunents' for caipensatlon policies that would result

Indirect relationship between canpensation policy and ultimate
financial performance.

Indeed this problem is exacerbated by the fact that caipensation

policies are often set at the indivithal establts,rnt level and are
designed to effect establishment level variables such as absenteeisi,

the quality of new hires, turnover, and proo.ictiv,ty. Yet the

40

financial

performance (stock market or accounting) measures available

are typically avaiiable only at the firm or corporate level.

These difficulties suggest a third option. Researchers might
focus on the establisinent level to estimate the effects of
cc.,çensation

d,rectly

pal ides on the outcaies that they are designed to

intiuence, such as recruitment, absenteeisn, and turnover and

individual, group and business unit performance;

all in

the context of

models in which one attempts to control for the endogeneity of these

policies.
these

Assuming that censatlon policies are shown to influence

outcnes, establishment level data could then be used to estimate

the effects of these outcanes on total costs of production and thus on

underlying profitability. Related research on the effects of
industrial relations type policies on establishments' costs and
productivity in the autanobile and paper mill industries has recently
been undertaken and can serve as a starting point for these

endeavors.7 These related studies do ng. treat industrial relations
variables as

endogenous, however, and it Is important that attempts be

made to treat cnpensation policies as endogenous in future analyses.

Indeed, it may be

that

financial and stock market measures simply

have too much "noise in many situations to be useful measures of the

direct effects of various crensation policies and practices. By
considering only the ultimate' performance measures and ignoring the
intermediate outccqnes of cajipensation systems, we run the risk of

concluding nothing" matters when in fact what matters depends on the
outcQiies and models selected. Research on the effects of caupensation

41

policies on tic-rn performance thus needs to focus on th firm—level
performance measures and more intermediate level measures.

42

Footnotes
1. CaTensatton related theories come frau a variety of sources;
Thomas Mahoney (1979) attempts to integrate the perspectives of
compensation fran the econanics, psychology • sociology and personnel
literatures.
2.

See Narti n

post—inst Itutional

a.

E.E.

See, for

Lawler 111
4.

ist's I abor market IIIOCJe)S
e x amp I e

of the 1940s and 1950s.

George Plilkovich and Jerry Neuman (I9S4) or

(1 971)

See, for

Dunn <1966).

Segal (1986), for exan e. for a discussion of the

We

exajo&e, Charles Brown & James Medoff (1965) or L.

discuss the various ways firm

performance may be

measured below.
5.

Explanations for the existence of above maricet-clearing wages

unaer the rubric of efficiency

fal

the I iterature Include

Janet Yellen (1984).
pol

ic

Mon i

(see

suIlMr'es

of

Lawrence Katz (1906), Joseph Stiglitz (1984) and

Explanations often revolve around high wage

es being used to discourage shirking in situations where

t oring

KflOiJfl

wa theies; recent

costs are ii igh. This provides one explanation for the weN—

fact that wages tend to increase with establishment and firm size

Brown and Medoff (1985)).

6.

For example, recent evidence on the relationship between quit

probabi II t I es and firms' crensatioli levels is presented in Mark
2986)

Earlier studies include John Pencavel (1970) and

Viscusi ( 1980)

Evidence that high wages are associated with low

Meitzen

absentee rates is presented in Steven Allen (1984).

Up

43
7.

See,

for

example, Hilkovich & New,oan (2984), Richard B.

Freeman (1982).
B.

Econcuilists have also

developed a variety of theories to

increase with seniority including those

explain why earnings S.ould

based on Investments in training (e.g., Gary Becker (1975)) and those
based on providing incentives (e.g.. Edward Lazear (1979; 1981). Edward

Lazear and 9wrwin Rosen (1981). and Sherwin Rosen

(1966).

9. For example. Donald WinIer (1980) shows that generous sick
leave pa1 ,cIes may encourage absenteeiTi. We

effects of

do not discuss the

another important employee benefit, pensions, ,n our paper

since they are the subject of another contribution (Steven Allen and
Ronert Clark) in this volume.
10.

Theoretical

models

of

payment by group

or

individual output

also exist; a good survey of this literature is Lazear (1986).

12. See the papers in this volum,
on

by Srian Becker and Craig Olson

labor relations and Waiter Gershenfeld on employee participation.

12. See La2ear (1986) for a survey.
13. See David

Ciscel and Thauas Carroll (1980) for a survey of

this literature.

24. See,

for example, T. CcuØ.lin and P. Schmidt (1985), Peter

Kostiuk (19%), and Kevin J. Nürphy (1985a; 198%) (fotthcalling a;
forthcoming b) who focus on absolute measures of performance and Rick

Anti. and libbie &iith (1986) who focus on performance measures relative

to ccn,petltors.

44

IS. See George Benson (1985) and T. Coughlan and P. ScSidt
(1985). Benson also studied the incane of executives in 29
conglanerates during the 1970—75 period and found that the annual gains
(or losses) they incurred due

to

changes

in

the value of their stock

holdings in their cpariie5 far exceeded their annual changes in
salaries. This further ties their 9ortunes" to their ca,lparLles'
fortunes.

Further cDnfirlnatlon that ownership matters canes fran William
Leweilen. Claudjo Loderer and N.ron Rosenfeld (1985), and Randall

Nørck, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1986).

The former examined

the abnormal

stock

mergers fran

the 'bid" to the approval1 date. They found these

market returns experienced by "bidder firms" in

returns positively related to the percentage of the bldder

firms"

stock owned by senior management. Thus, executives' ownership of their
firms'

securities

helped to align

the interests of stockholders and

managers, at least in this case. The latter found that corporate
performance (in terms of both accounting profits and stock market
performance)

was highest when management owns between 5 and 20 percent

of the corporation's stock. They hypothesize that when nai er amounts

are ownea, managers have less incentive to pursue a profit maximizing
strategy.

i*j le when

larger amounts are owned,

managers may feel more

secure and not work as hard.
16.

For

examples of such "learning' models, see Siiith Freeman

(1977). Mflton Harris and Bengt Hoimstran (1982) and Glenn McDonald
(I 982)

17. Murphy (forthcaning, b).

45

18. See Rocert Kasson (197!).
39. See, S. Shagat. J. Brickley and R. Lease (3985). 3. Brickey,
S. Bhagat and R. Lease (1985), 0. Larcker (1983). and H. Tehranian and
J. Vaegeiein (1966).

20. Larcker (1983).
21. Bhagat, Brickley and Lease (1985).

22. See Jonathan Eaton and Harvey Rosen (1983) for one
theoretical model.

23. P. A. Lambert and D. F. Larcker (1985).

24. Charles Xnober (1986).
25. Ronald Ehrenberg and Steven Golterg (197?).
26. Gerald CQldsteln and Ronald Drenberg (1976).
2?. Ronald Ehrenberg, Richard Chayk,ski and Randy Ann Ehrenberg
(1986).

28. Jone Pearce. William Stevenson and James
Performance
claims

Ferry

(1985).

measures used here include the average length of time

to be approved or denied, the percentage

of

f or

claims approved with

accurate aocumentatjon, and the percentage of post—entitlement actions

that took over
29.

In

30 days.

fact,

little attention has been given to how

cipensation levels of top

executives

the

relative

within a firm are set and whether

the structure across executives provides proper incentives. Edward
Lazear and Sherwin Rosen (1981) do present theoretical arguments why At

may ne optimal to have ccwpensation differences across ranke that far
exceed the relative productivity differences across the positions but
no empirical work on interfirm variations In executive salary

46
structures has Deen undertaken

30.

-

For a brief overview of the types of data collected by the

leading private censation consulting firm see Nilkovich 8. Newman
(1904). See any area wage survey, for example U.S. Bureau of Labor

Statistics u985 for a discussion of the publically coflected data.
31.

Kenneth E. Foster (1905).

32. See Fred Foulkes (1982) for a survey of the personnel
practices of large non—union firms.

33. See Lawrence Katz (1906), Joseph Stiglitz (1904).
34. See, for example, Brown and Medoff (1985) and Walter
(1983).

35. See, for example Balkin & Gcqnez—Mejiz

(1986). High tech

firms were Defined as those with R&D budgets reported to be 5% or more

of sales. A total of 105 firms were in their sample, 33 were
classified as high

tech,

72 as traditional.

36. See, for example, William Dickens and Lawrence Katz (1906).
As noted in the introduction, such a correlation between wages and
profits proviDes little evidence that high wages cause high profits.

37. John Barron, John Bishop and William Dunkeiberg (1986).

30.

To be provided.

39. See, for example, Charles Brown
40. Ruth G. Shaeffer (1976).
41. Herbert Simon (1957).
42. Elliot Jacques (1965).

(1985).

47

43. Under knowledge based pay plans, employees salaries increase
as additional training is acquired, whether or not those ski I Is are
used
as

on the present job.

Managers may then assign workers to any task.

long as the employees possess the required skills for that task and

are paid at rates

for

the

highest skill they possess regardless of the

task they actually perform. Maturity curves pay employees according to
sane sense of maturity" (years—since—degree is a frequent measure),
type of degree, and a performance measure. Maturity curves are
frequently used for engineers and scientists whose work is on group
projects where individual contribution is difficult to assess.
44.

ano

Knowledge based pay schenes are described in Ijawler (1985)

Jenkins and Gupta (1985).
45.

See for example. Paul Osterman.

46. Analysts of earnings, experience, age profiles have been
widely researched. See, for example, Katherine C. Abraham & Henry S.
Farber (2986), James L. Medoff I Katherine C. Abraham (1980), Joseph
Altonji & Robert Shakotko (1985).

47. For discussions of the effects of various wage differentials
on employee work behavior see Lawler (1971) and Lazear (1979. 1981.
1986).

48.

Exanles of the

theoretical work include the work of Lazear

and Rosen (1981) and Rosen (1986)
work

cited above.

internal

on

Malcc.nson's work on

labor markets,

'rank order tournaments". Lazear's

incentives and hierarchies within

and Frank's rediscovery that employees value

theft relative position in an internal pay hierarchy as well
absolute cempensation levels.

as

their

48

49. See, for example. James Medoff & Richard Freeman (1903).
50. See David Peck (1984).

51. See charles Greene (1978), Charles N. Greene & Phillip H.
Pedsakoff. For a general review of the literature see Robert Opehal

and M.D. Dunnette (198 ). E. Lawler (1971), R.E. Kepelman & Leon
Re,nharth (1982) or Al Nash (1982).

52. C. A. Yukl and C. P. Latham

(1975). 0. F.

Latham and D. I..

Dessett (1976) and C. A. Yukl, C. P. Latham and E. D. Pursell (1975).

53. Jone C. Pearce

I James L.

Perry (1983) & Pearce. Stevenson &

Perry (1985).

54 See Samuel Bacharach, David

Lipeky, and

Joseph Shedd (1984), David

Cohen and Richard Humane (1985), and Humane and Cohen (1906).
55. These studies that regress earnings or pay levels on
demographic factors are reported in both the labor econanic and

psychology literature. See, for exanple, N. Haire. EL ChIselli,
NcGordan (19

),

E. Lawler (1971. 1981), Medoff 8. Abraham (1981).

56. See Nedoff and Abraham (198).
57. See E. Lawler (1971, 1981).

56. See HG. Heneman (1973).

59. See Kilkovich and Nean (1987).
60. See L. Gez—Nejia & D. Balkin (1985).
61 John Pencavel (1977).
62 Eric Seiler (1984).

63. The iteratume on gainsharing is burgeoning. Most of it
ctpares the procedures and aministrative aspects of various
approaches. See for example, Bert C. Netzger, (1980 & 1984), Brian E.

49

Moore (1982). or Institute of Industrial Engineers (1983). Some make a
distinction between gaEneharing, in which incentives based on team or
unit level performance improvements and other forms such as

prof.tsharing totai organization financial performance) stock
ownership, bonus and the like.

A further distinction is that

gainsharing schemes permit wide definition of IlIprovellIen ts——exaiip Cs

include

measures of financials, production quantity and quality.

accident and absentee rates and even workplace cleanliness.

64. For examples of proponents of gainSar,ng see. E.E. Lawier
(1984 8. 1955). Schuster (1965), Hoore (1982).

65. For a

66.

(1982 and
67.

brief

review

of these see Bullock

and Lawler (1984).

See New York Stock Exchange Office of Econanic Research

the General Accounting
See,

Office (1981).

for example. Paul Gooran 8 Brian Moore

(1976) & Lawler

(1985)

66

See, for example, Bert Hetzger (1980).

69

See for example, George T. Milkovich (1987)

Systems in High technology Fims in A. Kleingardner,

'Ccuipensat ion

ed,

of UiS Techn&oav (Lexington Presa, 1987).
70

See, for example, Ronald Ehrenber g, Leif Danziger and Gee San

(1983), Stephen Wooiry (1983), and
ii

ftitchens

See, for example, Casey Ichniowski

Kochan, and
Zaba I a

Robert

Kenneth GobellIe (1963), and J.R.

(1 965).

(forthcuing).

(1986), Harry Katz, Thnas
Norsworthy and Craig

50

References

John N. Abovd, 'Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value of
the

Enterprise,' ,nilneo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

October 19U5).

Katherine C. Abraham and Henry S. Farber, 'Job Duration. Seniority and

Earnings', mimeo, Working Paper No. 1819 National Bureau of

Econnic Research.
George Akerlof, 'Gift Exchange and Efficiency—Wage Theory:

Views." Pctrican EciIc Revi w. voL

Four

74. no. 2. May 1964.

Steven Allen, Trade Unions, Absent eeili, and Ex It—Voice,' __________
Injstrlal
__________
and Lar Relptinns Review 37,

April

1984: 331—345.

Rick Antle and Abbie iiith, "An &ip irical Invest Igation of the Relative

Jjrnal of

Performance Evaluation of Corporate Executi ve5. ___________
Accajnt!np
Research 24. SprIng 1986, 1-32.
_________________
Samuel Bacharach, David Lipsky and Joseph Shedd. Paying

Teaching: erIt Pay and Its Alt.rnatIv

(Ithaca,

for Better
NY:

Organizational Analysis and Practices. Inc.. 1984)
David B. Balkin & Lois Cc.nez-Mejia,

'The Relationship

Between Short—

Term and Long—term Incentives and Strategy in the High Technology
Industry" mimeo paper 1986.

John N. Barron, John Bishop and William C. Thanks berg, 'Employer

Search: The Interview ing and Hiring of New Dlloyees,' The Review

of Ecnnics and Stat! stJc, 1986. 43—52.
Gary Becker, ihinari Cital:

A Theoretical and liri cal

ed. (New York: Colunthia University Press, 1975)

AnalysIs, 2nd

5'

0. Benson. 'The Self—Serving Management Hypothesis: Sie Evidence'.
.Jajrnpl

af

Accjntinp

S. Bhagat, .3. Brickley

and gcwiics 7.

and R. Isase, 'Incentive

Stock Purchase Plans," Jjrnal of

t985.

April 1985. 67—64.

Effects

of

Financial !canics

Employee
14.

June

195—216.

J. Brickley. S. Shagat and R. r.ease, 'The Impact of Long-Run Managerial

Compensation Plans on 9jareholder Wealth,' Jairnal of Mcjntlna
and !co.iics. April 1985. 115—129.

charles Brown, Military Enlistments: Ynat Can We Learn From

Geographic Variation," rican Eeoncaic Review 75. March 1965:
228—234.

Charles Brown and James Medoff, 'The &ployer Size Wage

Effect'

Cmimeo,

Nove,iter 1985).
R. .3.

Bullock

and E. E. Lawler III, 'Gains,arlng: A Few Questions and

Fewer Answers. HlnIAn Resojrce Management 5 (1984). 197-212.
David Ciscel and Thomas Carroll, 'The Determinants of Executive

Salaries: An Econometric Survey,' Review of Ecannics and
Statistics, February 1980, 7—IS.
David .3.

Cherrlngton,

H. Joseph Refla & William E. Scott Jr., 'Effects

of Contingent and lion—Contingent Rewards on the Relationship

Between Satisfaction and Task Performance,' Jirnal of Molled
Psyctinlnoy. December 1971, 531—5%.

David Cohen and Richard Murnane, 'The Merits of Merit Pay," Public

Interest, Sumer 1985. 3-30.

52

T. Coughlln and R. Schmidt, 'Executive Ccupensatlon, Management

Turnover, and Firm Performance: An &opirical Investigation,'

Journal of Accjritinp and Ecrlc 7,

William Dickens

April 1985, 43-66.

and Lawrence Katz, 'lnterln&stry Wage Differences and

Industry Characteristics in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard,

eds., lJnlovrent and the Structure of

Lattr

arkets (London:

Basil-Blackwell, 1986).

Lucia Dunn. 'The Effects of Firm Size on Wages, Fringe Benefits and

Work Thsutility." in Harvey Goldschmldt, et al., eS The Isct
of the !rn Corooratlon, Coluithia Press, New York, 1984.
Lee Dyer and Donald P. Schwab, 'Personnel Research' in TA. Kochan, et
al..

eds. Iii&t4,)

Anoraisal;

167—220

in the 1970's: Review and

(MadIson, Wig., IRRA, 1982).

Jonathan Eaton and Harvey Rosen. 'Agency, Delayed Compensation and the

structure of Executive Remuneration.' Journal

of

Finance 38.

December 1963, 1469—1505.
Ronald Ehrenberg, Richard chaykowski and Randy Ann Ehrenberg, 'MerIt
Pay for School Superintendents?1 (National Bureau of Economic

Research Workng Paper No. 1954, June 1906).
Ronald Ehrenberg. Leif Danziger and Gee San, 'Cost of Living Adjustment

Clauses n Union Contracts: A Sumary of Results," Jrsjrnal of

Labor Ecnnics 3. July 1963: 215—246.
Ronald Ehrenberg and Steven Goldberg, 'Officer Ccxnpensation and

Performance In Local Building Trade Unions,' InsstrIàl and Latr
Relations Review 30. January 19??. 188—196.

53

Kenneth E. Foster. "An Anatoiiy of Crany Pay Practices,' PernneI,
Sept. 1985.

Fred

K. Foulkes.

Personnel

Policies in Laroe ltnuninn Csanjes

(Engiewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice—Hail. Inc.. 1980).
H. Frank. Dinosing the RiS,t Pond. (Hew York: Oxford University

Robert

Press. 1965).
Richard B. Freeman. 'Union Wage Practices and Wage Diwersion Within

Establishments,' Inctjstrlal and Labor Relatlan, RevIew, 36. No. 7.
October 1962: 10—11.
Richara B. Freeman and James L. Medoff. .at

Uninns Do? (Hew York:

Basic Books, Inc. 1984).
&nI

th

Freeman, 'Wage Trends as Performance Di lays Prodact I ye

Potential: A Model and Application to Academic Early

Retirement,'

Ml I Jjrnal nf Ecnnaiics 8. Autumn 1977, 419—433.
General

Accounting Office. Prn&ctlvity Siaring Pr: Can They

Contriite to Prjctiyity Irove.ents?. March 31, 1961.
Brian A. Giles & Gerald Barrett, 'UtHity of Merit Increases,' Journal
of

Anolied

Psytholoaw, 55. April 1971: 103—109.

Gerald Goldstein and Ronald Ehrenberg, 'cecutIve Caipensation In
Municipalities.' Sjthern Ecc,ic Jirnal 43, July 1976, 937—94?.
Luls R. Gaoez—Nejia 8 David B. Balkin, 'The Effectiveness of IndivIaal

and Aggregate Cpensation Strategies n an R&D Setting,' miioeo
1986.

Paul S. Goodman and Brian E. Moore. 'Factors Affecting Acquisition of
Beliefs about a Hew Reward System,' Ri—an
571—566.

Pelatias,

June 1976,

54

Charles N. Greene, Causa1 Connections Among Managers' Merit Pay. Job
Satisfaction and Performance," Jjrnpl nf Anti led Psychninoy, 58,
1978; 95—100.

Charles N. Greene and Phlillp H. Podsakoff, "Effects of Removal of a

Pay Incentive: Field Experiment." Acaniv pfMapaoement
Proceedin, 38, 1978, 206—210.
Erica L. Croshen, "Sources of Wage Dispersion: How Much Do Eoçlayers
Matter?"
N.

mlmeo paper, December • 1985.

Haire. E.E. Chiseili and H.E. Gordon, "A Psychological Study of
Pay,1 Jajrnal of Aol led Psychoinay, 1967, 51. 4, 636.

Milton Harris and Bengt Holrnstrn,"A Theory of Wage Dynamics," Review

of Econic Studies 49, 1982. 315—333.
Herbert C. Heneman III, "Inact of Performance on Managerial Pay Levels
and

Pay Changes." .Jajrnal of Anpl led Psvcholnov, 1973, Vol. 58,

No. 1, 128—130.
Sian B. Howard and Peter 0. Dletz, "A Study of the Financial

Significance of Profit Sharing" <chicago: Council of Profit
Sharing IndustrIes. 1969).

Robert Hutchens, "A Test of Lazear's Delayed Payment Contracts,"

Jornai of

Lartr

Eeonlc, (forthcoming).

Casey Ichniowskl, "The Effects of Grievance Activity on Productivity,"

ln&strial and Laaot Relations RevIew 40. October 1986. 75—89.
Institute of Industrial Engineers, Gainsiarina: A Collection of

Eatc. 1983.

55

C. Douglas Jenkins,

Jr. and Nina Gupta, "The Psyoffs of Paying for

KnowIedge. Labor llanaaement CoQppratlon Bird (Washington. D.C.:
Department

of

Labor.

August

1985).

Katz, Thauas Kochan and Kenneth Gobeille, 'Instrial Relations

Harry

Performance.

Econnic Performance, and the Effects of Quality of

Working Life Efforts: An Interplant Analysis." lnthjstrial and

La Relations Reyis 37, October

1983. 3—17.

Lawrence Katz, 'Efficiency Wage Theories: A
Itatirmal

&sreau of Econgnic

Partial

Evaluation.'

arch Wmkino Paper P

1906,

April

1966.

Charles

Knober, 'Golden Parachutes. .ark Repel lents. and Hostile

Tender Offers." rican Econcsic ReyEev, &rch 1986. 155—187.
Thaiias A. Kochan. Collective Barcainino and Injstrial Relaticas.
CHcinewood,

Illinois:

Richard IL Irwin, 1980).

R.E. Kopelmar, & Leon Relnharth, Research Results: The EFfects of

Merit Pay Practices on ,ite Collar Performance.' Censatimi
Review,

Fall Quarter 1982: 30—40.

Peter F. Kostiuk, Hecutive Ability. Corporate Performance, and
Nanagerial

Alan

Krueger

Incarie' (minmo, Center for Naval AnalysIs, May 1906).

and Lawrence Suoners, 'Efficiency Wages

Structure,' National Bureau of Econiic Research
1952. June

and the Wage
Working Paper

1986.

P. A. Lambert and

D.

F.

Larcker,

'Golden Parachutes. Executive

Decision—Making and Shareholder Wealth,' ,Jgurnal of Accounting and
!cireics 7, April 1985, 179—204.

56

The Association Between Performance Plan Adoption and

0. F. Larcker,

C.

Corporate

Capital Investments,"

Ecnnl cs

5, 1983. 3—30.

Jnurnal nf Annnuntlnn nrl
_________________________

P. Latham and D. L. Dessett, flesigning Incentive Plans for
Unionized &oployees,' Persnnne Psyctnlnav 31 (1978): 47—61.

E.E. Lawler III. 'Gainsharing Research: Findings and Future
Directions,h Technical Report T 85—1(67): University of Southern
California Center for Effective Organizations.

E.E. Lawler III,
Pay and aanizatii Effectlvene (New York: McGraw—
__________________________________
Hill 1971).

E.E. Lawler III

Pay and Organization Rrviopment. (Reading, Mass:

Addison—We 51ev 1961).

Esard Lazear, °bfr.y Is There Mandatory Retirement ,1 _________
Jjc-nai of

Potential Eeonray 87, December 1979), 261—284.
Edward Lazear,

"Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours

Restricti ens,'________________________
laerican Ecic Review 71 (September 1981), 606—
620.

Edward Lazear, 'IncentIve Contracts,'

National Bureau of Econanic

Research Working Paper No. 1917, May 1986.
Edward Lazear

and Sherwin Rosen, 'Rank—Order Tournaments and Opt iota I

Labor Contracts," JjrnaI nf Political Ecnnrrv 89. October 1981,
64 1—864.

Jonathan Leonard, "Carrots and Sticks: Pay, Supervision and Turnover'
(mlmeo, March 1986).

57

William Lewellen,

Claudlo Loderer and N.ron Rosenfeld. 'Merger

Decisions and Executive Stock Ownership in Acquiring Firms.'

Jjrnal

of McjntinQ and Econics 7, April 1985. 209—223.

E.A. Locke, D.B. Feren, Y.M. Mccaleb; 1 K.N. aw. "The Relative
Effectiveness of Four Methods of Motivating Faiployee Performance,1

in aanaes in Wkinp Life, edited by
York:

K.O.

Duncan, et

al

CNew

Wiley & Sons. 1900).

Glenn MacDonald, 'A Market Equilibrium Theory of Job Assignment and
Sequential

Accumulation of Information,' Arlcan Ecnnmlc Review

72 December 1982. 1038—1055.

Thas A. Mahoney, Caepsatinn and Reward Perectlye, (}lcmewood,

Illinois: Richard D.

Irwin, 1979).

H. Malcnson. Work Incentives, Hierarchy, and Internal Labor

James

Markets.' Jrajrnal of Political Esv, 1984, vol. 92, 3; 486—507.
Robert Macson, 'Executive Motivations, Earnings and Consequent Equity
Performance, Jairnal nf Political Eccnanv 79, Noventer 1971.
1278—1292.

E. Neadows, 'How Three Cipanies Increased Their Productivity,' Zcu.

10, March 1980, 92—lOt.
James L. tiedoff & Katherine C. Abraham,

'Experience.

Prnotlon and

Earnings,' Ijarterlv JirnaI of Ecoojc,, 95, Deceoter 1980:
703—36.

L. Nedoff I Katherine C. Abraham, 'Are Those Paid More Really

James

Mote Productive: The Case

R.scxirce, Spring.

of Experience,' Jjrnal of

1981: 186-216.

Ian

56

Hark Meitzen, 'Differences in Male and Female Job—Quitting Behavior'

Jjrnal of Labor EcortIcs 4 (April 1966, 151—160.
Bert L. Metzger. 'Gainsharlng Plans: What They Are; Flow They Cnpare;

and the Advantages and Limitations of Each.' Profit ,aring,
December. 1984.

Bert L. Metzger, Increasing Prjctiyity Thraii Profit Sarinp
(Evanston: Profiteharing Research Foundation, 196D).
Bert L. Metzger, Profit 9,arlno in

Lar Csanies (Evanston:

Profit Sharing Research Foundation. Vol. I (1976). Vol. 11
(1978)).

Bert L. Netzger and Jerome A. Culletti, es Profit ,arino Pay' A
Caratiye Study of the Financial Perfnr.ance of Retailers With

and Wlthit Profit .arino Prn (Evanston, Profit Sharing
Research Founcation, 1971).

George T. Milkovich, 'Caiwensation Systems in High Technology
Cc,,panies.' in A. Xleingardner, ed Kana.cmcnt of Hith Technolnoy

Firm, (Lexington Press, 2987).

George T. Nilkovich I Jerry Newman, Censatinn, 2nd Edition (PIano.
Texas: Business Publications Inc.. 1987).

Brian E. Moore, ,prIno the Gains of Prjctivity: KiSliSts of the

Literature,

Work In Mierican Institute Studies in Productivity

(New York: Pergamon Press, 1982).
Randall M&ck, Andrew Shleifer and Robert Vishny, "Management Ownership
and Corporate Performance." National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 2055 (Cambridge, Mass., Noventer 1906).

59
Richard Murnarie and David Cohen, 'Merit Pay and the Evaluation Problem:

ty Most Merit Pay Plans Fall and Few %rvive,H Harvard

Ecation

Review 56. February 1986, I—I?.
Kevin 3. Murphy, 'Corporate Performance and Managerial Resirieratioru

An Fnpirical Analysis,' irsirnal of Accaintino arid EconIcs

7,

April 198$, 11—42. Ca)
Kevin 3. Murphy, 'Can Theories of Wage Dynamics and Agency Explain
cecutive C,pensation, Priotions, and Mobilttr (mimeo, October
1985). (b)
Kevin

J.Nurphy, 'Does Executive Compensation Make Sense?', Harvard

&jsiness Review (forthcing, a).
Kevin J.Murphy, 'Incentives, Learning and Ciw.ensation' (mimeo. August

1985), JjrnaI of L Ei <forthcanlng, b).
Al Ian MaSt, lIa,iarisl CensatIt: Hitl ithts of the Literature,
Work in America Institute, l9.
3. R. Norsworthy and Craig Zaballa, 'Worker Attitudes, Worker Behavior
and Productivity in the U.S. Autc,unabile Industry. 1959—1976,'

Industrial

pnj Lahor Relations Review 38, July 198$, 544—558.

Walter Di, 'The Fixed Eployment Costs of Peci4lized Labor' in 3.

Triplett, ed., The reaaat..._.jt of La Costs CO.icago:
University of thicago Press, 1963).
Robert Op,hal & M.D. Dunnette, 'The Role of Financial Caipensation in

Industrial Motivation.' Ps,th,olical il let ii, 66. 1966; 94—116.
Charles Peck. Pay and Perfoçpance: The Interaction Qf censLtiQp nd

Perf.anne raisaI, The Conference Board, Research &al letin
155,

1964.

60

Jane I.. Pearce & James I.. Perry. 'Federal Merit Pay: A Longitudinal

AnaLysis, PttIic ASInistrati, eview, July—August 198$

315—

325.
John Pencavel ,

Methods

Work Effort, On the Job Screening, and Alternative

of Remuneration," Research

225—259.

John

Pencavel • An

Analysis of

the

ji t

in r.ahor Econaniç 1, 1977,

Rate

in rican Nanufacturino

Lnsstrv (Princeton. N.J.: Injstrial Relations Section, 1970).
Peat Marwick &

Mitchell, ecutiye Censatia.t Stratecies in the Nev

England His. Technoloay Inthstrv, 1982. 83 & 84.
Jone Pearce. William Stevenson and James

Perry,

'Managerial

Ciwensatlon Based on Organizational Performance: A Time—Series
Analysis of the Effects of Merit Pay.' An.I.,_. of Kana.—nt

Journal

28. 1985. 261—278.

E.T. Redding, 'Myth ye. Reality:

The Relationship Between Top

Executive Pay and Corporate Performance,' Csensation Review,
Fourth quarter. 1981: 16—24.
Sherwin Rosen,

'Prizes

and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments,'

Wrican Eccoic Review 76,

September 1985, 701—715.

Michael Schuster. 'Gainsharing; Issues for Senior Managers,' mimeo

paper: November, 1985.
Michael Schuster, HThe Scanlon Plan: A Longitudinal Analysis," Journal
of Agolied and Be4,pyjoraj

Science 20, I, 23—38 c1984a.

Michael Schuster, Union—Manaqpnt Cooperatoj,: StructMre—Prpces,-

Iact <Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.
Research, 1984).

E. Upjohn Institute for Fknployinent

61

Martin Segal, 'Post—Institutionali in

Labor Econanlcs: The Forties

arid Fifties Revisited. !ntluqtrial and Labor Relations Reyiv 39,

April 1986, 308—403.

Eric Seller, Piece Rate vs. Time Rate:

The Effect of Incentives on

Earnings,' Reyiev of Eciics and StatIstics 66, August 1984.
363-376.

Ruth C. Shaeffer

'Ceiliparing Staffing Pattern,' Kanaaemenj Reylew, July

1976. 41—47
Herbert

A. Simon

'The

Compensation of Executives,' itrw, 20,

195?, 32—35

Joseph Stigl !tz, Theories of Wage Rigidity,'

Econii

Research Working Paper No. 1442

National Bureau of
September 1984

H. Tehranian and 3. Waegelemn, 'Market Reacti on to Short—Term Executive

Accoontina and

EcnnitIcs

Sex Differences In Worker Otaltt Ing,' Revlev of

Econi

Cixope nsa tlon

7, April

Kip Viscusi,

Plan Adoptions.' Jjrnal of

I9, 13t—144.

and Stati stica,

August 1980.

Donald Winkler. 'The Effects of Sick Leave Policy on Teacher

Absenteeisn," Inaistrial and La Relations Review 34, January
1981, 207—228

Stephen Woodbury, 'ibstitution Between Wage and Nonwage Senef its.'

Arican Ecot'aic Review 73, March 1983: 166—t82.
Janet Yellen, "Efficiency Wage Models of Unenloynent,' ricafl

cgDflQJtviw roceØInqs 74, May 1984, 200—205.
6. A. Yukl and C. P. Latham, "Consequences of Reenforcenent Schecbles

62

and Incentive ?lagnitudes for Employee Performance, Jojrna of
ADoIIed Psycholocy 50 (1975): 294—298.
C. A. Yukl, G. P. Latham and E. El. Pursell, 'The Effectiveness of

Performance Incentives Under Continuous and Variable Ratio

Schedues of Reinforcement,0 Perinel Psycholnay 29 (1775): 221—
231.

The Nei, York Stock Exchange Office of Econnic Research, PeIe and

PrjctvItv:

A

Q,allen to CorDorate Arica, (New York: New

York Stock Exchange. 1982).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Area Waces &Jrvey: Cleveland. ,ip

Ketrol 'tan

Area Saoter l9. Bulletin 3030—45. November 1985.

