NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT CRISES
Cristina Arellano
Andrew Atkeson
Mark Wright
Working Paper 21456
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21456
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We thank Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker for helpful comments and Aaron Kirkman for excellent
research assistance. Wright thanks the National Science Foundation for support under grant SES-1059829.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Cristina Arellano, Andrew Atkeson, and Mark Wright. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

External and Public Debt Crises
Cristina Arellano, Andrew Atkeson, and Mark Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 21456
August 2015
JEL No. F3,H7,K1
ABSTRACT
The recent debt crises in Europe and the U.S. states feature similar sharp increases in spreads on government
debt but also show important differences. In Europe, the crisis occurred at high government indebtedness
levels and had spillovers to the private sector. In the United States, state government indebtedness
was low, and the crisis had no spillovers to the private sector. We show theoretically and empirically
that these different debt experiences result from the interplay between differences in the ability of
governments to interfere in private external debt contracts and differences in the flexibility of state
fiscal institutions.
Cristina Arellano
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com
Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net

Mark Wright
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University of California, Los Angeles
and also NBER
mwright@frbchi.org

1

Introduction

At the end of the first decade of the 21st century, the members of two advanced monetary
and economic unions, the nations of the Eurozone and the U.S. states, experienced debt
crises with spreads on government borrowing rising dramatically: in a short period of time,
Californian spreads rose six-fold, Italian rose ten-fold, Illinois fifteen-fold, and Portuguese
twenty-five-fold. Despite the similar behavior of spreads on public debt, these crises
were fundamentally different in nature. In Europe, the crisis occurred after a period of
significant increases in government indebtedness from levels that were already substantial,
whereas in the United States, state government borrowing was limited and remained
roughly unchanged. Moreover, whereas the most troubled nations of Europe experienced
a sudden stop in private capital flows and private sector borrowers also faced large rises
in spreads, there is little evidence that private borrowing in U.S. states was differentially
affected by the creditworthiness of state governments. In this sense, we can say that the
US states experienced a public debt crisis, whereas the nations of Europe experienced an
external debt crisis affecting both public and private borrowers.
Why did Europe experience an external debt crisis and the U.S. states only a public
debt crisis? And why did the members of other economic unions, such as the provinces of
Canada, not experience a debt crisis at all despite high and rising provincial public debt
levels? In this paper, we argue that these different experiences result from the interplay
between the ability of governments to interfere in the private external debt contracts
of their citizens and the flexibility of state fiscal institutions. The governments of U.S.
states, for example, are less fiscally flexible than the members of other economic unions as
a result of state and federal limitations on their ability to change taxes and borrow, but
are prevented by the U.S. Constitution from interfering in private contracts. Together,
these factors result in public debt intolerance and yet also limit the likelihood of an
external debt crisis affecting private sector borrowers within the state. Eurozone nations
are more fiscally flexible but have a greater ability to interfere with the contracts of their
citizens, particularly if one of them exits the eurozone, which together allows for more
public borrowing but also raises the likelihood for external debt crises occurring together
with public debt crises. Canadian provincial governments are both fiscally flexible and
limited in their ability to interfere in private contracts, which both allows for more public
borrowing and limits the likelihood that either a public or an external debt crisis will
occur.
We establish this argument both empirically and theoretically. Empirically, we document variation in both possibilities for government interference in private contracts and

1

fiscal flexibility across economic unions. We show that interference in private contracts—
which can include direct interference such as moratoria on repayments of external debt or
the imposition of controls on capital outflows, as well as indirect interference such as deposit freezes which hinder the ability of private borrowers to repay their external debts—is
a common occurrence in debt crises. We also show that ratings agencies incorporate the
risk of sovereign interference when rating private sector bonds in both emerging markets
and in Europe, but do not consider the risk of state and provincial government interference when rating private borrowers in the United States and Canada. We next show
that fiscal flexibility of the governments of members of economic unions—the ability to
vary their tax rates and levels of public expenditure in response to economic shocks—also
varies across unions.
Theoretically, we model the decisions of a benevolent government to spend, tax, borrow, default on public debts, and interfere in private debt contracts in a world where
the private sector can also issue external debt but cannot independently default on its
own debts. In our economy, the efficient benchmark under full commitment and full fiscal flexibility has the country borrowing externally to smooth both public and private
consumption, and setting public expenditures to equate the marginal utilities of public
and private expenditures within each period. We examine how governments with limited
commitment to repay public debt and to refrain from interfering in private debts, and
facing potential constraints on fiscal flexibility, might find themselves and their citizens
unable to borrow enough to smooth consumption over time and across the public and
private sectors.
First, we show that if the government is fiscally flexible in the sense that it is unconstrained in its ability to vary taxes and if it can commit to not interfere with private
contracts (which we think of as the Canadian case), then neither public debt crises nor
external debt constraints can bind. In equilibrium, the citizens of the country and the
government can raise the resources they need to smooth consumption, regardless of the
government’s ability to commit to repay its public debts. The reason no public debt
crisis can occur is that, if the government can vary taxes, it prefers to close fiscal gaps
with taxes rather than with default on domestically held public debt. As a result, the
government can commit to repay its domestically held public debts and hence can implement its optimal borrowing strategy domestically, whereas the private sector does the
required borrowing externally. With commitment not to interfere in private external debt
contracts, this private external borrowing is unconstrained.
Second, we show that if the government can tax flexibly but cannot commit to refrain
from interfering in private debt contracts (the European case), all crises are external debt
2

crises that affect both the private sector and the public sector simultaneously. As in
the Canadian case, with tax flexibility, governments can credibly borrow from their own
private sector. Hence, the government should not find itself constrained in its borrowing
unless the private sector is also constrained from borrowing externally. In contrast to
the Canadian case, if the government is tempted to interfere with private external debt
contracts, the external borrowing of the country may be constrained. If this occurs, the
country is constrained in both its public and external borrowing.
Third, and finally, we show that when taxes are inflexible but the government can
commit to not interfere in private contracts (the American case), it is possible to have
a public debt crisis without an external debt crisis. The reason is that, when taxes are
inflexible, the government may be tempted to default on domestically held public debts
so as to finance the desired level of public expenditure. As a result of this risk of default
on all forms of public debt, the public sector may be constrained in its borrowing even
when the private sector faces no constraint on its external borrowing.
The spillovers of the public debt crisis in Europe on the private sector have sparked
a recent literature focused on the role of the banking system in generating spillovers
between private external and public debts.1 We view such mechanisms as complementary
to our theory based on the risk of government interference and in fact are closely related,
since many examples of government interference with private debt contracts, such as
deposit freezes and capital controls, are applied to the banking sector. For example,
many observers see the recent drain of deposits from the Greek banking system as being
driven by a fear that a deposit freeze and/or capital controls may be imposed. In this
context, a banking union may be beneficial for Europe not only to protect banks’ balance
sheets but also to remove the temptation of governments to interfere with private debt
contracts during times of fiscal distress.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents our claims about
the different experiences of Eurozone members, the U.S. states, and the members of other
economic unions such as Canada. Section 3 presents our empirical and institutional evidence on the occurrence of sovereign interference, and Section 4 discusses fiscal flexibility.
Section 5 presents our model, and Section 6 concludes. References to the literature are
discussed as they arise throughout the text.

1

Bocola (2015) develops a model where public debt crises hurt the balance sheets of banks that
hold sovereign debt and lead them to tighten private loans. Farhi and Tirole (2014) consider a similar
mechanism and add government bailouts to banks. They argue that these feedback loops between banks
and the government are important for the recent Eurozone crisis.

3

2

Debt Crises in the Eurozone and U.S. States

In this section we document the debt crises in the Eurozone countries and U.S. states
during the late 2000s. We show that during these crises, the governments faced increases
in spreads on their borrowing related to default risk. We document that this increase
in spreads occurred even though current public debt levels for U.S. states are quite low
relative to those observed in European nations and Canadian provinces. We also show
that U.S. states did not increase their public borrowing during the crisis. In contrast,
Canadian provinces did not experience debt crises and were able to increase their public
borrowing at low spreads. We also show that in the Eurozone, the debt crisis was external
because these countries experienced reversals in their international private capital inflows
and significantly increased spreads on private sector external borrowing.

2.1

Spreads

During late 2008, countries in the Eurozone including Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal,
and Spain experienced increases in the yields and spreads at which they were borrowing
reflecting perceptions of a higher probability of default. Figure 1(a) plots the 10-year
spreads for these five countries. The spreads peaked in 2012, reaching for example 500
basis points for Spain. Greece actually defaulted in 2012 on its public debt.
U.S. states and Canadian provinces are similar to Eurozone countries in that there is
no bankruptcy process for handling state defaults. U.S. state governments are sovereign
in that they can repudiate their debts without recourse for creditors.2 Historically, in the
1840s many U.S. states did repudiate their debts, but no U.S. states have defaulted on
their general obligation debts since the Great Depression.3
Several U.S. states, such as California, Illinois, and Michigan, have experienced a debt
crisis since 2008 in the sense that they face spreads on the general obligation debt of the
state government similar to those faced by several Eurozone sovereign borrowers. Figure
1(b) shows the 5-year credit default swaps (CDS) spreads on the debts of California,
Illinois, Michigan, Virginia, and New York from 2008 through 2014. The CDS spreads on
the debts of California, for example, reached about 500 basis points and have been high
for much of this period.4 Although these CDS spreads for California are not as high as
2

The Eleventh Amendment of the U.S. Constitution restricts suits in federal courts against states.
In contrast, municipalities, such as Detroit, can undergo a court-supervised bankruptcy process under
Chapter 9 of the U.S. bankruptcy code.
3
See Mysak (2010) for a description of Arkansas’ default on its debt during the Great Depression.
4
As shown in the case of Virginia, this was not the case for all U.S. states. The spreads shown for
Virginia are relatively low and stable.

4

the peak sovereign spreads shown for Eurozone countries in Figure 1(a), these spreads are
still sizable.5
In contrast to the experiences of the Eurozone countries and U.S. states, Canadian
provinces did not experience a debt crisis during the Great Recession. Figure 1(c) shows
the 10-year bond spreads on the debts of British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec, which
are the three most populous provinces in Canada. These spreads have been quite stable
since 2008, with modest rises in 2009 and 2013. As discussed in Bird and Tassonyi (2003)
and Wong and Raimes (2013), Canadian provincial governments have a great deal of
fiscal autonomy from the Canadian central government, no central restrictions on their
borrowing, and broad responsibilities for social services in the province, making them a
good comparison group with Eurozone countries and U.S. states. Thus, the Canadian
provinces appear to serve as examples of relatively independent regional governments in
a monetary union that have been able to avoid a public debt crisis.

2.2

Debt Levels: U.S. States are Debt Intolerant

Many U.S. state governments faced high sovereign spreads during the debt crisis despite
very low levels of indebtedness. We argue that these U.S. state governments are public debt
intolerant: the thresholds of public debt to GDP at which the public debt is considered
safe by the market are extraordinarily low in comparison with public debt levels for the
governments of Eurozone countries and the regional governments of Canadian provinces,
even after including obligations for employee pensions and health care.6 Moreover, the
fiscal response of U.S. states to the Great Recession was strikingly different from the fiscal
responses of the provincial governments of the largest Canadian provinces. U.S. states
did not increase their level of borrowing whereas Canadian provinces increased their level
of borrowing substantially.
The first panel of Table 1 reports the 2012 ratio of net debt to state GDP for the 10
most populous U.S. states. These public debt to GDP ratios lie in a narrow range from
a little over 1% for Texas to a little under 5.5% for New York. The second panel of the
table reports the net debt for the most populous Canadian provinces. Net debt to GDP
ratios in Canada are on average 8 times larger than in the U.S. states, reaching 48% for
5

Ang and Longstaff (2013) perform a more systematic comparison of the levels and comovements of
the sovereign spreads for U.S. states and Eurozone countries. This observation of high credit spreads for
U.S. state governments is not unique to the financial crisis of 2008. California, in particular, has had a
history of budgetary difficulties reflected in heightened credit spreads in 2003 and 2004, for example.
6
Reinhart et al. (2003) introduced the term Debt Intolerance to describe the combination of high
spreads at low external debt to GDP levels observed for many emerging market economies. We borrow
this term here to refer to the combination of high spreads at low public debt to GDP levels observed for
several U.S. state governments.

5

Quebec. The third panel reports net debt to GDP ratios for countries in the Eurozone,
and these ratios are 10-20 times larger than is the case for U.S. state governments. As
shown in the fourth column of Table 1, the debts for Canadian provinces and Eurozone
countries relative to government revenues are also larger than for U.S. states by a factor
of 2 or more in many cases.
The creditworthiness of governments is affected by their total level of indebtedness
measured on a comprehensive basis, including explicit and implicit liabilities for employees’ pensions and health care. The second column of Table 1 reports the total level of
debt for U.S. states, Canadian provinces, and Eurozone countries, taking into account estimates for unfunded liabilities including employee pension liabilities and employee health
care obligations.
For U.S. states, these unfunded liabilities increase the ratio of debt to GDP by a
factor of 3 on average. Nevertheless, we see that for most states, with the exception of
Illinois, the total debt including unfunded liabilities is relatively modest, averaging 10%.
The pension and health care liabilities for Canadian provinces and Eurozone countries are
substantially larger than those for most U.S. state governments. For Canadian provincial
governments, estimates indicate that the total liabilities are typically on the order of three
times the net indebtedness of the provincial government. In Figure 2 we summarize these
findings by plotting the net debt (with and without unfunded liabilities) to GDP ratio
of selected Eurozone countries, U.S. states, and Canadian provinces. As is evident in the
figure, U.S. states have remarkably low levels of total liabilities when compared with these
other regional and national governments.
The Great Recession of 2008 had an important fiscal impact on almost all of the
regional and national governments discussed in this paper. The fiscal response of the U.S.
state governments was to adjust revenue and expenditures on a year-by-year basis without
increasing outstanding debt. In the first panel of Table 2, we show the history of the ratio
of state net debt to personal income over the period 2008-2012 for U.S. states. As is
clear in the table, these indebtedness levels are little changed. By way of contrast, in the
second panel of Table 2, we show that the provincial governments in Canada responded
to the fiscal crisis by issuing substantial additional debt relative to GDP, particularly in
the case of Ontario.
The choice by the governments of U.S. states to refrain from issuing more debt in
response to their fiscal crisis following the Great Recessions was not due solely to their
self-imposed legal fiscal constraints on state borrowing.7 Instead, many U.S. states were
7

See, for example, Henning and Kessler (2012). On top of restrictions on debt, many states have
restrictions on expenditures and revenues. In the case of California, these are seen as being particularly

6

charged considerable spreads on their debts once the crisis began.8

2.3

External Debt Crisis in Eurozone

The public debt crises in Eurozone countries and U.S. states documented above were
associated with strikingly different responses in private sector external borrowing. We
document that in several Eurozone countries, private capital markets experienced a sudden
stop, defined as a sharp reversal of private capital inflows.9 We also document strong
comovement in private and sovereign spreads. In sharp contrast to the experience of
Eurozone countries, we are aware of no evidence linking the borrowing costs of private
borrowers domiciled in California (or any other state) to the borrowing costs of the state
government. In this sense, we argue that several U.S. state governments have had a public
debt crisis without facing an external debt crisis.
As discussed in Lane (2013), the introduction of the euro was associated with a large
increase in the volume of cross-border capital flows among the Eurozone countries, leading
to the accumulation of large gross and net stocks of international indebtedness. With the
crisis that started in 2007-2008, there was a dramatic reduction in both the gross and net
volume of private capital flows. We now document the disparate impact of this reversal
of private capital flows on different Eurozone countries.
In Figure 3, taken from Pisani-Ferry et al. (2013), we show the cumulative net capital
flows into Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Italy over the period 2002-2012 as a percentage of
2007 GDP. The solid lines in each frame of the figure show the total cumulative net capital
inflow into these countries. For both Greece and Portugal, the cumulative net capital
inflow over this decade rose to over 70% of 2007 GDP, and for Spain, this cumulative
inflow rose to over 50% of 2007 GDP. The red bars in each frame of the figure show the
cumulative total net private capital inflow. For each of these countries, in the earlier part
of this time period, the cumulative net capital inflows were primarily private. Since the
crisis began, however, in each case, this private capital has been withdrawn (as indicated
by the diminished height of the red bars) and has been replaced by official net capital
inflows from the European Central Bank (ECB) and other official programs. In the case
of Greece and Portugal, the cumulative net private capital flow over the 2002-2012 time
period is essentially zero, and these countries are left with external indebtedness to official
binding. See, for example, Wong and Raimes (2013).
8
This recent experience is consistent with the earlier findings of Bayoumi et al. (1995). They estimate
the spreads charged on debt of U.S. state governments over the period 1981-1990 as a function of various
determinants including the overall debt level. They estimate a Laffer curve for levels of state indebtedness
with a peak at indebtedness of 8.7% of state GDP.
9
See Calvo (1998) for a discussion of the genesis of this term.

7

lenders well over 70% of GDP. In the case of Spain and Italy, the withdrawal of private
capital since the crisis began is substantial as well. As noted in IMF (2012), in the 12
months from June 2011 to June 2012, Spain experienced a net private capital outflow of
27% of 2011 GDP, and Italy experienced a net private capital outflow of 15% of 2011
GDP.10
We now discuss the comovement of sovereign and private bond spreads. Gilchrist
and Mojon (2014) document a strong comovement by constructing indices of nonfinancial
corporate spreads in the four largest Eurozone countries.11 These are bonds issued by
large nonfinancial corporates in European securities markets. We reproduce these data in
Figure 4(a). We can see that for the period from mid-2006 to 2009, these bond markets
appear to be tightly integrated in that the nationality of the bond issuer does not appear
to have an impact on its spread. This was true even though, as shown in Figure 1(a),
sovereign spreads for these countries began to diverge in 2009. In contrast, however, the
heterogeneity in the movement in private nonfinancial spreads is readily evident in the
figure after mid-2010. This heterogeneity in private spreads was tightly linked to the heterogeneity in sovereign spreads. For example, the comovement of non-financial corporate
credit spreads, measured using either bond spreads or CDS spreads, with sovereign CDS
spreads in Italy and Spain starting in 2011, can be seen in our Figures 4(b) and 4(c)
reproduced from Gilchrist and Mojon (2014).12
In contrast to the experience of Eurozone countries, for the United States, we are aware
of no evidence linking the borrowing costs of private borrowers domiciled in a state to
the borrowing costs of the state government. We illustrate this disconnect by comparing
the ample borrowing possibilities for Los Angeles County in July 2009, at the same time
that the state of California experienced very high borrowing costs. As described in Taylor
(2009), the state of California regularly engages in substantial short-term borrowing over
the course of its fiscal year (July 1 - June 30) to deal with the regular seasonal pattern
of cash outflows in the first part of the fiscal year and cash inflows due to tax collections
late in the fiscal year. Starting in the fall of 2008, the gap between cash inflows and
outflows turned out to be much larger than expected due to the dramatic decline in tax
revenues for the state. For the 2008-2009 fiscal year, the state’s expenditures exceeded
10

See also IMF (2012) and de Sola Perea and Van Niewenhuyze (2014) for further decomposition of
these flows.
11
These authors construct indices of credit spreads in Eurozone countries using data on a comprehensive panel of bonds issued by both financial and nonfinancial firms in Germany, France, Italy, and Spain
over the period 1999-2013. We focus on bonds issued by nonfinancial firms.
12
Klein and Stellner (2014), Bedendo and Colla (2013) and Bai and Wei (2014) also find similar
evidence on the comovement of private and sovereign CDS spreads in both Eurozone countries and
emerging markets after adding many controls.

8

revenues by $17.9 billion (roughly 1% of state GDP and 17% of 2007-2008 state revenues).
The state faced tremendous difficulty raising the cash necessary to fund this gap. The
state controller resorted to a 30-day delay of $4.2 billion in payments in February and
issuing registered warrants (IOUs) in lieu of state payments that were not redeemed until
September 2009. In July of 2009, the Los Angeles Times estimated that California would
have had to pay over 5% tax free for further short-term borrowing, while at the same time
Los Angeles County was able to borrow short term at 0.8% and short-term Treasury bills
paid 0.5%.13
In summary, many of the Eurozone member countries experienced an external debt
crisis with sudden stops of net private capital inflows and rising spreads on both sovereign
and private debt. The debt crisis in the U.S. states, and especially California, was distinct
because it was restricted to public debt.

3

Government Interference with Private Contracts

We now review evidence that the perceived risk of sovereign interference with domiciled
private debt contracts plays an important role in linking private and public borrowing in
Eurozone countries. We also review the institutional environment that governs protections against government interference, contrasting the strong protections embodied in the
United States and Canadian constitutions with the much weaker protections available in
Europe.
We start by documenting that the credit ratings agencies cite the risk of sovereign interference as an important factor in rating private borrowers in emerging markets economies
and now in Eurozone countries as well. They do so because, in practice, episodes of
sovereign interference with private contracts, which have imposed substantial haircuts
for creditors, are correlated with public default. We review this history of episodes and
document how these concerns for Eurozone countries have risen. We document that the
sovereign rating is, in fact, binding as a ceiling on the private credit ratings and has
economic impact by affecting the cost and availability of international credit for private
borrowers in both emerging market and Eurozone economies.
We then review how the contract clause in the U.S. Constitution has insulated private
borrowers and creditors in U.S. states from the impact of public debt crises of state
governments. We provide a historical account of various rulings that have repeatedly
upheld the protection of private creditors against potential cases of sovereign interference,
13

Tom Petruno, “Wall Street awaits California’s short-term borrowing plans,” Los Angeles Times,
July 3, 2009.

9

and contrast this experience with the widespread government interference that occurred
prior to ratification of the Constitution. We also show how similar protections are available
to creditors in the Canadian provinces, while pointing to the weaknesses in European
protections.

3.1

The Sovereign Credit Ceiling

The term sovereign credit ceiling refers to the policies of the main credit rating agencies
to restrict the credit ratings that they give to private borrowers to be no greater than the
credit rating of the sovereign government of the country in which the private borrower is
located. The sovereign credit ceiling has long been a feature of credit ratings for private
borrowers in emerging market economies. More recently, it has become a feature of credit
rating agency policies for credit ratings for private borrowers in Eurozone countries.14
The three credit rating agencies, Fitch Ratings, Moody’s Investors Service, and Standard and Poor’s, typically invoke three reasons for their policies of linking sovereign and
private credit ratings.15 The first reason is that both sovereign and private borrowers face
common macroeconomic shocks. The second is that a sovereign default would lead to (or
coincide with) a financial crisis that would affect the terms of credit available to private
borrowers.16
The third reason, and the focus of our analysis, is the risk of sovereign interference
with private contracts. These credit rating agencies point to a long history of experience
with sovereign interference with private debt contracts in emerging market economies.
The interference has typically taken the form of imposition of bank deposit freezes and/or
capital or exchange controls in a public or external debt crisis. Because deposit freezes and
capital controls directly interfere with a private borrower’s ability to transfer the foreign
exchange necessary to service his or her external debt, this risk of sovereign interference
is often termed transfer and convertibility risk. This concept captures the risk that a
14

As described in Borensztein et al. (2013), prior to 1997, this sovereign credit ceiling was applied
to all private borrowers in emerging market countries. During the mid-2000s, this policy was somewhat
relaxed, and, in the case of Eurozone countries, it was removed altogether in 2005 by both Standard
and Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service. See, for example, Beers et al. (2005), Truglia (2005), and
Cavanaugh and Feinland-Katz (2009), as well as Stendevad (2007). As we discuss in this section, the
main credit rating agencies reconsidered this policy of relaxing the sovereign credit ceiling for private
borrowers in Eurozone countries following the recent concerns about possible exit of countries from the
euro.
15
See, for example, Fox and Renwick (2014), Gates et al. (2012), and Feinland-Katz and Chu (2013).
See Loh and Frey (2011) and Chu (2014) for discussions of the impact of the Eurozone sovereign credit
crisis on the ratings for structured finance transactions.
16
There is a large literature on the linkage between sovereign debt spreads and financing difficulties
for banks in both emerging market economies and the Eurozone. See, for example, Reinhart and Rogoff
(2013).

10

foreign creditor might not get paid on his or her loan to a private borrower because the
government of the borrower’s country enacts policies that make it difficult for the private
borrower to obtain the foreign exchange necessary to repay his or her debts. In the past
several years, the credit rating agencies have pointed to the risk that a Eurozone member
country would enact such policies upon exiting the euro as a significant risk restricting
the ratings offered to private borrowers in several Eurozone countries.17
The three main ratings agencies make an effort to quantitatively evaluate the impact
of sovereign interference in private contracts on the ratings given to private entities separately from the risk of the sovereign’s default. Standard and Poor’s, for example, provides
a Transfer and Convertibility Rating to each country in addition to a sovereign credit rating for both the local currency and foreign currency debt of the sovereign government to
attempt to measure the likelihood of sovereign interference with private contracts as distinct from the likelihood of a default on domestic and external public debts. This transfer
and convertibility rating is incorporated into the ceiling that Standard and Poor’s applies
to the credit ratings given to private borrowers in the relevant country. Likewise, Moody’s
Investors Service and Fitch Ratings provide Country Ceilings which are similar to Standard and Poor’s Transfer and Convertibility Ratings in that they “capture the risk of
capital and/or exchange controls being imposed that would prevent or materially impede
the private sector’s ability to convert local currency into foreign currency and transfer
the proceeds to non-resident creditors—transfer and convertibility (T&C) risk. Country
Ceilings are not ratings but rather a key analytical input and constraint on the ratings of
entities and transactions originating in the sovereign’s jurisdiction.”18
Cavanaugh (2013) provides a history of Standard and Poor’s sovereign credit ratings
for domestic and foreign currency debt as well as their transfer and convertibility ratings
for a large number of countries over the past several decades. In most instances, the
transfer and convertibility rating is aligned with the sovereign credit rating. There are,
however, several instances in this historical record of countries with a higher transfer and
convertibility rating than sovereign foreign currency ratings, indicating that Standard and
Poor’s assessment of the risk of sovereign interference with private contracts is lower than
their assessment of the risk of default on the government’s foreign currency debt.19

17

See, for example, IMF (2012), page 39.
See Fox and Renwick (2014) and Moody’s (2009)
19
For a discussion of this point, see, for example, Cavanaugh and Feinland-Katz (2009) and Heinrichs
and Stanoeva (2013).
18

11

3.1.1

Transfer and Convertibility Risk in Emerging Markets

There is a substantial historical record of sovereign interference with private debt contracts
in emerging market economies. In Duggar (2008), Moody’s Investors Service surveys the
post-1960 history of sovereign bond defaults and the extent to which sovereign defaults
have been accompanied by government interference with domiciled borrowers’ foreign
currency debt service.
This Moody’s survey covers 38 episodes of sovereign bond defaults. It finds 27 episodes
of deposit freezes, with all but two of these (Korea 1998 and Ukraine 2004) accompanied
by a sovereign bond default. It finds that “the most frequent deposit interference measure
employed has been the imposition of prolonged deposit freezes, with several freezes lasting
one year or longer, followed by outright deposit expropriations, forced deposit conversions
into bonds, and forced deposit conversions into local currency.” Depositor losses in a freeze
have been severe, with haircuts often as high as 70%.
Moody’s also finds that since 1960, about 26% of public bond defaults have been
accompanied by controls on private sector debt service payments, with all but one of
these also coinciding with a deposit freeze. Of these events of controls on private debt
service payments, 44% were full moratoria in which either all external private sector
payments were explicitly banned, or purchases of foreign currency were blocked (e.g.,
Peru 1985, Venezuela 1994, Russia 1998). Another 28% of these events included a selective
moratorium in which the ability to make private sector external debt payments was limited
to favored sectors or companies, or required a case-by-case authorization by the central
bank and/or the ministry of finance (e.g., Costa Rica 1981, the Philippines 1983, Brazil
1990, Argentina 2001). The other 28% of events included the imposition of exchange
controls or regulations that have severely affected external private sector payments and
that have encouraged, implicitly or explicitly, the rescheduling of private foreign debt
payments (Mexico 1982, Argentina 1982).
3.1.2

Transfer and Convertibility Risk in the Eurozone

Prior to the most recent financial crisis in the Eurozone, the three main credit ratings
agencies had essentially eliminated the sovereign credit ceiling for private borrowers in
Eurozone countries.20 As described in Cavanaugh and Feinland-Katz (2009) and Fox
and Renwick (2014), writing for Standard and Poor’s and Fitch Ratings, respectively,
prior to this crisis, all countries in the Eurozone were assigned either a Transfer and
Convertibility rating or a Country Ceiling of “AAA”, indicating that considerations of
20

See, for example, Beers et al. (2005) and Truglia (2005).

12

transfer and convertibility risk were not relevant in constraining the credit ratings for
private entities in the Eurozone. The thinking expressed in these documents was that
the legal structure of the European Union and the Eurozone in particular would make it
difficult for a sovereign to interfere with cross-border private debt contracts. In the wake
of the recent sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone, and in particular, in the wake of events
in Iceland, Greece, and Cyprus, all three of the main credit ratings agencies have revised
their ratings methodology to reflect heightened perceptions of transfer and convertibility
risks for Eurozone countries.21
As discussed in Feinland-Katz (2013), Standard and Poor’s has since revised its assessment of the link between sovereign and private credit ratings in the Eurozone to recognize
that the transfer and convertibility risk for several Eurozone countries is higher than they
previously thought.22 Pitman (2012) indicates that Moody’s also reassessed the risk of
sovereign interference with private external debt contracts in Eurozone countries. Focusing on the potential for transfer and convertibility risk associated with a Eurozone exit,
Moody’s pointed to a number of legal acts that would likely be required of an exiting
country including a deposit freeze, the imposition of capital controls, and the redenomination of financial obligations. As described in Pitman (2012), in June of 2012, Moody’s
lowered the ceiling for private borrowers in Greece to “Caa2” because of the risk that
creditors would not receive payments in the originally contracted currency.23 Moody’s
21

Thinking about the legal basis for sovereign interference with private contracts in the Eurozone is
rapidly evolving. Slaughter and May (2012) present a summary of the legal issues a company operating
in the Eurozone would face in the wake of a sovereign default crisis and possible euro exit. Pykett
et al. (2013) provide a discussion of the legal foundations for capital and exchange controls for Eurozone
countries following the imposition of such controls in Cyprus. In its press release regarding the imposition
of capital controls in Cyprus on March 28, 2013, the European Commission noted that “Member States
may introduce restrictions on capital movement, including capital controls, in certain circumstances
and under strict conditions on grounds of public policy or public security. In accordance with the
case law of the European Court of Justice, measures may also be introduced for overriding reasons
of general public interest.” It noted furthermore that “Such restrictions may include bank holidays,
limits on withdrawals, freezing of assets, prohibition of terminating fixed term deposits, prohibition on
certain payment orders, restrictions in using credit/debit/prepaid cards, restrictions on other banking
operations as well as execution of certain transactions subject to the approval of the Central Bank and
other measures.” See European Commission (2013).
22
As described in Fox and Renwick (2014), Fitch Ratings has also revised its procedure for setting
Country Ceilings for Eurozone Countries.
23
To illustrate the application of this country ceiling, on page 5 of Pitman (2012), Moody’s reprints
its press release describing the impact of this rating change for the Hellenic Telecommunications Organisation, S.A. (OTE plc), a private borrower located in Greece. As indicated in this release, the legal
uncertainty surrounding a Eurozone exit is considerable.
The terms of the rated instruments issued through OTE plc contain a choice of English
law, submission to the courts of England, a clear definition of ‘euro’ as the single currency
and payment provisions that were not tied to Greece. However, OTE itself is the borrower
under a bank facility governed by Greek law that we consider as being at significant risk of
redenomination. The size of the facility relative to the OTE family’s total debt outstanding

13

also describes the downgrades of the country ceilings for Spain and Italy in August 2012
for similar reasons (Pitman (2012), page 6).
3.1.3

Does the sovereign credit ceiling bind ratings?

A large body of empirical work examines the interaction of sovereign credit ratings with
private credit ratings and credit terms both in emerging markets and in the Eurozone.24
The first finding in this literature is that the credit rating agencies’ policies of imposing
a sovereign credit ceiling does, in fact, constrain the distribution of private credit ratings
assigned by the rating agencies. Borensztein et al. (2013) and Almeida et al. (2014)
both examine the empirical distribution of the gap between nonfinancial corporate credit
ratings and the associated sovereign credit rating for a large number of emerging market
and Eurozone foreign bonds.25 Both papers find a striking spike in the distribution of
ratings gaps at zero (i.e., with the private firm and the respective sovereign having the
same rating), with very few firms rated higher than the sovereign (that is, with positive
ratings gaps) relative to the number of firms rated below the sovereign (negative ratings
gaps). This finding is illustrated in our Figure 5, which reproduces the distribution of
ratings gaps between corporate and sovereign ratings shown in Almeida et al. (2014). More
specific to the recent developments in the Eurozone, Klein and Stellner (2014) examine
a sample of 897 bonds from Eurozone countries all denominated in Euros covering the
period March 2006 through June 2012. Figure 3 in that paper confirms that the vast
majority of these private sector bonds in the Eurozone carry ratings that are below the
rating of the sovereign.
The second finding in this literature is that changes in sovereign ratings appear to
drive changes in the associated private ratings. To evaluate the impact of changes in
sovereign ratings on private bond ratings, Borensztein et al. (2013) run regressions of
was sufficiently material to justify the risk of a default for redenomination being reflected in
OTE’s rating. As a consequence, whilst we positioned the corporate family rating one notch
above the Greek country ceiling at Caa1(negative) — reflecting (amongst other factors) a
lower expected loss for the debt issued by OTE plc — the exposure of the bank facility to a
change in currency pushed OTE’s probability of default rating to the Greek country ceiling
of Caa2 (negative).
24

See, for example, IMF (2012) Chapter 2, Special Feature B, on page 85 of ECB (2014), and Adelino
and Ferreira (2014).
25
Borensztein et al. (2013) put together a data set of sovereign and private credit ratings as well as
accounting data for every publicly traded nonfinancial corporate borrower with a rating from Standard
and Poor’s as of June 2005. The final sample is an unbalanced panel of 478 non-financial corporations from
29 countries, including 14 developed and 15 emerging economies for the time period 1995-2009. Almeida
et al. (2014) examines a sample of bonds of nonfinancial firms from 80 countries over the 1990-2012 time
period. Their sample has 3,605 unique firms with a credit rating.

14

individual firms’ bond ratings on the country rating, a vector of firm-specific controls
using accounting data, a vector of country-specific macroeconomic variables, and time,
country, and industry dummies. They find a significant correlation of sovereign credit
rating changes with changes in the credit ratings of private borrowers even after controlling
for these other factors, particularly for borrowers in emerging market economies. Klein
and Stellner (2014) find the same result in their sample of Eurozone bonds using a similar
methodology. Almeida et al. (2014) take a nonparametric approach to establishing this
point. In Figure 2 of their paper (reproduced here in Figure 6), these authors show that
when a sovereign downgrade occurs, a large fraction of firms that are initially rated at
or above the sovereign receive a downgrade of the same number of steps as the sovereign
either in the same month as the sovereign or one month later, whereas only a very small
fraction of firms initially rated below the sovereign experience the same downgrade. They
argue that this asymmetry of responses is indicative of a causal impact of the sovereign
downgrade on the highly rated firms in that country.
The third and fourth findings in this literature are that the price of private external
borrowing tends to rise, whereas the quantity of private external borrowing tends to fall,
when sovereign credit spreads rise and/or ratings fall. In addition, there is evidence, chiefly
for emerging market economies, that sovereign downgrades also reduce firm investment
(see Areta and Hale (2008) and Das et al. (2010)). Almeida et al. (2014) look to identify
the impact of sovereign downgrades on private firm investment by taking advantage of
their observation that it is those private firms that are rated at or above the sovereign that
get downgraded when the sovereign is downgraded whereas those that are rated below the
sovereign typically are not downgraded when the sovereign is downgraded. By dividing
firms into treatment and control groups based on their rating gap with the sovereign at
the time of the sovereign downgrade and comparing the responses of firm investment, they
argue that sovereign downgrades have a substantial negative impact on firm investment
for firms initially rated at the same level of the sovereign in comparison to firms initially
rated substantially below the sovereign.

3.2

Institutional Constraints on Government Interference

The governments of sovereign states have a long history of interfering in private financial
contracts, particularly in relation to contracts between the citizens of the state and noncitizens. Such interference can take a variety of forms ranging from the extremes of
nationalization and expropriation through changes in legal tender for the payment of
debts (redenomination risk) to the imposition of capital and exchange controls (transfer

15

and convertibility risk). In this section, we review the limits placed on the ability of a
government to interfere in private contracts, placing these limits within the context of
previous attempts at interference in the histories of the U.S. states, Canadian provinces,
and Eurozone nations.
We make two main points. First, we show that the legal institutions protecting debtors
and creditors from government interference in their contracts is far weaker in Europe
than among the U.S. states or the Canadian provinces. Second, we argue that these
institutional constraints are frequently binding, even in the United States and Canada,
by documenting this history of attempted government interference in both countries.
3.2.1

United States

In the United States, the ability of state governments to interfere in the contracts signed
by their citizens is limited by a number of clauses within the U.S. Constitution. The first
is The Commerce Clause (Article I, Section 8, Clause 3), which gives Congress the power
“to regulate commerce ... among the several states” and hence prevents state governments
from introducing capital controls. The second is The Takings Clause (the last clause in
the Fifth Amendment), which limits the power of state governments to expropriate private
property without “just compensation.”26
The third and arguably the most important set of protections is contained in The
Contract Clause (Article I, Section 10, Clause 1), which reads in full:
No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or Confederation; grant
Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any
Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of
Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts,
or grant any Title of Nobility.
This clause serves to limit redenomination risk by preventing the state governments from
issuing coins or paper money (“bills of credit”) and making them (or anything else) legal
tender in the repayment of debts. The clause also limits the risk of a range of other
forms of government interference by preventing state governments from impairing the
obligations of private debt contracts.
The Contract Clause was explicitly drafted as a counter to the long history of state
(and colonial) government interference in private contracts prior to the passage of the U.S.
26

The Takings Clause was not initially intended to apply to state governments. However, in 1897 the
federal court in Chicago, B. & Q. Railroad Co. v. Chicago (1897) held that the Fourteenth Amendment
extended the effects of that provision to the states.

16

Constitution. Some of the earliest examples arose during the War of Independence and
took the form of colonial laws that seized the real property of British loyalists. Following the Revolution, the new state governments widened their interference in private debt
contracts by passing debtor relief laws that took one of four basic forms. The first were
changes that made paper money, often significantly depreciated, legal tender in the repayment of debts. The colonial governments had experimented with issuing paper money, in
the form of bills of credit, since at least 1690 when the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
began issuing bills of credit—debts intended to circulate as media of exchange—and made
them legal tender in the payment of taxes. New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
New York, and New Jersey all quickly followed suit, with South Carolina, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, and Georgia doing likewise at various points over the next
half century (Dewey (1902), pp.21-24).
Following the Revolutionary War, this practice arose again. In one of the best known
cases, Rhode Island issued paper money in 1786 and made it legal tender for the repayment
of debts. The money soon traded between 25% to 50% of par and had fallen to 1/12 of par
by 1789. In response, Massachusetts and Connecticut legislated to prevent Rhode Island
residents from collecting debts owed by their own residents (Nevins (1924), pp.539-40,
571). Similar acts occurred in other states: in 1785 North Carolina issued paper money
that was used to repay debts in sterling at a 50% discount (Nevins (1924), p.524); in 1786,
both New Jersey and Georgia issued paper money and made it legal tender for all private
and public debts (Nevins (1924), pp.523-524).27
The second form of debtor relief law were changes that made commodities or land
legal tender in the repayment of debts, often on terms quite unfavorable to creditors. The
most famous of these was South Carolina’s Pine Barren Act of 1785, which permitted
debtors to tender property to discharge debts. The land was to be appraised and could
be used to repay debts at two-thirds of the land’s value. However, the lands tendered
were often very distant from creditors, making it difficult to challenge their appraised
value. South Carolina also allowed payment in kind (such as cattle), with the creditor to
pay the costs of driving the animals to market (Ely (2008), p.37, Nevins (1924), pp.404-5,
525-6). Likewise, in 1782 Massachusetts passed a law allowing payment of debt in cattle
and other commodities, and in 1785 New Hampshire allowed debtors to repay debts in
either real or personal property (Nevins (1924), p.537).
27

In cases in which the state legislatures refused to issue paper money as legal tender in repaying debts,
popular uprisings prevented the execution of judgments against debtors. A prominent example is Shays’s
Rebellion in western Massachusetts in 1786-1787, when farmer protests closed courts in the western part
of state in order to prevent executions of judgments against debtors, after having unsuccessfully petitioned
the state government to issue paper currency for the repayment of debts (Ely (2008), p.39).

17

The third form of debtor relief laws were stays in the repayments of debts, or alterations
in the timing of required repayments. As one example, South Carolina passed a stay law
in 1782 that remained in place until 1786 when only one-quarter of the outstanding debt
became payable (Nevins (1924), p.525). The fourth and final form of debtor relief laws
involved the closure of the courts to suits by creditors, or the diminution of the penalties
for default. For example, in 1783 North Carolina passed a law suspending suits against
debtors (Nevins (1924), p.386). Likewise, in 1781, while repealing laws that had made
paper money legal tender in the repayment of debts, South Carolina prohibited suits for
the recovery of debts until the next general assembly (Nevins (1924), p.390). Maryland
passed a law in 1787 allowing insolvent debtors to pass through bankruptcy without prison
(Nevins (1924), p.532).
The history of state interference in debt contracts framed the thinking of delegates to
the Constitutional Congress. The Founding Fathers objected to these debtor relief laws
not only out of a concern about property rights per se but also, in light of the Rhode
Island paper money dispute, because it had the potential to generate interstate conflict.
On the former, James Madison wrote in The Federalist No. 44 that “Bills of attainder,
ex post facto laws, and laws impairing the obligation of contracts, are contrary to the
first principles of the social compact, and to every principle of sound legislation.” On
the latter, writing in The Federalist No. 7, Alexander Hamilton argued that “Laws in
violation of private contracts, as they amount to aggressions on the rights of those States
whose citizens are injured by them, may be considered as another probable source of
hostility.”28
Support for the clause was widespread. There was no debate on the contract clause
for the first three months of the Congress and, notwithstanding some modifications by
the Style Committee, no amendments to the clause were ever proposed (Wright (1938),
pp.9,12,15). There was also very little debate on the clause as part of state ratification
proceedings. Even in the ratification proceedings for South Carolina, which had frequently
interfered in private contracts, most views were positive, with Charles Pinckney trumpeting that “no more shall paper money, no more shall tender-laws, drive their commerce
from our shores, and darken the American name in every country where it is known,”while
David Ramsey argued that the contract clause and the prohibition of state-issued paper
money “will doubtless bear hard on debtors who wish to defraud their creditors, but it
will be a real service to the honest part of the community” (Ely (2008), p.50).
28

Madison expressed similar sentiments when describing the importance of a strong union in The
Federalist No. 10 : “a rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property,
or for any other improper and wicked project, will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the union
than a particular member of it.”

18

In the years following ratification, state government interference in private contracts
was greatly reduced. Debtor relief legislation occasionally arose in response to financial
panics, and the courts vigorously applied the contract clause to strike down this legislation.
29
The panic of 1837 led to similar efforts to relieve debtors that were also struck down
because of their retrospective application. In both Illinois and Alabama, laws allowing a
debtor to redeem previously foreclosed property were struck down (Bronson v. Kinzie,
1843; Howard v. Bugbee, 1860). A similar fate befell Illinois and Indiana legislation that
prohibited the sale of mortgaged property at prices below some fraction of its appraised
value (McCracken v. Hayward, 1844; Lessee of Gantley v. Ewing, 1845; see also Wright
(1938), p.70).
The largest wave of debtor relief laws was passed during the Great Depression; in an
18 month period between 1933 and 1934, mortgage foreclosure moratorium legislation was
enacted in 27 states. Concerned about the constitutionality of these laws, the statutes
were designed to be qualitatively different from previous debt relief laws. The most
famous example concerned a 1933 Minnesota statute that came before the U.S. Supreme
Court in Home Building and Loan Association v. Blaisdell, 1934. In this case, a 5-to-4
majority of the Supreme Court ruled that a 1933 Minnesota statute imposing a limited
moratorium on the foreclosure of farm mortgages was constitutional. The court described
in some detail what made this statute qualitatively different from previous debtor relief
legislation that had been ruled unconstitutional. First, it was temporarily enacted in
response to an emergency: the law was set to expire once the emergency was over, and
in no case later than 1935. Second, it was a conditional moratorium subject to judicial
review: debtors in need were allowed to appeal to state courts to have the existing period
of redemption from foreclosure sales extended. Finally, it placed limits on the losses
imposed on creditors; debtors were required to pay rents to creditors while they remained
in possession (see Wright (1938) and Olken (1993)). The special nature of the statute at
issue in the Blaisdell case was emphasized in succeeding cases that struck down debtor
relief laws that applied indefinitely and did not discriminate on the basis of the needs of
the debtor (W.B. Worthen Company v Thomas, 1934).
Following the recession of the early 1980s, foreclosure moratorium acts were struck
down by the Oklahoma Supreme Court (Federal Land Bank of Wichita v. Story, 1988),
the Kansas Supreme Court (Federal Land Bank of Wichita v. Bott, 1987), and the Iowa
Supreme Court (Federal Land Bank of Omaha v. Arnold, 1988). Only modest debtor
29

State and federal courts struck a 1791 Rhode Island law granting debtors exemptions from attachments for a period of three years (Champion and Dickason v. Casey, 1792), a South Carolina law
suspending the execution of judgments against debtors (Jones v. Crittendon, 1814), and even a modest
change to bankruptcy law that applied retroactively (Sturges v. Crowninshield, 1819).

19

relief laws, such as those requiring mediation between debtors and creditors, have been
upheld (Walsh (2011)). In the recent crisis, legislation was passed in 11 states affecting
the mortgage foreclosure process, but in each case the laws served only to require some
form of meeting between the borrower and lender before foreclosure. California, Indiana,
Massachusetts, Michigan, and Oregon all now require a pre-foreclosure conference between
the debtor and lender aimed at mitigating losses. Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, Nevada,
New York, and Vermont now require some form of mediation between the borrower and
the lender.
Together, these strong protections from government interference are why, in contrast
to the case for private borrowers in emerging markets and in the Eurozone, credit rating
agencies impose no linkage between the local sovereign rating and that for private borrowers in U.S. states.30 Much the same rationale exists for private sector borrowers in
Canada, which, as we will see next, enjoy similar protections from provincial government
interference as their U.S. counterparts.
3.2.2

Canada

Protections against provincial government interference in private contracts in Canada
are similar to those available in the United States and stem from a similar place: the
Canadian Constitution. Paragraph 91 of the Constitution Act, 1982 (formerly the British
North America Act, 1867 ) vests in the Parliament of Canada the exclusive legislative
authority over the regulation of trade and commerce, currency and coinage, the issuance
of paper money, bills of exchange and promissory notes, legal tender, and bankruptcy and
insolvency. That is, like U.S. states, Canadian provinces cannot change legal tender, issue
money, nor interfere in interprovincial (and international) trade and commerce.
However, paragraph 92 of the Constitution Act, 1982 does vest the provincial governments with the exclusive legislative authority over property rights within their own
province. More than a century of jurisprudence has interpreted this expansively to include laws regarding contracts resulting in some overlap between federal and provincial
laws regarding the treatment of debts.31 As a result, although the provinces have no de
jure power over interprovincial debts, they were able to exercise some de facto power over
such debts and often used this power to favor local creditors over creditors from other
provinces, creating a form of transfer and convertibility risk.
30

Moody’s rationale for this delinking of private and U.S. state government credit ratings is explained in
Wilson (2014), Appendix B. We also verified that US state government credit ratings are not a constraint
on private credit ratings for US corporates with S&P personnel in private communication.
31
In Citizen’s Insurance Co. v. Parsons, 1881, a case that involved insurance contracts, the Privy
Council ruled that the property and civil rights clause included the power to regulate contracts.

20

In the early years of the Dominion, the Parliament of Canada attempted to impose a
federal insolvency law guaranteeing equal treatment of creditors both within and across
provinces.32 The Insolvency Acts of 1869 and 1875 prohibited an “unjust preference”
made in “contemplation of insolvency” with the required proof being an intention to
prefer one creditor over another. However, courts interpreted payments made following a
creditor’s request for repayment as involuntary and hence not an unjust preference (see
Telfer (2014)). As a result, there existed a de facto, if not de jure, preference in favor of
local creditors—often family members and friends—who first observed signals of a debtors
distress and could submit early requests for repayment. The rights of creditors from other
provinces worsened with the repeal of the federal Insolvency Act in 1880 which led to a
period in which a common law “race to courthouse” governed insolvent debtors, a situation
that typically favored local creditors who could often initiate and obtain judgments before
more distant creditors were informed of the debtor’s distress. The provincial governments
were slow to legislate to restrict the granting of preferences (New Brunswick only passed
legislation in 1895, and Nova Scotia took until 1898) and the resulting legislation was
often regarded as ineffectual (e.g., Ontario’s law of 1880).
With the passage of the federal Bankruptcy Act of 1919, any de facto or de jure
preference in favor of local debtors was eliminated. This situation remains in force today.
3.2.3

European Union

Compared with the legal protections against state and provincial government interference
available to private creditors in the United States and Canada, the protections offered
among the nations of the European Union are typically substantially weaker. One exception that holds only for those members in the Eurozone is in regard to changes in
legal tender; Article 128 (1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU) makes euro-denominated banknotes and coins, and only such notes and coins,
legal tender. 33 Hence, short of abandoning the euro—a possibility that appears to be
explicitly ruled out in the TFEU—the members of the Eurozone are unable to change
legal tender.34
Other protections from government interference in European treaties and conventions
are typically weakened by the presence of clauses allowing any such protection to be
32

Much of our discussion of the history of Canadian insolvency and bankruptcy law is drawn from
Telfer (2014) and Telfer (1999).
33
Strictly, the TFEU concerns only euro banknotes, whereas Article 11 of Regulation EC/974/98 on
the introduction of the euro applies to euro coins.
34
The TFEU refers to the irrevocable fixing of exchange rates in Articles 46(3), 49, and 140(3).
However, there is a provision in Article 50 of the TFEU that envisages a member state leaving the
European Union altogether.

21

suspended whenever it is in the public interest. For example, Articles 63 and 65 of the
TFEU, although designed to limit the use of capital controls by member states, allow
capital controls that are “justified on grounds of public policy or public security”, as well
as the case law of the European Court of Justice allowing interventions “for overriding
reasons of general public interest”(see European Commission (2013)).35
The only other potential source of protection against government interference comes
from Article 1 of Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms (CPHRFF). However, this clause does not prohibit government
interference in private contracts per se; rather, it simply requires that such interference
be “in the public interest”and subject to legal principles: “Every ... person is entitled
to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions
except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by
the general principles of international law.”Moreover, Article 15 of CPHRFF allows any
government to suspend any human right or fundamental freedom in the event of a public
emergency:
In time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation
any High Contracting Party may take measures derogating from its obligations
under this Convention to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the
situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with its other
obligations under international law.
In summary, investors in Europe lack the extensive protections against government
interference enjoyed by investors in the U.S. states and Canadian provinces today. Moreover, the experience of investors in emerging markets today, as well as in the U.S. states
and Canadian provinces throughout history, indicates that governments can be expected
to interfere in contracts each time some public emergency, such as a debt crisis, allows
them to justify interference “in the public interest.”

4

Fiscal Flexibility

We now briefly review the theoretical and empirical literatures on the link between fiscal
flexibility and public debt sustainability. We first discuss the theoretical literature’s finding that a government’s decision to raise taxes as opposed to default on debt as a way
of filling fiscal gaps is determined by the range of tax instruments available to it. We
35

With the imposition of capital and exchange controls in Cyprus, the European Commission proactively issued the opinion that both controls were lawful as a result of both the “public policy”exemption.

22

then discuss the empirical literature on debt sustainability, which relies on estimates of
a government’s ability to vary primary surpluses in response to debt levels and macroeconomic shocks, and the widespread finding that U.S. states are less fiscally flexible than
Canadian provinces or European nations. Lastly, we turn to a discussion of how ratings
agencies assess fiscal flexibility when rating the debt of U.S. state and Canadian provincial
governments.
Following the theoretical work of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Lucas and Stokey
(1983), we see the sustainability of public debt as being determined by a government’s
ability to commit to use taxes and spending to generate the primary surpluses needed
to repay the public debt rather than choose to default on that debt. In much of the
literature, the trade-off the government faces when public debt is due is between the costs
of current distortions connected with adjusting tax rates or levels of public expenditure
with the reputational and/or resource costs of default on the public debt. This literature
has found that whether or not that trade-off leads to a default on public debt depends
on the range of tax instruments available to the government. If the government has
access to taxes that impose only small distortions on the economy, then it will not be
tempted to default on public debt held by domestic agents because closing fiscal gaps
through increased taxation will generally be preferable to doing so through costly default
on public debt. In contrast, if tax instruments are limited, then default on public debt
can become a more attractive option, even if such a default is costly.36 In this sense, this
literature has emphasized a strong connection between fiscal flexibility as measured by
the range of tax instruments available and the incentives to default on public debt.
This theoretical literature has led to a large recent literature on the sustainability of
public debt that uses empirical estimates of the response of primary surpluses to debt levels and macroeconomic shocks as a reduced form measure of the ability of governments to
adjust primary surpluses to repay public debts that can be an input in debt sustainability
calculations.37 Along this dimension, there is considerable evidence that U.S. states have
a strongly procyclical fiscal response to macroeconomic shocks, suggesting fiscal rigidities
caused by the nature of fiscal institutions in these states. For example, Poterba (1994),
Bohn and Inman (1996), and Aizenman and Gunnarsson (2014) among others examine
the impact of fiscal restrictions in U.S. states on their fiscal adjustment to macroeconomic
shocks. More relevant for our thesis, Poterba and Rueben (1999), Lowry and Alt (2001),
Poterba and Rueben (2001), and Johnson and Kriz (2005) estimate the extent to which
36

Pouzo and Presno (2014) examine the role of fiscal inflexibility in generating optimal default in a
stochastic closed economy in which a government is restricted to proportional taxes and uncontingent
debt.
37
See, for example, Bohn (1998) and Ghosh et al. (2013).

23

legal restrictions on increasing revenue raise the cost of U.S. state borrowing, both in
terms of overall levels and in response to fiscal shocks. These modern findings complement the findings of historical studies of public debt in the United States. For example,
Sargent (2012) discusses the role of fiscal inflexibility in shaping public debt crises in early
U.S. history. Similarly, Wallis (2000) discusses the importance of flexible revenue sources
for determining the equilibrium level of public debt at the local, state, and federal levels
of U.S. government throughout American history. He shows how changes in institutions
restricting the revenue sources available to local, state, and federal levels of U.S. government have had a dramatic impact on these governments’ abilities to sustain public debt
at different points in history.
In practice, considerations of fiscal flexibility are also an important part of credit ratings agencies’ methodologies for the general obligation bonds issued by U.S. states. When
rating U.S. states, Moody’s makes an assessment of the role of constitutional constraints
in reducing what they call the “financial flexibility” of each state. They argue that “[t]he
constitutions of some states include provisions that limit financial flexibility and weaken
the institutional governance framework. The initiative and referendum process can particularly constrain flexibility over time. California, Oregon, and Washington are among
the states with the most active voter initiative processes, and in all three there have been
long-run budgetary effects. Some states are constitutionally blocked from increasing revenues unless they put a referendum to the voters. Those states often can only look to the
expenditure side of their budgets to close deficits when a two-pronged approach would
offer more flexibility” (Raimes (2013)). Similarly, Standard and Poor’s provide each U.S.
state with a “revenue structure score” that reflects both institutional constraints and the
track record of state policymakers with regard to raising revenue, which they use in their
ratings.
Considerations of relative fiscal flexibility also play a major role in determining the
relative credit ratings of U.S. states relative to Canadian provinces. As Moody’s explains,
“California’s legal and political environment creates obstacles to timely budget management and revenue raising, which restricts its freedom of action relative to other US states
and some sub-sovereigns, including Ontario. Constitutional constraints on budgeting flexibility continue in California, although modest governance changes have helped the state
achieve three years of on-time budget passage. California’s reliance on highly progressive
income taxes creates recurring revenue volatility and financial pressure and constrains
California’s rating. In comparison, Ontario has relatively stable revenues and like other
Canadian provinces, has strong fiscal flexibility, on both the revenue and expenditure
sides of the ledger” (Wong and Raimes (2013)).
24

The finding that U.S. states are less fiscally flexible than Canadian provinces and the
subnational units of other federal systems is widespread. Rodden and Wibbels (2010)
study seven federal systems and conclude that U.S. states engage in far less expenditure
smoothing than do the provinces of Canada, as well as the subnational governments of
several other countries. Looking at the most recent business cycle, Jonas (2012) also
concludes that “[e]ven though a similar procyclical fiscal tightening has been observed
at the subnational level during the latest crisis in a number of advanced economies, the
U.S.’s tightening appears to have been among the most pronounced.” In contrast to the
United States, Canada is viewed as one of the most decentralized countries in the world
in which the provinces “have a virtual free hand in levying taxes” (Bird and Tassonyi
(2003)). The extent of expenditure smoothing for U.S. states documented by Rodden
and Wibbels (2010) also seems low relative to estimates computed for members of the
European Union in Hallerberg and Strauch (2002).

5

Model

We now present a theory of external debt constraints and public debt constraints based
on the interaction of the risk of sovereign interference with private debt contracts and
fiscal flexibility. We use a simple two period model to illustrate our main points.

5.1

Environment

Consider a model of a small open economy with two time periods, t = 1, 2. This small open
economy has access to opportunities to borrow from risk neutral international creditors.
These international creditors have a time discount factor equal to one, and hence the
equilibrium (net) international riskless interest rate is equal to zero. This small open
economy consists of a representative household, domestic financial intermediaries, and a
government that chooses policies to maximize the welfare of the representative household.
The household has utility over private consumption Ct and public expenditure Gt of
the form
u(C1 ) + u(G1 ) + u(C2 ) + u(G2 ).
The household is endowed with Yt units of the consumption good at time t = 1, 2,
with Y1 < Y2 . This assumption, combined with zero discounting by households and international creditors, ensures that agents in this economy have a motivation to borrow from
25

the international creditors in period t = 1 so as to smooth private and public expenditure
over time. Specifically, given an international gross interest rate of one, the unconstrained
optimal allocation would equate private consumption and public expenditure in all periods
such that
1
(1)
Ct∗ = G∗t = (Y1 + Y2 ) .
4
To implement this unconstrained optimal allocation, this small open economy would incur
external debt D∗ = 12 (Y2 − Y1 ) in period t = 1 and repay this amount of external debt
in period t = 2. In the unconstrained optimal allocation, the households’ intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution for private consumption u′ (C1∗ )/u′ (C2∗ ) is equal to the international riskless (gross) interest rate of 1. The same is true of households’ intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution for public consumption u′ (G∗1 )/u′ (G∗2 ).
Borrowing and Default Costs: The government borrows from international creditors Dg and from domestic financial intermediaries B g . Households borrow from domestic
financial intermediaries B p . Domestic financial intermediaries borrow from international
creditors Dp . We refer to the sum of public and private external debt Dg + Dp as the
external debt of the country and to the sum of domestic and foreign public debt B g + Dg
as the public debt of the country. In all cases this notation refers to the principal and
interest due in period 2. Resources borrowed in period 1 are equal to these amounts times
the price of these debts in period 1.
Domestic financial intermediaries and households can commit to repay their debts
unless the government interferes with private debt contracts. The government, in contrast,
is unable to commit to repay its external and domestic debts and not to interfere with
private external debt contracts.
We assume that government default or interference with private external debt contracts
imposes a resource cost on the economy in terms of reducing Y2 . The costs of default on
external public debt Dg is ∆dg ≥ 0; the costs of default on domestic public debt B g is
∆bg ≥ 0; and the costs of government interference with private external debt contracts
Dp is ∆p ≥ 0.38
Note that we consider the possibility that the government would make separate default
decisions on its domestically held and external public debts. In some cases, governments
38

As discussed in Wright (2006), a conceptual issue arises in modeling competitive equilibria when there
is a disconnect between the decentralized decision of individual borrowers and the collective decision to
interfere with those debts made by the government. Wright (2006) decentralizes such equilibria with individual specific borrowing constraints; Kehoe and Perri (2004) assume individual borrowers always repay
and the government induces the desired allocation with asset taxes; Kim and Zhang (2012) assume there
are no private capital markets. In a previous version of this paper, we introduced oligopolistic domestic
financial institutions. In the current version, we do not take a stand on the specific decentralization.

26

are able to make these separate default decisions because the different types of debt it owes
are governed by different laws: domestic and foreign. Alternatively, a government may
implement differential default on its externally held public debts and its domestically held
public debts (or, at least, those public debts held by domestic financial intermediaries) by
defaulting on all of its public debts and then using government funds to bail out domestic
financial intermediaries. This is the interpretation that we follow here.
These resource costs of default on public debt and interference with private external
debt contracts are potentially stochastic. We denote the realized value of these costs in
period 2 by the vector ∆ = (∆dg , ∆bg , ∆p ). We assume that the cumulative distribution
function of these costs is given by F (∆). These stochastic costs imply that in equilibrium
private and public consumption in period t = 2 are also potentially stochastic.
Binding Debt Constraints: In what follows, we will say that the country faces no
binding debt constraints, external or public, if it is able to implement the unconstrained
optimal allocation (1) in equilibrium. If it is not able to implement the unconstrained
optimal allocation in equilibrium, then we say that it faces a binding external or public
debt constraint depending on the equilibrium intertemporal marginal rate of substitution
of private and public expenditures, respectively.
The commitment problem on the part of the government in our model leads to the
households facing a binding external debt constraint in equilibrium if u′ (C1 ) > Eu′ (C2 ).
That is, we say that the country faces a binding external debt constraint if households
are constrained from doing the borrowing needed to finance the unconstrained optimal
timing of consumption. Taking the household’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution Eu′ (C2 )/u′ (C1 ) = 1/R as the inverse equilibrium domestic riskless interest rate in
this small open economy, we then have, equivalently, that the households face a binding
external debt constraint if the equilibrium domestic riskless interest rate in this small
open economy exceeds the international riskless interest rate.
In parallel, we say that the commitment problem on the part of the government
leads to the government facing a binding public debt constraint in equilibrium if, in that
equilibrium, u′ (G1 ) > Eu′ (G2 ). In this case, household welfare would be increased if
the government were able to raise more resources in period t = 1 to finance increased
government expenditure relative to the government expenditure in period t = 2.
Government Policy: We consider two possible regimes restricting the government’s
choice of taxes in both periods τ1 and τ2 to be paid by households. In the first regime,
which we term the flexible tax regime, we assume that the government can choose taxes
27

freely. In the second regime, which we term the inflexible tax regime, we assume that
taxes are predetermined as parameters that cannot be altered.
In period 1 the government chooses public expenditure G1 , and domestic and external
public indebtedness B g and Dg due in period 2. The prices paid for these public debts
in period 1 are determined endogenously and reflect the risk of government default and
interference. In equilibrium, these prices are functions of private external debts and public
domestic and external debts D = (Dp , B g , Dg ). The government also chooses taxes τ1 in
the flexible tax regime. Government policies in period 1 must satisfy the budget constraint
G1 = τ1 + q bg (D)B g + q dg (D)Dg ,

(2)

where q bg (D) and q dg (D) are the prices for domestic and external public debt respectively.
In period t = 2, the government chooses whether to repay domestic debt (I bg = 1)
or not (I bg = 0); whether to repay external public debt (I dg = 1) or not (I dg = 0); and
whether to interfere with private external debt contracts (I p = 0) or not (I p = 1), taking
the outstanding debts due D = (Dp , B g , Dg ) and the realized costs of default and/or
interference ∆ as given. For simplicity, we assume that default and interference can be
partial by allowing I j ∈ [0, 1] for j = bg, dg, p. The resource costs of partial default and/or
interference are partial and in proportion to the default and/or interference.
The government then chooses public expenditures G2 and, in the flexible tax regime,
taxes τ2 contingent on these default and interference decisions. We let I = (I bg , I dg , I p )
denote the government’s default and interference decisions. We write government policy
in period t = 2 as functions of private and public debts D and the realized resource
costs of default and interference with private external debt contracts ∆ as needed. The
government’s budget constraint in period 2 is given by
G2 (D, ∆) = τ2 (D, ∆) − I bg (D, ∆)B g − I dg (D, ∆)Dg .

(3)

Pricing of External Debts: International creditors take as given government default
and interference decisions as functions of the country’s aggregate indebtedness D and the
default costs ∆ and set prices for external borrowing by the government q dg (D) and the
domestic private agents q p (D) to ensure that they receive expected gross return of one
on their lending to the public and private sector in this country. Thus, these prices for
external borrowing are given by
dg

q (D) =

Z

I dg (D, ∆)dF (∆)

28

(4)

and
p

q (D) =

Z

I p (D, ∆)dF (∆).

(5)

We then define the spread on public external debt as S dg (D) = 1/q dg (D) − 1 and the
spread on private external debt as S p (D) = 1/q p (D) − 1.
The Decision to Default or Interfere with Debts with Flexible Taxes
In period 2, the government chooses its decisions to default on public debts or interfere with private external debts together with taxes τ2 to maximize the welfare of the
representative household taking as given outstanding debts due D = (Dp , B g , Dg ) and
the realized costs of default and/or interference ∆ = (∆dg , ∆bg , ∆p ). It is straightforward
to show that with flexible taxes, the government’s decision to default on its public debts
and its decision to interfere with private external debts are made based on a simple comparison of the size of these debts relative to the resource costs of default or interference.
In contrast, government will not default on its domestic public debts B g regardless of how
small the costs of such a default might be. Moreover, taxes are set to equate public and
private consumption.
Lemma 1: With flexible taxes, the government will default on its public external
debt Dg iff Dg > ∆dg ; it will interfere with private external debts iff Dp > ∆p ; and it will
not default on its domestic public debt B g for any value of ∆bg > 0.
Proof:
Household welfare in period 2 is given by
u(C2 (D, ∆)) + u(G2 (D, ∆)).
Government provision of the public good G2 (D, ∆) is given as a function of debt and
policies by equation (3).
Private consumption in period 2 is given by the household budget constraint in the
second period
C2 (D, ∆) = Y2 −

X

(1 − I j (D, ∆))∆j − τ2 (D, ∆) + Π(D, ∆) − B p ,

(6)

j=bg,dg,p

where Π(D, ∆) are the profits that the households receive as owners of the domestic
P
financial intermediaries and j=bg,dg,p (1 − I j (D, ∆))∆j are the realized resource costs of
the government’s default and/or interference decisions.

29

The aggregate profits of domestic financial intermediaries in period 2 are given by
Π(D, ∆) = B p + I bg (D, ∆)B g − I p (D, ∆)Dp ,

(7)

since these intermediaries enter the period with assets comprising of loans to the domestic
households B p and loans to the government B g and liabilities comprising of borrowings
from abroad Dp .
By plugging equation (7) for the aggregate profits of domestic financial intermediaries
into the period 2 budget constraint of households, we have that private consumption in
period 2 is given by
C2 (D, ∆) = Y2 −

X

(1 − I j (D, ∆))∆j − τ2 (D, ∆) + I bg (D, ∆)B g − I p (D, ∆)Dp . (8)

j=bg,dg,p

Finally, using equation (3) to solve for taxes τ2 (D, ∆) and plugging this expression
into (8), we get
C2 (D, ∆) + G2 (D, ∆) = Y2 −

X

(1 − I j (D, ∆))∆j − I dg (D, ∆)Dg − I p (D, ∆)Dp . (9)

j=bg,dg,p

Because the government has full flexibility in setting τ2 (D, ∆), it can choose these taxes
to implement any combination of private and public second period consumption that
satisfies this joint constraint (9). Thus, with flexible taxes, it is clear that the government
maximizes welfare by setting taxes to equate public and private consumption C2 (D, ∆) =
G2 (D, ∆) and defaulting on external public debt Dg or interfering with private external
debt Dp whenever such debts exceed the resource costs of default or interference. In
contrast, there is no benefit to default on domestically held public debt because such a
default imposes a cost ∆bg reducing resources available for private and public consumption
that does not need to be incurred if taxes rather than domestic default is used to finance
government expenditures. Hence, the government always chooses to honor domestically
held public debts.
We now derive our key results regarding equilibrium in the version of the model in
which the government is free to choose taxes fully flexibly.
Canadian Provinces: Neither External nor Public Borrowing Constraints Bind
We first show that with flexible taxes, if the government can commit not to interfere with
private external debt contracts, then neither the external nor the public debt constraint
can bind in the first period. That is, as long as the costs of sovereign interference with
30

private contracts are large enough, then the country is able to achieve the unconstrained
first best allocation borrowing abroad privately as necessary. This result holds independently of the resource costs ∆bg and ∆dg of defaulting on domestic and external public
debt. We interpret this result as characteristic of Canadian provinces.
Proposition 1: Assume that ∆p ≥ 12 (Y2 − Y1 ) with probability 1 and taxes are fully
flexible. Then neither the external nor the public debt constraints binds.
Proof: We prove this result by showing that the unconstrained optimal allocation in
equation (1) can be implemented as an equilibrium. Recall that D∗ = 12 (Y2 − Y1 ) denotes
the level of external debt needed to fund the unconstrained optimal allocation for the
country. By assumption, we have that P rob(∆p ≥ D∗ ) = 1 so that I p (D∗ , ∆) = 1 for all
realizations of ∆ and hence, from equation (5), the domestic financial intermediaries are
able to borrow the unconstrained optimal level of external debt D∗ abroad privately at
the international riskless interest rate of 1.
To show that the unconstrained socially optimal allocation (1) can actually be implemented as an equilibrium allocation, we must show that the government is able to obtain
the resources it needs in each period to pay for the optimal level of public good provision
G∗1 = G∗2 = 14 (Y1 + Y2 ). If we assume that the government has no constraints on its choice
of taxes, then this can be accomplished simply by setting taxes τ1 = τ2 = (Y1 + Y2 )/4
and having the government run a balanced budget with G1 = τ1 and G2 = τ2 . With a
balanced budget, it is clear that both domestic and external public debt are equal to zero
(B g = Dg = 0). Thus, we have that the government has no incentive to default on public
debts.
Note that with these taxes, the household then has after-tax wealth of (Y1 + Y2 )/2
and faces a domestic interest rate equal to the international interest rate, so R = 1. In
equilibrium, the household then consumes the socially optimal levels of private consumption C1 = C2 = (Y1 + Y2 )/4 and borrows internationally through the domestic financial
intermediaries Dp = C1 + τ1 − Y1 = (Y2 − Y1 )/2. Note since the domestic interest rate
R = 1 and the price at which the domestic financial intermediaries are able to borrow
from abroad is q p (D) = 1, the equilibrium profits of these intermediaries are Π = 0. Thus
this allocation can be implemented as an equilibrium.
Our proof of this proposition uses a particularly strong argument based on the fact
that, with flexible taxes, government can change the timing of taxes as needed to balance
its budget every period and look to the private sector to do whatever external borrowing is
needed to finance the first best allocation of consumption. Such a strong argument is not,
in fact, required. The government does not need to run a balanced budget to implement
the unconstrained socially optimal allocation when the government can commit not to
31

interfere with private external debt contracts (∆p ≥ 12 (Y2 − Y1 ) with probability 1) and
taxes are fully flexible. Instead, as we have shown above, the government can credibly
commit not to default on domestic public debt regardless of the costs of such a default.
As a result, as we show in the next proposition, the equilibrium satisfies a particular form
of Ricardian equivalence with regard to domestically issued public debt.
Proposition 2: Assume that ∆p ≥ 12 (Y2 − Y1 ) with probability 1 and that taxes are
flexible. Then it is possible to implement the unconstrained socially optimal allocation
as an equilibrium with any values of government borrowing from domestic financial intermediaries B g ≤ 14 (Y1 + Y2 ) = G∗1 even if the costs of defaulting on public debt ∆dg and
∆bg are arbitrarily low.
Proof: The proof of this proposition relies on the observation from Lemma 1 that,
in period 2, default on domestically held public debt has the equivalent impact on the
resources available for private and public expenditure as an increase in taxes, except that
it entails a reduction in resources available for private and public consumption in period 2
of ∆bg . Thus, as long as the costs of default on public debt ∆bg > 0, the government will
strictly prefer to raise taxes to repay domestically held public debt rather than choosing
to default on that debt. Even if these costs are zero, the government will weakly prefer
to use taxes rather than default on domestic debt in period t = 2 to finance government
expenditure.
Note that our Ricardian equivalence result applies only to public domestic borrowing
and not public external borrowing. That is, if low realizations of the resource cost ∆dg
are possible, then public external borrowing may lead to costly default in equilibrium,
which would imply that it would not be possible to implement the unconstrained socially
optimal allocation.
We interpret Propositions 1 and 2 as appropriate for Canadian provinces with commitment not to interfere with private debt contracts and flexible taxes. We argue that
these provincial governments are able to issue a substantial amount of public debt held by
domestic residents with little apparent risk of binding external or public debt constraints.
Eurozone Countries: Binding External and Public Borrowing Constraints We
now turn to consider the case in which the costs of interfering with private contracts may
be low enough such that the government does wish to interfere with these contracts
for at least some realizations of ∆p . We show that if the resource costs of sovereign
interference and default ∆ are deterministic and taxes are flexible then, if the public
constraint is binding, the external debt constraint is binding as well. We interpret this
case as characteristic of Eurozone countries.
32

Proposition 3: Assume that the resource costs of sovereign interference and/or default ∆ are deterministic. If the government has full flexibility in setting taxes then, in
any equilibrium, if the public debt constraint is binding in period 1 then the external debt
constraint is binding as well.
Proof: Using the results of Lemma 1, we have that when the costs of default are
deterministic, the equilibrium price of private external debt is then q p (D) = 1 if Dp ≤
∆p and zero otherwise because default does not occur in equilibrium. Likewise, the
equilibrium price of public external debt is q dg (D) = 1 if Dg ≤ ∆dg and zero otherwise.
Thus, the total combined amount of resources that this country can borrow from abroad in
period 1 is q p (D)Dp + q dg (D)Dg ≤ ∆p + ∆dg . If this limit on external debt ∆p + ∆g > D∗ ,
then it will be possible to implement the unconstrained socially optimal allocation as an
equilibrium outcome, as we discussed for the case of Canadian provinces.
Now consider the case in which the limit on external debt ∆p +∆g < D∗ so that it is not
possible to implement the unconstrained optimal allocation. In this case, we must have
that the sum of public and private consumption in period 1, C1 + G1 , is less than the sum
of the unconstrained optimal levels of public and private consumption, C1∗ + G∗1 . Likewise,
because there are no resource costs of default in equilibrium, we also have that private
and public consumption in period 2 both exceed their optimal levels C2 = G2 > C2∗ = G∗2 .
Thus, we must have that either the public or the external debt constraint is binding, or
they are both binding.
To show that both the public and the external debt constraints must bind at the same
time, we must use the assumption that the government chooses fiscal policy in period 1
to maximize welfare subject to its limited power of commitment. What the government
would like to do in period 1 to maximize welfare is to choose taxes τ1 and/or domestic
public borrowing B g to equate private and public consumption C1 = G1 in period 1 as well
as in period 2. Given the constraint on overall external borrowing given by ∆p +∆g < D∗ ,
this means that in an equilibrium in which financial and fiscal policies are chosen optimally
in period 1 as well as in period 2, we have
C 1 = G1 =


1!
Y1 + ∆p + ∆dg ,
2


1!
Y2 − ∆p − ∆dg ,
2
so that both the external and public debt constraints are binding.
In this case with deterministic costs of sovereign interference and default, it is straightforward to find the constrained optimal equilibrium because no default occurs in equilibC 2 = G2 =

33

rium. In the case with stochastic default costs ∆, the government faces the additional
consideration in choosing its fiscal policy in period 1 that its choice of policies impacts
both domestic and public external borrowing and hence the equilibrium probability of
resource costs in period 2 due to default and/or interference with private external debt.
Hence, in this case, the government may wish to constrain its period 1 expenditures
(choose G1 < C1 ) to reduce the need for private and/or public external borrowing. Such
a government might also wish to implement ex-ante controls on private external borrowing in period 1 to avoid the temptation to interfere with that borrowing in period 2. Of
course, such ex-ante capital controls would be inconsistent with the free movement of
capital envisioned for countries in the Eurozone.
California: Public Debt Constraints with Inflexible Taxes We now consider a
modified version of this economy in which the government has constraints on its ability to
set taxes. In particular, assume that τ1 and τ2 are fixed at given levels. We now show that
when the government is unable to alter taxes in period t = 2 to finance its desired level of
public expenditures, then it may be tempted to default on outstanding public debts, both
external and domestic, as a substitute for taxation for raising revenue. This temptation
arises when public expenditure is constrained by rigid low taxes relative to private consumption. This incentive to default on both domestic and external public debts in period
2 can lead to a binding public debt constraint in period 1, with the government unable to
raise additional resources through public borrowing either domestically or abroad, even if
the private sector is unconstrained in its external borrowing. We interpret this outcome
as characteristic of California.
Consider the government’s incentives to default on its public debts in period t = 2 when
taxes are rigid at τ2 . As in the case in the economy with flexible taxes, public and private
consumption are given by equations (3) and (8). But now, since taxes τ2 are inflexible,
the choices of public and private expenditure that can be implemented are restricted to
those combinations that satisfy equation (9) together with inequalities G2 (D, ∆) ≤ τ2 and
P
C2 (D, ∆) ≥ Y2 − j=bg,dg,p (1 − I j (D, ∆))∆j − τ2 because the government cannot alter
taxes. Because of these restrictions on the choice of public and private consumption in
period t = 2, now the government may be tempted to default on domestically held public
debt even if such a default entails a resource cost that reduces private expenditure over and
above the reduction due to the default on the debt itself. This is because, with inflexible
taxes, the government has no alternative means of raising revenue other than default on
its public debts. Thus, in this environment with fiscal inflexibility, in contradiction to
the case with fiscal flexibility, it is possible for the country to face a binding public debt
34

constraint without facing a binding external debt constraint.
We can understand these incentives for the government to default on its domestically
public debts as follows. Given realized values of (D, ∆), the government’s equilibrium
default decisions on domestically and externally held public debt are the choices of I bg
and I dg in the interval [0, 1] that maximize welfare u(C2 ) + u(G2 ) with public and public
consumption given by (3) and (8) with taxes τ2 fixed.
Consider first the government’s decision to default on its external public debts. Such a
default is optimal if the value of the debt, in utility units, exceeds the value of the default
resource cost, also in utility units, or
u′ (G2 )Dg > u′ (C2 )∆dg .
This result is a simple generalization of the default rule on external public debts with
flexible taxes since, with flexible taxes, G2 = C2 , and hence, I dg (D, ∆) = 0 if Dg > ∆dg
and 1 otherwise. Here we see that if taxes are rigid and constrained to be low, so that, in
equilibrium, G2 < C2 , then the government will default on external debts Dg even if the
costs of such a default ∆dg are somewhat in excess of the amount Dg owed on these debts
because, in this case, the marginal social utility of public expenditures strictly exceeds
the marginal social utility of private expenditures.
The same logic also can be used to understand the government’s decision to default on
domestically held public debts. Now the necessary condition for optimality of the default
decision requires that default occurs when
u′ (G2 )B g > u′ (C2 )(B g + ∆bg ).
Note that this condition cannot be satisfied in the economy with flexible taxes because,
with flexible taxes, G2 = C2 and hence u′ (G2 ) = u′ (C2 ). This logic delivered us the result
that a government with flexible taxes could credibly commit to repay its domestically
held public debts in period t = 2 regardless of the costs of default on these debts. With
rigid taxes, however, it is possible that in equilibrium, we have that G2 < C2 because τ2
is set low and hence we may have that in equilibrium, the marginal social utility of public
expenditures strictly exceeds the marginal social utility of private expenditures. In this
case, we have that government will wish to default on its domestically held public debts
whenever those debts are large enough relative to the costs of default.
To develop an example economy in which the government does in fact face a binding
public debt constraint in equilibrium with inflexible taxes, assume that default costs ∆

35

are deterministic and satisfy
∆bg + ∆dg < Y2 − 2τ2 .

(10)

This inequality (10) implies that C2 (D) > G2 (D) for all values of D even if the government
defaults on all of its public debt both domestic and external.
In this case, the government is able to raise up to D̄g in external public debts in period
1 at price q dg (D) = 1 for Dg ≤ D̄g and zero otherwise, where
D̄g =

u′ (Y2 − τ2 − ∆bg − ∆dg ) dg
∆ .
u′ (τ2 )

Furthermore, as long as inequality (10) is satisfied, the government is able to raise domestically held public debts up to B̄ g at price q bg (D) = 1 for B g ≤ B̄ g and zero otherwise,
where B̄ g solves
u′ (Y2 − τ2 − ∆bg − ∆dg )
B̄ g
=
.
u′ (τ2 )
B̄ g + ∆bg
The government then faces a binding public debt constraint in period 1 if the implied
public debt limit B̄ g + D̄g together with the rigid taxes τ1 in period 1 are not large
enough to finance public expenditure G1 = G2 .
Note that if the cost of interference with private external debt contracts ∆p is high,
then it will be possible for the households to borrow abroad as desired to implement
optimal private consumption
C1 = C2 =

1
(Y1 − τ1 + Y2 − τ2 )
2

by borrowing abroad privately Dp = C1 + τ1 − Y1 at the international riskless interest rate
of 1. We interpret such an equilibrium as corresponding to California.

6

Conclusions

When the member countries of the Eurozone established their monetary union, neither
academics nor policymakers anticipated that member states might experience external
debt crises.39 Policymakers’ optimism is nicely captured in the European Commission’s
One Market, One Money report (1990) which posits that “a major effect of EMU is
that balance-of-payments constraints will disappear [...]. Private markets will finance all
viable borrowers, and savings and investment balances will no longer be constraints at
39

See, for example, Blanchard and Giavazzi (2002), who spoke of the end of the Feldstein-Horioka
puzzle.

36

the national level.” As described in Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012) policymakers made
no explicit provisions for addressing external debt crises among Eurozone member states.
Rather, policymakers focused on constraining public debt through provisions in the Maastricht Treaty. As a result of this lack of attention to external debt, solutions to the current
crisis have had to be improvised.
The academic literature has not provided clear cut guidance on how to address external debt crises within the Eurozone. In part this is because the literature is typically
segmented. Most models of the risk of default on external debt consider the domestic government and private sector as a unified actor, whereas most models of the sustainability
of public debt are conducted within closed economies. Our contribution to this literature
is to integrate the analysis of default incentives on external and public debt in a simple
unified model.
What lessons for addressing debt crises within the Eurozone do we draw from our
analysis? First, the experiences of Canada and the United States indicate that stronger
institutional foundations are needed to mitigate the risk of government interference with
private contracts. The freedom of private capital flows within the United States and
Canada benefits from a strong legal foundation of protection under constitutional law
together with federal bankruptcy law and uniform laws governing securities markets.
The freedom of these capital flows has also been enhanced over time, particularly in
the United States, by the development of stronger federal foundations underpinning the
banking system. Although we have not discussed banking explicitly in this paper, the
development of an integrated continent wide banking system in the United States has been
a gradual process carried out over two centuries marked by repeated crisis and reform. In
contrast, as discussed in Bordo and Rockoff (2015), Canada has had a strong nationwide
banking system from relatively early on in its history and has been largely free of banking
crises. Of course, one often noted potential benefit of establishing a stronger banking
system in the Eurozone would be to reduce the risk of member government interference
with private contracts in times of crisis.
Second, the institutional features governing fiscal flexibility for state and provincial
governments in the United States and Canada also provide lessons for the development
of new fiscal institutions in Europe. As described in Sargent (2012) and Henning and
Kessler (2012), U.S. states have chosen somewhat distinctive fiscal institutions that result
in equilibrium in relatively tight constraints on state government borrowing. In contrast,
Canadian provincial governments enjoy much greater fiscal flexibility and as a result are
able to sustain substantially higher levels of public debt. These starkly different outcomes
suggest that Europe should carefully consider the implications of restrictions on the fiscal
37

flexibility of member states for the future sustainability of public debt.

7

Epilogue: An Unfolding Tale of Two Sovereign Defaults

In late June of 2015, after this paper was written, the leaders of the governments of
Greece and Puerto Rico nearly simultaneously announced that it was likely that they
would default on their respective public debts.40 These two public debt crises share many
aspects in common. In both Greece and Puerto Rico, the governments’ fiscal condition
has been exacerbated by very large and prolonged recessions.41 Both governments face
high and rising costs of further borrowing, making it infeasible for them to roll over their
existing debts. For both governments, the legal structure to support a rescheduling of
their debts is fraught with all the uncertainty surrounding a sovereign default.42
But there is one dimension in which these two public debt crises differ—the extent
to which this public debt crisis has spilled over to the private sector. In the case of
Greece, the public debt crisis has been accompanied by a run on Greek banks that has
led the government to interfere in private debt contracts by declaring a bank holiday,
limiting deposit withdrawals, and imposing controls on capital outflows. On June 29,
in response to these measures, Standard and Poors downgraded the counterparty credit
ratings of the four main Greek banks to ’SD’ (selective default) and the ratings of their
senior unsecured debt to ’CCC-’. Standard and Poors (2015a) summarizes the outlook
for these Greek banks as follows:
We view the banks’ liquidity positions as having weakened further after
these recent events, which we see as constraining the banks’ ability to meet
their upcoming financial obligations, when due. We therefore believe the default of the Greek banks is a virtual certainty unless unexpected additional
external support materializes.
Standard and Poors (2015b) has also begun downgrading the credit ratings of Greek
non-financial corporations.
40

The announcement by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico that their public debt is
unsustainable was immediately met by announcements from the White House and Congress that there
would be no Federal bailout of these debts.
41
Puerto Rico’s fiscal and economic conditions are analyzed in the report by Krueger et al. (2015))
recommending the restructuring of Puerto Rico’s General Obligation Debts.
42
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is specifically exempted from Chapter 9 of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code, so the government does not have access to the same legal structure Detroit and other municipalities
have used to reschedule their debts.

38

In contrast, while the recession and public debt crisis in Puerto Rico has implications
for the credit ratings of that island’s banks, the impact of this public debt crisis on these
banks is more limited than in Greece due to the legal certainty that the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico is not able to interfere with private external debt contracts.43 Specifically,
on June 29th, Standard and Poors (2015c) downgraded the general obligation bonds
of Puerto Rico to ’CCC-’ and wrote ”The downgrades are based on our view that a
default, distressed exchange, or redemption of the commonwealth’s debt appears to be
inevitable within the next six months absent unanticipated significantly favorable changes
in the issuers’ circumstances.” The credit rating agencies’ views on Puerto Rican banks,
however, are more measured, even given the likelihood of a default on the public debt. For
example, in February of 2015, Moody’s (2015) affirmed its ratings of three of the largest
Puerto Rican banks writing
The bank rating affirmations take into account Puerto Rico’s current economic conditions, which, although very weak, remain within Moody’s expectations for the banks’ liquidity and capital profiles. The affirmations were
in contrast to the downgrade of Puerto Rico’s GO bond rating, which reflected not only the commonwealth’s continued economic weakness, but also
its reduced liquidity, which has increased the probability of default on central
government debt over the next two years. Moody’s said the three banks’ ratings already incorporate risks stemming from Puerto Rico’s broader economic
and fiscal challenges, including the high probability of a public-sector default.
It remains to be seen how the macroeconomic implications of the public debt crises in
Greece and Puerto Rico will play out. Clearly, in Greece, the public debt crisis has also
morphed into an external debt crisis, largely due to sovereign interference with private
debt contracts. In Puerto Rico, while there is no risk of such sovereign interference with
private contracts, the overall uncertainty surrounding a public debt default is also likely to
have an important impact on the private economy. Only time will tell what the resolution
of these two public debt crises will look like.

43

Of course, the fact that bank deposits in Puerto Rico are insured by the FDIC also plays an important
role in insulating the finances from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico from bank failures. The FDIC
closed three banks in Puerto Rico in 2010 and closed Doral Bank, the third largest bank in Puerto Rico,
in the spring of 2015.

39

References
Manuel Adelino and Miguel A. Ferreira. Bank ratings and lending supply: Evidence from
sovereign downgrades. Technical report, Duke University and Nova School of Business
and Economics, October 2014.
Joshua Aizenman and Gunnar Gunnarsson. Fiscal challenges in multilayered unions: An
overview and case study. Technical Report 20564, NBER Working Paper, October 2014.
Hector Almeida, Igor Cunha, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Felipe Restrepo. The real effects of
sovereign rating downgrades. Technical report, January 2014.
Andrew Ang and Francis A. Longstaff. Systemic sovereign credit risk: Lessons from the
U.S. and Europe. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60:493–510, 2013.
Carlos Areta and Galina Hale. Sovereign debt crises and credit to the private sector.
Journal of International Economics, (74):53–69, 2008.
Jennie Bai and Shang-Jin Wei. When is there a strong transfer risk from the sovereigns
to the corporates? Property rights gaps and CDS spreads. March 2014.
Tamim Bayoumi, Morris Goldstein, and Geoffrey Woglom. Do credit markets discipline
sovereign borrowers? Evidence from U.S. states. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
27(4 Part 1):1046–1059, November 1995.
Mascia Bedendo and Paolo Colla. Sovereign and corporate credit risk: Evidence from the
Eurozone. Technical report, Universita Bocconi, June 2013.
David T. Beers, Marie Cavanaugh, and Laura Feinland-Katz. Ratings associated with
risk of foreign exchange controls raised in 27 countries. General criteria, Standard and
Poor’s, November 2005.
Richard M. Bird and Almos Tassonyi. Constraining sub national fiscal behavior in canada:
Different approaches similar results? In Jonathan Rodden, Gunnar S. Eskeland, and
Jennie Ilene Litvack, editors, Fiscal Decentralization and the Challenge of Hard Budget
Constraints, chapter 3. MIT Press, 2003.
Olivier Blanchard and Francesco Giavazzi. Current account deficits in the Euro area: The
end of the Feldstein Horioka puzzle? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 33(2):
147–186, 2002.

40

Luigi Bocola. The pass-through of sovereign risk. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming, 2015.
Henning Bohn. The behavior of U.S. public debt and deficits. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(3):949–63, 1998.
Henning Bohn and Robert P. Inman. Balanced-budget rules and public deficits: Evidence
from the U.S. states. Journal of Monetary Economics: Carnegie Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 45:13–76, December 1996.
Redish Angela Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff. Why didn’t Canada have a banking
crisis in 2008 (or in 1930, or 1907, or âŠ)? The Economic History Review, 68(1):218–243,
2015.
Eduardo Borensztein, Kevin Cowan, and Patricio Valenzuela. Sovereign ceilings “lite”?
The impact of sovereign ratings on corporate ratings. Journal of Banking and Finance,
37:4014–4024, 2013.
Guillermo A. Calvo. Capital flows and capital-market crises: The simple economics of
sudden stops. Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1):35–54, 1998.
Marie Cavanaugh. Sovereign rating and country transfer and convertibility assessment
histories. Technical report, Standard and Poor’s Ratings Direct, January 2013.
Marie Cavanaugh and Laura J. Feinland-Katz. Criteria for determining transfer and
convertibility assessments. General criteria: Methodology, Standard and Poor’s, May
2009.
Nancy G. Chu. Methodology and assumptions for ratings above the sovereign–singlejurisdiction structured finance. Criteria, structured finance, general, Standard and
Poor’s, September 2014.
Udaibir S. Das, Michael G. Papaioannou, and Christoph Trebesch. Sovereign default
risk and private sector access to capital in emerging markets. IMF Working Paper,
(WP/10/10), January 2010.
M. de Sola Perea and Ch. Van Niewenhuyze. Financial integration and fragmentation in
the euro area. National Bank of Belgium Economic Review, (1):99–125, June 2014.
Davis Rich Dewey. Financial History of the United States. Longmans, Green and Company, 1902.
41

Elena Duggar. Sovereign defaults and interference: Perspectives on government risks.
Technical Report Report Number: 110114, Moody’s Investors Service, August 2008.
ECB. Financial integration in Europe. Annual report, European Central Bank, April
2014.
James W. Ely. The Guardian of Every Other Right: A Constitutional History of Property
Rights. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2008.
European Commission. Statement by the European Commission on the capital controls
imposed by the Republic of Cyprus. Press Release, March 28 2013.
Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole. Deadly embrace: Sovereign and financial balance sheet
doom loops. MIT Working Paper, 2014.
Laura J. Feinland-Katz. Ratings above the sovereign–corporate and government ratings:
Methodology and assumptions. General criteria, Standard and Poor’s, November 2013.
Laura J. Feinland-Katz and Nancy G. Chu. Country risk assessment methodology and
assumptions. General criteria, Standard and Poor’s, November 2013.
Richard Fox and Douglas Renwick. Country ceilings.
Sovereigns, global, Fitch Ratings, August 2014.

Cross-sector criteria report:

Daniel Gates, Alastair Wilson, and Elena Duggar. How sovereign credit quality may affect
other ratings. Cross Sector Rating Methodology Report Number: 139495, Moody’s
Investors Service, February 2012.
Atish R. Ghosh, Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S.
Qureshi. Fiscal fatigue, fiscal space and debt sustainability in advanced economies. The
Economic Journal, 123, February 2013.
Simon Gilchrist and Benoit Mojon. Credit risk in the euro area. Technical Report No.
20041, NBER Working Paper, April 2014.
Mark Hallerberg and Rolf Strauch. On the cyclicality of public finances in Europe. Empirica, 29(3):183–207, 2002.
Marcel Heinrichs and Ivelina Stanoeva. Country risk and sovereign risk — building clearer
borders. Technical report, Standard and Poor’s Capital IQ, February 2013.

42

C. Randall Henning and Martin Kessler. Fiscal federalism: US history for architects
of Europe’s fiscal union. Working Paper 12-1, Peterson Institute for International
Economics, January 2012.
IMF. Global financial stability report. Technical report, International Monetary Fund,
October 2012.
IMF. Fiscal monitor: Back to work, how fiscal policy can help. Technical report, International Monetary Fund, October 2014.
Craig L. Johnson and Kenneth A. Kriz. Fiscal institutions, credit ratings, and borrowing
costs. Public Budgeting and Finance, 25(1):84–103, March 2005.
Jari Jonas. Great recession and fiscal squeeze at U.S. subnational government level.
Working Paper 12/184, International Monetary Fund, July 2012.
Patrick Kehoe and Fabrizio Perri. Competitive equilibria with limited enforcement. Journal of Economic Theory, 119(1):184–206, November 2004.
Yun Zhung Kim and Jing Zhang. Decentralized borrowing and centralized default. Journal
of International Economics, 88(1):121–133, September 2012.
Christian Klein and Christoph Stellner. Does sovereign risk matter? New evidence from
eurozone corporate bond ratings and zero-volatility spreads. Review of Financial Economics, 23(2):64–74, 2014.
Anne O. Krueger, Ranjit Teja, and Andrew Wolfe. Puerto rico: A way forward. Technical
report, Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico, 2015.
Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott. Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency
of optimal plans. Journal of Political Economy, 85(3):473–491, 1977.
Philip R. Lane. Capital flows in the euro area. Economic Papers 497, European Commission, April 2013.
Baye Larson. 2013 state debt medians report. Median report, Moody’s Investors Service,
May 2013.
Ning Loh and Katherine Frey. Assessing the impact of the eurozone sovereign debt crisis
on structured finance transactions. Special comment, Moody’s Investors Service, April
2011.

43

John Lombardi and Marcia Van Wagner. US state pension medians increase in fiscal 2012.
Median report, Moody’s Investors Service, January 2014.
Robert C. Lowry and James E. Alt. A visible hand? Bond markets, political parties,
balanced budget laws, and state government debt. Economics and Politics, 13(1):49–
72, March 2001.
Robert E. Lucas and Nancy L. Stokey. Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy
without capital. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1):55–93, 1983.
Silvia Merler and Jean Pisani-Ferry. Sudden stops in the euro area. Bruegel Policy
Contribution, 6, 2012.
Moody’s. Moody’s ratings symbols and definitions. Technical report, Moody’s Investors
Service, 2009.
Moody’s. Moody’s statistical handbook: Non-U.S. regional and local governments. Technical report, Moody’s Investors Service, December 2013.
Moody’s. Moody’s affirms ratings on three puerto rican banks. Global Credit Research,
2015.
Joseph Mysak. Bond default is about too much debt, too little time, July 20 2010.
Allan Nevins. The American States During and After the Revolution, 1775-1789. Macmillan, New York, 1924.
Samuel R. Olken. Charles Evans Hughes and the Blaisdell Decision: A historical study
of contract clause jurisprudence. Oregon Law Review, 72:513, 1993.
Milagros Palacios, Hugh MacIntyre, and Charles Lammam. Canadian government debt
2014: A guide to the indebtedness of Canada and the provinces. Technical report,
Fraser Institute, April 2014.
Jean Pisani-Ferry, Andre Sapir, and Guntram B. Wolff. EU-IMF assistance to euro-area
countries: An early assessment. Blueprint Series 19, Bruegel, 2013.
James Pitman. Credit and rating considerations arising from a “euro exit”. Special
comment, Moody’s Investors Service, October 2012.
James M. Poterba. State responses to fiscal crises: The effects of budgetary institutions
and politics. Journal of Political Economy, 102:799–821, August 1994.
44

James M. Poterba and Kim S. Rueben.
State fiscal institutions and the U.S.
municipal bond market.
In James M. Poterba and Jurgen eds. von Hagen, editors, Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, pages 181–208. NBER,
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c8028, January 1999.
James M. Poterba and Kim S. Rueben. Fiscal news, state budget rules, and tax-exempt
bond yields. Journal of Urban Economics, 50(3):537–562, November 2001.
Demian Pouzo and Ignacio Presno. Optimal taxation with endogenous default under
incomplete markets. Technical report, UC Berkeley Economics, July 2014.
Benjamin Pykett, Matthew Harding, and Benedict James. Capital and exchange controls.
Technical Report Issue 3, Linklaters, April 2013.
Emily Raimes. US states rating methodology. Rating methodology, Moody’s Investors
Service, April 17 2013.
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff. Financial and sovereign debt crises: Some
lessons learned and those forgotten. Technical Report WP/13/266, IMF Working Paper,
December 2013.
Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano. Debt intolerance.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34(1):1–62, 2003.
Jonathan Rodden and Erik Wibbels. Fiscal decentralization and the business cycle: An
empirical study of seven federations. Economics and Politics, 22(1):37–67, 2010.
Thomas Sargent. United States then, Europe now. Journal of Political Economy, 120(1):
1–40, 2012.
Slaughter and May. Sovereign default, bank default, eurozone exit and related issues:
Is your business prepared? A practical guide to contingency planning and legal risk
management. Memorandum, Slaughter and May, July 2012.
Standard and Poors. Ratings on four greek banks lowered to ’sd’ following restrictions
imposed on deposits. Press Release, 2015a.
Standard and Poors. Greek corporations ellaktor, public power corp., and ote long-term
ratings lowered following similar action on sovereign. Press Release, 2015b.
Standard and Poors. Puerto rico go rating lowered to ’ccc-’ from ’ccc+’; outlook is negative
on likelihood of default or distressed exchange. Press Release, 2015c.
45

Carsten Stendevad. Debating point: Bosses’ agendas are converging. Financial Times,
July 26, 2007.
Mac Taylor. California’s cash flow crisis: May 2009 update. Technical report, Legislative
Analysts Office, May 2009.
Thomas G. W. Telfer. Reconstructing Bankruptcy Law in Canada 1867 to 1979: From
an Evil to a Commercial Necessity. PhD thesis, 1999.
Thomas G. W. Telfer. Ruin and Redemption: The Struggle for a Canadian Bankruptcy
Law, 1867-1919. University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 2014.
Vincent Truglia. Revised policy with respect to country ceilings. Rating methodology:
Request for comment, Moody’s Investors Service, November 2005.
John Joseph Wallis. American government finance in the long run: 1790 to 1990. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 14(1):61–82, Winter 2000.
Geoff Walsh. The finger in the dike: State and local laws combat the foreclosure tide.
Suffolk University Law Review, 44:139–191, 2011.
Alastair Wilson. Proposed changes to local currency country risk ceilings in currency
unions. Request for comment, Moody’s Investors Service, November 2014.
Jennifer A. Wong and Emily Raimes. California and Ontario: Peer comparison. Credit
focus, Moody’s Investors Service, October 2013.
Benjamin F. Wright. The Contract Clause of the Constitution. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1938.
Mark Wright. Private capital flows, capital controls and default risk. Journal of International Economics, 69(1):120–149, June 2006.

46

Table 1: Indebtedness in the United States, Canada, and the Eurozone 2012

Liabilities to GDP
Net Debt Plus Unfunded
United States
California
Texas
New York
Florida
Illinois
Pennsylvania
Ohio
Georgia
Michigan
North Carolina
Mean
Canada
Ontario
Quebec
British Columbia
Alberta
Mean
Europe
Greece
Italy
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Mean

Rating

Revenue/GDP

5%
1%
5%
3%
5%
3%
3%
3%
2%
2%
3%

11%
11%
7%
6%
32%
14%
6%
5%
6%
5%
10%

A1
Aaa
Aa2
Aa1
A2
Aa2
Aa1
Aaa
Aa2
Aaa

9%
7%
11%
8%
9%
10%
10%
8%
12%
9%
9%

40%
48%
17%
2%
27%

102%
197%
73%
68%
110%

Aa2
Aa2
Aaa
Aaa

17%
19%
19%
19%
19%

170%
111%
92%
119%
61%
110%

229%
131%
147%
171%
134%
162%

Caa1
Baa2
Baa1
Ba1
Baa2

44%
52%
34%
44%
38%
42%

Sources: United States: Larson (2013), Table 5, for net debt. Lombardi and Van Wagner (2014),
Tables 3 and 7, for pension liabilities and government revenues. Moody’s (2013) for ratings. Europe:
IMF (2014) for net debt and government revenues. IMF (2014), Table 23a for pensions. Wilson (2014)
for ratings, which are for 2014. Canada: Moody’s (2013) for net debt and ratings. Palacios et al. (2014)
for pensions liabilities. Government/GDP series from fiscal reference tables (Department of Finance
Canada).

47

Table 2: Net Debt to Income in U.S. States and Canadian Provinces, 2008-2012

State
California
Texas
New York
Florida
Illinois
Pennsylvania
Ohio
Georgia
Michigan
North Carolina
Canada
Alberta
British Columbia
Ontario
Quebec

2008
4.3%
1.4%
6.3%
2.8%
5.2%
2.4%
2.9%
3.0%
2.2%
2.8%

2009
4.4%
1.4%
6.3%
2.9%
4.6%
2.5%
2.8%
3.0%
2.2%
2.5%

2010
5.6%
1.4%
6.5%
2.9 %
4.4%
2.4%
2.6 %
3.3%
2.1%
2.3%

2011
6.0%
1.6%
6.7%
3.0%
5.7%
2.7%
2.8%
3.3%
2.2%
2.3%

2012
6.0%
1.5%
6.6%
3.0%
6.0%
2.8%
2.8%
3.1%
2.2%
2.3%

0.6%
13.4%
27.4%
43.4%

2.1%
14.7%
34.0%
45.4%

2.1%
14.9%
36.1%
47.2%

2.1%
15.6%
37.8%
47.7%

2.4%
16.8%
40.4%
48.3%

Sources: Larson (2013) and Moody’s (2013). Data on U.S. states are relative to personal income.
Data on Canadian provinces are relative to gross domestic product.

48

600

600
2000

500

500

1500

400

400

300

300
1000

200

200
500

100

100

0

0
2008

2009

2010
Italy

2011
Spain

2012

Greece(rightaxis)

2013

2014

2015

Portugal(rightaxis)

0
2008

2009

2010
California

(a) Spreads for Eurozone Countries

2011
Illinois

NewYork

2012
Michigan

2013
Virginia

(b) Spreads for U.S. States

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
2008

2009

2010
Ontario

2011
Quebec

2012

2013

2014

British Columbia

(c) Spreads for Canadian Provinces

Figure 1: Government Spreads in Europe, U.S. States, and Canadian Provinces
Notes: Europe: Spreads are calculated as the difference between the 10-year government bond yield
and each country and the German 10-year yield using monthly data; source: Global Financial Database.
U.S.: Spreads are from credit default swaps; source: Markit. Canada: Spreads are calculated as the
difference between the 10-year provincial government bond yield and the Canadian 10-year yield using
monthly data. Source: Bank of Canada.

49

2014

NetDebt+Pension/HealthcareasPercentageofGDP












Figure 2: Net Debt and Pension/Health care Liabilities to GDP
Notes: See Table 1.

90%

110%

Greece

90%

Portugal
70%

70%
50%

50%

30%

30%

10%
10%

Oct-12

Feb-12

Oct-10

Jun-11

Oct-08

Feb-10

Jun-09

Feb-08

Oct-06

Feb-06

Jun-07

Oct-04

Jun-05

Feb-04

Oct-02

Feb-02

-10%

Jun-03

Oct-12

Oct-10

Feb-12

Jun-11

Feb-10

Oct-08

Jun-09

Oct-06

Feb-08

Jun-07

Feb-06

Oct-04

Feb-04

Jun-05

Oct-02

Jun-03

-30%

Feb-02

-10%

90%

90%

Private inflows

TARGET Liab.

Dec-12

Apr-11

Feb-12

Jun-10

Aug-09

Oct-08

Dec-07

Apr-06

Programme disb.

Feb-07

Aug-04

Jun-05

Oct-03

Oct-12

Feb-12

Oct-10

Jun-11

Oct-08

Feb-10

Jun-09

Feb-08

Oct-06

Feb-06

-10%

Jun-07

-10%

Oct-04

10%

Jun-05

30%

10%

Feb-04

30%

Oct-02

50%

Feb-02

50%

Jun-03

70%

Feb-02

Italy

70%

Dec-02

Spain

Total inflows

Figure 3: Private Capital Flows, Programme Financing, and Eurosystem Financing,
Greece, Portugal, Italy, and Spain, 2002-12 (% of 2007 GDP)
Source: Pisani-Ferry et al. (2013), Figure 1.

50

&"##

%"##

$"##

!"##

("##

'"##

#"##
')))

(###

(##'

(##(

(##!

(##$

,-./012

(##%
3.014-

(##&

(##*

56072

(##+
890:1

(##)

(#'#

(#''

(#'(

(#'!

;<.=0.-0

(a) Nonfinancial Corporate

-.%/&

*+%,'
*
)
(
'
&
%
$
#
"
!

*
)
(
'
&
%
$
#
"
!
#!!%

#!!&

#!!'

#!!(

+,-./0-78

#!!)

#!!*

013-./0-78

#!"!

#!""

#!"#

#!!%

#!"$

(b) Italy Sovereign and Nonfinancial Corporate

#!!&

#!!'

#!!(

+,-./0-39

013-345-78

#!!)

#!!*

013-./0-39

#!"!

#!""

#!"#

#!"$

013-345-39

(c) Spain Sovereign and Nonfinancial Corporate

Figure 4: Euro Area Credit Spread
Source: Gilchrist and Mojon (2014), Figure 1 and Figure 6

51

.15
.1
Density
.05
0
-16

-12

-8
-4
0
Corporate Rating - Sovereign Rating

4

8

Figure 5: Distribution of Gaps between Corporate and Sovereign Ratings
Source: Almeida et al. (2014)

Month of a Sovereign Downgrade

One Month After a Sovereign Downgrade

80

80

70

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

60

57.3

50
(%)

(%)

(%)

One Month Before a Sovereign Downgrade
80

40

40
34.6

32.0

30

30

20

20

10
0

7.3

6.5
2.7

1.6

<= -6

-5

2.2

-4

3.9

-3

2.2

-2

-1

30

10
3.4

0

4.0

1.1

+1 >= +2

Corporate Rating minus Sovereign Rating

0

25.8

20
8.4

4.0
1.2

30.1

<= -6

-5

-4

2.9

-3

10

2.7

-2

16.1

1.7

-1

0

+1 >= +2

Corporate Rating minus Sovereign Rating

0

<= -6

1.4

1.0

-5

-4

3.7

3.7

-3

-2

5.4

-1

0

Figure 6: Proportion of Corporate Rating Changes around a Sovereign Downgrade
Source: Almeida et al. (2014)

52

+1 >= +2

Corporate Rating minus Sovereign Rating

