NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BETTER PREDICTIONS, BETTER ALLOCATIONS:
SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Mark C. Freeman
Ben Groom
Richard Zeckhauser
Working Paper 21463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21463
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mark C. Freeman, Ben Groom, and Richard Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Better Predictions, Better Allocations: Scientific Advances and Adaptation to Climate Change
Mark C. Freeman, Ben Groom, and Richard Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 21463
August 2015
JEL No. D8,D83,E21,H41,H43,Q5,Q54
ABSTRACT
The initial hope for climate science was that an improved understanding of what the future might bring
would lead to appropriate public policies and effective international climate agreements. Even if that
hope is not realized, as now seems likely, scientific advances leading to a more refined assessment
of the uncertainties surrounding the future impacts of climate change would facilitate more appropriate
adaptation measures. Such measures might involve shifting modes or locales of production, for example.
This article focuses on two broader tools: consumption smoothing in anticipation of future losses,
and physical adaptation measures to reduce damages. It shows that informative signals on climate-change
effects lead to better decisions in the use of each tool.
Mark C. Freeman
School of Business and Economics
Loughborough University
Leiceistershire, UK LE11 3TU
m.c.freeman@lboro.ac.uk
Ben Groom
Department of Geography and Environment
London School of Economics
Houghton St, London, WC2A 2AE, UK
b.groom@lse.ac.uk

Richard Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

Better Predictions, Better Allocations: Scienti…c
Advances and Adaptation to Climate Change
Mark C. Freeman1 , Ben Groom2 and Richard Zeckhauser3 .
August 14, 2015

Abstract
The initial hope for climate science was that an improved understanding
of what the future might bring would lead to appropriate public policies
and e¤ective international climate agreements. Even if that hope is not
realized, as now seems likely, scienti…c advances leading to a more re…ned assessment of the uncertainties surrounding the future impacts of
climate change would facilitate more appropriate adaptation measures.
Such measures might involve shifting modes or locales of production, for
example. This article focuses on two broader tools: consumption smoothing in anticipation of future losses, and physical adaptation measures to
reduce damages. It shows that informative signals on climate-change
e¤ects lead to better decisions in the use of each tool.

1

Introduction

However rewarding life as a climate scientist must be, the absence of binding international agreements on climate change mitigation and the slow pace of climate policy
reform must make it frustrating in equal measure. What is the point, one may well
ask, of continuing to re…ne the science of climate change if e¤ective collective action
seems so unlikely? The message of this article is that receiving clearer signals about
1

School of Business and Economics, Loughborough University. Author for correspondence:
m.c.freeman@lboro.ac.uk. 2 Department of Geography and Environment, London School of Economics. 3 Kennedy School, Harvard University.

1

the likelihood of future states of a warmer world would provide substantial utility,
even in the absence of binding global agreements, or e¤ective national policies on
mitigation. Signals provide the basis upon which the adaptation activities of sovereign nations, regions, …rms and even individuals are made. Their utility lies in
enabling more informed saving and consumption-smoothing decisions, but informed
signals are particularly valuable when physical adaptation measures are also available, such as ‡ood defenses or choice of location. So, although the primary impetus
for climate research was to inform and in‡uence high-level negotiations on collective action, knowing more about the likelihood of future outcomes is also a valuable
input both for individual governments, and for agents within them at lower, more
decentralised organisational levels. These are the parties who will ultimately make
adaptation decisions, irrespective of the success of international agreements.
The article focuses on adaptation because it is an inevitable part of the response
to climate change [1]. The best predictions so far suggest that, whatever is agreed
at the 21st Conference of Parties in Paris in December this year (COP21), there is
by now su¢ cient inertia in the climate system to lock-in temperature increases of
between 0.3 and 0.7 degrees Celsius (C) for the period 2016 - 2035 relative to 19862005 [2, 3]. For the period 2080-2100 temperature change is expected to exceed 1.5C
for all but the most stringent Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP). These
predictions suggest that the focal-point of a 2C limit enshrined in the Copenhagen
Accord is likely to be unrealistic.1 Indeed RCP2.6, the most stringent of the RCPs
contained in the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC (AR5), shows that in order
for the 2C limit not to be exceeded, emissions of CO2 equivalents will have to turn
negative towards the end of the 21st century.2
Given previous experience, agreement on such stringent emissions reduction scenarios at the COP21 seems distinctly unlikely. It has been argued for some time
that the nature of climate change as a spatial and intergenerational problem, together with the absence of an enforcement mechanism within the Kyoto Protocol
and successive agreements, more or less precludes agreement on collective action
[5, 6, 7, 8]. There are straightforward free-rider problems: non-signatories bene…t
from the action of signatories thereby reducing the incentive to participate in an
international agreement. Many countries also recognise that a successful interna1

The Copenhagen Accord arising out of the COP15 states that the parties agreed that in order to
avoid dangerous anthropogenic climate change they recognise ‘the scienti…c view that the increase
in global temperature should be below 2 degrees Celsius’ compared to the pre-industrial average
([4], article 1)
2
Given uncertainty, the phrase ’likely to be met’ is used. This has a particular probabilistic
meaning in the AR5 report meaning a likelihood of between 66-100%, as do terms like ’virtually
certain’(99-100%), ’highly likely‘(90-100%) and ’very unlikely’(0-10%).

2

tional response to climate change mitigation requires the participation of the two
major contributors to greenhouse gases (GHGs), China and the US. So far the US
has shied away from signing the Kyoto protocol, while China remains a Non-Annex
I country without any obligations under the principal of ‘shared but di¤erentiated
responsibilities’.3 Moreover, given that the two countries are in such asymmetric
situations, an agreement that looks fair to one will look unfair to the other.
As a counter-argument we might look to the recent Sino-US pledges on emissions
reductions.4 But even here enforcement is lacking; there are no clear plans of implementation on either side, and the reliance of the US pledge on executive authority
means it is liable to be reversed under a Republican administration.5 The asymmetry of these respective pledges re‡ects the inherent asymmetry of the problem
more generally. A global agreement must resolve the fact that negotiating countries
are at very di¤erent stages of development, and that the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) will either require compensation for stringent emissions reductions, or
will only commit to mitigation once development has taken place [10].6 Even if the
Sino-US pledge is successful therefore, energy demand is still predicted to increase as
incomes in LDCs, not to mention populations, increase in the future [12, 11]. For all
of these reasons, adaptation is now an unavoidable feature of the response to climate
change, particularly in LDCs. This view is re‡ected in the high-level institutions
of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) with the formation at the COP16 in Cancun of the Cancun Adaptation Framework and associated
Adaptation Committee. Similarly, both AR4 and AR5 [3, 2] have detailed chapters
devoted entirely to adaptation.7
Of course, just like mitigation, adaptation decisions must be made despite considerable uncertainty about the impact of climate change in the future. As one looks
into the distant future, as is necessary for such problems that stretch across gen3

It has also been shown theoretically and in behavioural experiments that uncertainty surrounding climate damages tends to make agreement even less likely, particularly with regard to the
location of catastrophic thresholds such as the 2C of the Copenhagen Accord [9].
4
In November the Obama administration pledged a 26-28% reduction in GHG emissions by 2025,
while President Xi simultaneously made a general pledge for emissions reduction after 2030. These
pledges were submitted to the UNFCCC in March 2015.
5
See
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/01/us/obama-to-o¤er-major-blueprint-on-climatechange.html?
6
If they were at the same stage of development, with the same history of emissions, equal
populations, and equal current emissions, it would be relatively easy for the two countries to agree
say on a K% cut in emissions.
7
That climate change can be viewed as a development problem (e.g., [10]) is not a new idea.
There is also a long standing argument that the best adaptive response to climate for LDCs would
be to grow and reduce vulnerability in the future [13].

3

erations, every aspect of the problem becomes increasingly fuzzy. It is not simply
that the probability distributions attached to events widen and lead to less precise
estimates of key variables, we are also uncertain about the probabilities to attach to
di¤erent outcomes in the deep future. These responses to climate change must be
taken in an environment of uncertainty and ambiguity rather than risk.8 The chief
sources of uncertainty in our understanding of future climate change are threefold:
i) the level of future emissions; ii) the impact of emissions on temperatures; and, iii)
the damages that arise [15]. Take for instance ’climate sensitivity’, which measures
the increase in temperature from a doubling of CO2 . Estimates of this parameter
in the AR5 come from many and various climate models. The disagreement among
them is plain to see in Figure 1. Yet, with the passing of time scienti…c research
will improve our understanding of such relationships. We can expect the uncertainty
surrounding these factors to narrow either in the sense of obtaining more precise
predictions or obtaining closer agreement among climate models, not to mention experts, on the extent of uncertainty. The same can be said for the di¢ cult practice of
estimating climate damages. Ultimately though, the relevant information to improve
adaptation decisions would be provided at a local level. Here too we can expect better information to narrow the disagreement among models that currently exists [17].
Adaptation in many sectors can then be placed on a …rmer footing as a consequence
of better information [12, 17, 16]. This belief is widely held.9
In this paper we ask the question: what is the value of scienti…c research in
providing more informative signals on the future of climate change for agents faced
with adaptation decisions? To answer this question we use a parsimonious model
of an atomistic agent who could be the government of a sovereign nation, a local
government, a …rm, or an individual household. The agent has the capability of
making two separate decisions about how to optimally respond to climate change in
the future: a ’macro’consumption-saving decision that builds up a fund for future
adaptive responses and bu¤ers future losses (e.g., repairs to a damaged house, or
purchase of grain in the event of crop losses), and a ’micro’ physical adaptation
decision that limits future climate related damages (although not climate change
itself). In one future state of the world, a high temperature state, damages are
severe and endowments are low. In another damages are only moderate. The agent
8

With climate change, it is also important to consider the more extreme situation of ignorance,
where even some important possible states of the world cannot be identi…ed [14].
9
For instance, the World Meteorological Organisation states increased acceptance that some
degree of climate change is inevitable is now coupled with increasing demand from communities,
industry and government for reliable climate information at high resolution and with accurate
extremes. Cited in [16].

4

knows that before she commits to a micro or macro adaptation decision a signal of a
particular quality will arrive that updates the information held about the probability
of the severe state arising. The signal will either be ’good’ or ’bad’ in the sense
of lowering or raising the probability of the severe state compared to previously
held beliefs. With the signal in hand, the agent will then make her optimal micro
and macro adaptation decisions.10 We analyse the utility of the better signals by
comparing the agent’s pre-signal expected utility both with and without the signal.
We also look at signals of di¤erent qualities.
The value of information has been analysed before in the context of climate
change and adaptation. Our work relates to two strands of the preceding literature.
In the …rst, the option value of arriving information has been analysed following a
framework long since established [18, 19, 20]. Here the essential problem was that
an agent must make a decision today knowing that a better signal will arrive in the
future. In this context the agent can wait and see and the problem becomes one
of the optimal timing of adaptation given some irreversibility of investments and/or
climate damages. In the second strand, the implications for the precision of climate
predictions has been analysed for an agent who receives a short-run and a longrun prediction without knowing that the signal may improve in time. The question
here concerns the relative value of short-run and long-run predictions [15, 16]. Our
approach di¤ers from these in that it evaluates a world in which information is
improving via a future signal and yet agents make some decisions ex post. Evaluated
ex ante, we capture an essential value of better signals on saving and adaptation
decisions, but strip out issues of option value and irreversibility.
The initial result of this article is that under typical assumptions positing risk
aversion, the agent would prefer to be in the world with the signal than without. In
a world with de…nitive signals about the future, expected utility increases compared
to in the absence of a signal. The pathways for this result are clear. In the macro
adaptation case, better information e¤ectively reduces uncertainty in the future and
reduces precautionary saving. This e¤ect is monotonic in the conclusiveness of the
signal. The value of the signal is even higher when micro adaptation strategies are
also available. Signals allow a better tailoring of these adaptations to di¤erent states
of the world. However, the devil is in the details. Our analysis then examines how
properties of the consumption utility function a¤ect levels of savings and physical
adaptation. We present both analytic results and numerical calculations. The latter
illustrate, for example, the non-monotonic way in which micro and macro adaptations
respond as signals improve.
10

See Figure 2 for an illustration the sequence of events. Figure 3 describes the nature of the
signal.

5

2

Scienti…c Uncertainty in Climate Change

In this section we discuss the pervasive uncertainties associated with climate change.
This is done with a view to understanding where continued scienti…c research may
be able to provide better signals about the future of climate change. Given the focus
of this article, it is worth being clear about the sources of uncertainty discussed in
the context of climate change. We begin by categorising what we know about its
prospects in the future. Taken together, [21] and [15] provide a helpful structure,
which we now summarise.
Predicting the future is a di¢ cult task at the best of times, but the sheer complexity and time horizon associated with climate change ampli…es these di¢ culties.
Our knowledge about the future of climate change comes from two main sources: i)
scienti…c principles, including physical laws; and, ii) the empirical predictions of climate models. While the principles are matters of fact, the movement from principles
to predictions leads to an uncertain picture of the future as the models attempt to
reproduce extremely complex systems using di¤erent assumptions and calibrations.
Each model is subject to its own errors and potential omissions [22]. The essential
sources of uncertainty in predicting climate change are threefold: i) the path of future
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions; ii) the relationship between GHG concentrations
and temperature change; and, iii) the link between temperature change and damages [15]. In the context of adaptation, the uncertain process of technological change
means that the future costs of adaptation are also a source of uncertainty about
the future, just as abatement costs are uncertain when thinking about mitigation.
More speci…cally, with regard to climate change and damages, we are much more
uncertain about predictions with longer lead times or greater spatial de…nition. The
distant future, and country or regional level predictions are ’fuzzier’than short-term
or global predictions [21].
When thinking about adaptation to climate change, decisions will depend upon
the uncertainty surrounding future exposure to climate damages. Exposure to climate change will depend on each of the elements i to iii above. Future emissions
paths are undoubtedly di¢ cult to predict, but calibrating the damage function is one
of the key weaknesses of Integrated Assessment Models and a source of great uncertainty [23, 24]. At present damage functions are constructed on the basis of ’ad hoc
assumptions based on loose extrapolations and intuition’[25]. Small changes in the
parameterisation lead to large changes in estimated damages and associated policy
recommendations. The AR5 cites only a dozen or so sources for its estimates of the
damage function, many of which come from the same experts. It is widely regarded
as an area ripe for improvements in understanding and more re…ned information on
6

uncertainty [2].
The relationship between GHG concentrations and temperature change is usually
summarised by a parameter known as climate sensitivity [21]. Climate sensitivity
measures the long-run temperature change associated with a doubling of CO2 in the
atmosphere above pre-industrial levels. Together with predicted emissions paths and
damage functions it is one of the key pieces of the climate-change puzzle. In contrast
to the damage function, climate sensitivity has received a great deal of scienti…c
research. Despite this, its value remains very uncertain [26, 15]. To illustrate the way
in which di¤erent models disagree on climate predictions, consider their estimates
of climate sensitivity. Figure 1 shows the probability density functions for climate
sensitivity for a number of prominent climate models. From this it is clear that
models disagree on the likelihoods to attach to di¤erent values of climate sensitivity:
there is uncertainty rather than simply risk. For decision making purposes, these
estimates are typically aggregated into a single density function, either by Bayesian
methods as used in AR5 or by using expert assessment. Even then the aggregated
climate sensitivity remains a source of great uncertainty. Using such methods the
’likely range’ of climate sensitivity, meaning the central 66% of the distribution of
estimates, is currently 1.5 - 4.5C. This range has remained somewhat steadfast since
the First Assessment Report of the IPCC (AR1), with only a brief narrowing of the
range at the time of the Fourth Assessment Report in 2007 (AR4) to 2 - 4.5C.11 As
well as the likely range, the summary distribution of climate sensitivity reported in
AR5 provides information about the likelihood of extreme, high temperature states
of the world. For instance, the likelihood of a temperature rise in excess of 6C is
approximately 10% [26]. Some have argued that climate policy ought to be organised
around this information rather than the central ranges, since increases in temperature
of this magnitude would represent truly catastrophic outcomes, which make up the
vast majority of expected losses[28].
Climate sensitivity and climate damages are good examples of the information
we can expect from research on climate change. They act as guides to the analysis of climate scenarios and provide the essential information upon which climate
negotiations and adaptation decisions are made. There are several areas where improvements in this kind of scienti…c information are likely. Firstly, the estimates of
climate sensitivity used in the AR5 are derived from multiple climate models and also
involve expert opinions. With passing time, temperatures and CO2 emissions will
move further into uncharted territory, scientists will learn more about the complex
climatic relationships. The recent and unpredicted slowdown of global temperature
11

The physical reasons for the robustness of the distribution of climate sensitivity have been well
documented [27].

7

changes, which lead to closer scrutiny of the role of ocean warming, is a good example of this learning process. As a result, climate models will gain in the accuracy
in their predictions as we learn more about their underlying physical laws. Their
distributions of climate sensitivity will tighten, and disagreement among models will
diminish. New models will also arrive. Similar arguments can be made for the
damage function and knowledge of how humans will respond to these changes, for
example through migrations, wars, etc. In each case we can expect that more re…ned
scienti…c information will give us better, though still highly uncertain, predictions
on average.
Yet learning is also likely in relation to more esoteric issues, such as how to
best to aggregate models and expert opinions [22, 29]. For instance, expert opinions provide a useful source of information for estimating climate sensitivity since
their subjective probabilities are calculated using their experience with a variety of
climate models and their expert views of their advantages and shortcomings. However, experimental evidence indicates that experts do not always satisfy the axioms
of rationality that motivate the use of subjective probabilities in the …rst place [29].
Probabilities derived this way may paint a more optimistic or pessimistic picture of
the uncertainties that we face, compared to more appropriate aggregation methods
[29, 21]. Even without these behavioural/rationality issues, others argue that simply
combining the results from climate models to form a single distribution of climate
sensitivity only captures a fraction of the uncertainty that we face, and ignores the
deeper uncertainties contained in individual climate models. It could well be that
other representations of uncertainty might be more appropriate [22], or alternative
decision-making frameworks should be used to account explicitly for the inherent
ambiguity of climate sensitivity [21].
Finally, making predictions at higher levels of geographical de…nition represents
another source of profound uncertainty. Country level predictions of the evolution of
climate change are notoriously imprecise since they depend on local environmental
factors such as topography. This is particularly true for precipitation, since the
science of cloud formation is subject to stochastic processes which are less wellunderstood. Consider, for example, the predictions for temperature and precipitation
in China for the decades up to 2050 and 2100 coming from three prominent climate
models: the Hadley Centre Coupled Model (HCMIII), the Parallel Climate Model
(PCM2), and the Community Climate Model (CCM2) [17].12 While each predicts
more or less the same temperature rise on average, some predict more precipitation
in the future, while others predict signi…cantly less [17]. Improving the accuracy and
12

http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/pcm/;
http://www.meto¢ ce.gov.uk/research/modellingsystems/uni…ed-model/climate-models/hadcm3; http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/cms/ccm3/

8

precision of spatially de…ned predictions is one area in which additional research will
bear fruit [16, 15].
There are several areas where scienti…c research will be able to either improve
predictions or at least provide more informative signals about how much uncertainty
we are facing. Some types of uncertainty are more likely to be reduced than others.
For instance, the errors and omissions of climate models may well be ironed out with
sustained research. In time research may re…ne the spatially and temporally speci…c
predictions that are needed to inform decentralised adaptation decisions. Some scientists believe that a tripling of current funding levels would reduce uncertainty in
transient climate response, an element of climate sensitivity, by approximately 1/3
[15, 30].
Simple practical examples exist of where a clearer picture of the uncertainty facing potential agents has assisted in their adaptation/risk management decisions. In
The Netherlands maps have been produced that clarify the probability of ‡ooding in
di¤erent locales [31]. Elsewhere, better predictions of the danger zones for natural
disasters have also been provided [32]. There is a growing demand for such information from international organisations, commercial quarters, and local planners alike
[16]. The provision of such information is also taken seriously by major global organisations. For example, provision of this kind of information is a major component
of the World Meteorological Organisation’s Global Framework for Climate Services
[15]. Of course, we must remain mindful that uncertainty surrounding some aspects
of climate analysis is likely to be irreducible. The processes of cloud formation, the
path of future emissions, and many other socio-economic processes, are extremely
di¢ cult to narrow down. Such quantities may well dominate uncertainty in the longrun [15, 16]. Yet, more informative signals about the likelihoods of di¤erent future
states of the world are possible, and are widely seen as crucial for making adaptation
decisions in many di¤erent circumstances [33].
Improvement in the information about the future can in principle come from
any or all of the three (i to iii) sources of uncertainty discussed above. In our
formal analysis the signal concerning the probability of severe (high temperature,
high damage) state stems from from better information on climate sensitivity or
emissions, rather than damages. Before going into the details, we discuss some
speci…cs of adaptation.
[Insert Figure 1 here]

9

3
3.1

Adaptation as a response to climate change
A brief history of adaptation in climate negotiations

Adaptation has shifted from being virtually a taboo subject in the early years following the UNFCCC to receiving more or less equal status in recent meetings of the
Conference of Parties [34]. The fear in the past was that discussion about adaptation would undermine e¤orts to agree on mitigation targets. Al Gore made this point
forcefully when he said that focusing on adaptation represented ‘a kind of laziness,
an arrogant faith in our ability to react in time to save our skins’. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) devoted little time to
the issue and took a very narrow view of adaptation as a simple reactive behaviour
to future climate change.
Three main factors have led to this change in emphasis. First, inertia in the
climate system means that the full e¤ect of historical emissions is yet to be felt.
To quote the Stern Review, ‘there are some unavoidable impacts of climate change
to which the world is already committed’[35]. Second, equity issues have dictated
a shift in focus towards the impact on developing countries, which are the most
vulnerable to climate change due to their reliance on climate sensitive sectors such as
agriculture, forestry and …sheries [36].13 Third, quite apart from equity issues, there
has been also a strong sense that the focus on mitigation to reduce climate risks in
the future ignored the very real prospect of current climate and non-climate related
development issues, such as the control of malaria. The objectives of adaptation
strategies often overlap with those of development more generally [34].
Precisely these arguments have elevated adaptation to more or less equal status
with mitigation in high-level negotiations and associated institutions. The outcome
of the COP16 in Cancun, and agreement on the Cancun Adaptation Framework
(CAF), is testament to this.14 The CAF recommended the development of National
Adaptation Plans (NAPs) for Lesser Developed Countries (LDCs), as well as work
programmes for vulnerable countries, such as Bangladesh, to potentially address loss
and damage associated with climate change. Under the CAF, additional support
from developed countries comes in the form of provision of, inter alia, the best
available scienti…c evidence on adaptation strategies and climate change itself [38].
13

Whether these expressed concerns re‡ect deeply held values, which would lead for example to
signi…cant transfers of resources to developing countries, or are merely pious utterances that will
be followed with signi…cant actions, is unclear.
14
The Delhi Declaration of 2002 which called for a greater focus on the plight of developing
countries in international negotiations, leading to the Bali Action Plan of 2007, and arguments in
academia have all assisted in the integration of adaptation into the UNFCCC [34, 37].

10

National and local level assistance on adaptation is to be coordinated and provided
by the Adaptation Committee of the CAF.
The salient aspects of the Cancun Agreement, the CAF and the Adaptation
Committee for the purposes of this article concern their role in the provision of information and the promotion of scienti…c research on climate change. For instance, the
Cancun Agreement 15 states that one of the key roles of the CAF is: ’Strengthening
data, information and knowledge systems; and, improving climate-related research
and systematic observation for climate data collection .... in order to provide decision
makers at the national and regional levels with improved climate-related data and
information’. Furthermore, the Adaptation Committee’s objectives include: ’Sharing
of relevant information, knowledge, experience and good practices; and, providing
information and recommendations, drawing on adaptation good practices, for consideration by the COP when providing guidance .... on adaptation actions’. 16 In
short, adaptation is now taken very seriously by high-level climate institutions, and
the provision of scienti…c information to potential adapters is now an important part
of the adaptation framework.

3.2

Categories of adaptation

This article evaluates the bene…ts of information provision to those those who make
adaptive decisions at whatever level of organisation: national, regional, community
or individual. This is an issue of growing importance in international negotiations
on climate change. Adaptation can take various forms and has various de…nitions
which are worth articulating for the purpose of understanding our formal model.
One important distinction in the literature on adaptation (e.g., [39]) focuses on
the temporal dimension of decision making and draws the distinction between reactive and anticipatory adaptation. Reactive activities are rolling contemporaneous
responses to events caused by climate change. For instance, buying sandbags in response to a ‡ood to prevent damage to one’s house [31]. Anticipatory or ’pro-active’
adaptation [40] takes place before the impact of climate change. The construc15

Article I, Section 14(h) and (i)
A complete list of objectives is: 1. Providing technical support and guidance to the Parties; 2.
Sharing of relevant information, knowledge, experience and good practices; 3. Promoting synergy
and strengthening engagement with national, regional and international organizations, centres and
networks; 4. Providing information and recommendations, drawing on adaptation good practices,
for consideration by the COP when providing guidance on means to incentivize the implementation
of adaptation actions, including …nance, technology and capacity-building; 5. Considering information communicated by Parties on their monitoring and review of adaptation actions, support
provided and received. For more details see .
16

11

tion of sea defenses, changing the design and/or use of houses to limit damage, are
good examples of anticipatory adaptations. Another important distinction is made
at the organisational/logistical level between planned and autonomous adaptation.
Planned adaptation is typically thought to be the realm of government, since it
refers largely to public goods and infrastructure which either require coordination
or are subject to economies of scale [40]. Again, ‡ood defenses in The Netherlands,
migration policies in Bangladesh or public health responses in the tropics are good
examples. Autonomous adaptation is more decentralised to the local or individual
level. In agriculture, it may take the form of crop switching, input switching or
irrigation [41, 42]. In industry, air-conditioning in factories represents one possible
adaptation to higher temperatures [43]. Rural-urban migration and urbanisation in
general are other potential adaptations which may to ameliorate productivity losses
[44, 12]. Adaptation can also be organised at the regional or international level, where
cooperation over shared river basins is required for instance. With these two distinctions (reactive/anticipatory and planned/autonomous) there are clearly 4 possible
categories of adaptation.17 .
Adaptation decisions clearly di¤er in the way in which they ameliorate the impact
of climate change. Some defensive investments, such as wetland ‡ood defenses, reduce
the losses associated with any given ‡ood by reducing the amount of ‡oodwater that
arrives at the doorstep. Other defensive adaptations limit the damages associated
with ‡oods which do arrive at the doorstep. For instance, changes to the design of
housing in ‡ood prone areas such as raising them on stilts, or changing the uses of
‡ood prone basements and lower ‡oors. Such activities are witnessed in ‡ood-prone
areas of The Netherlands and the Indus river delta in Pakistan, for instance [45].
Relocating further inland or to higher ground today might be another obvious cost
that could be incurred to avoid future climate damages. Alternatively, agents may
simply make saving decisions to ameliorate the disaster when it arrives by smoothing
consumption. Each strategy represents a type of protection.18 In agriculture, the
equivalent distinction could be drawn between investing in new, say drought resistant
crop varieties to stop the damage associated with a given drought, versus storing food
or saving money to ameliorate the loss of production from traditional varieties.
Thus a variety of potential adaptation decisions can be made at di¤erent levels
17

There are other distinctions in the literature, such as substitute and complementary adaptations

[39]
18

We are careful not to confuse: (i) self-insurance where one avoids marketed insurance and
bears the …nancial and other consequences oneself; (ii) self-protection which reduces the probability
of bad outcomes; and, (iii) a non-insurance investment to reduce damages that we call physical
adaptation.

12

of organisation and at di¤erent geographical scales. In our formal analysis we allow
for the possibility that physical adaptation measures are constrained and households
must rely on their consumption-saving decisions to adapt to future climate change.
This type of policy can be thought of as a ’macro’adaptation due to the generality
of saving and consumption-smoothing as an aggregate strategy. Physical adaptation
measures can be thought of as ’micro’adaptations, since they act at the level of the
individual agent. In any given case, an optimal response would weigh the bene…ts of
each strategy based on the institutional and technological constraints at hand [1].
The principal of subsidiarity is probably the relevant principle to determine the
appropriate level of decentralisation for any given adaptation decision, and we largely
abstract from this discussion here [40]. As we discuss in the following section, our
primary interest is in anticipatory adaptation, either by saving or investing in physical
adaptation. These anticipatory decisions will allow the agent either to respond to
climate outcomes in the future or limit the damages. Each decision uses the available
information on the likely progression of climate change and the states of the world
that may arise in the future. Our interest is to …nd out the value of more informative
signals on climate change in informing these adaptation decisions. We now describe
the framework of analysis in more detail.

4

The Framework

In this section we describe the framework with which we value the arrival of an
informative signal on future climate change for a decision maker deciding on how to
adapt to future states of the world. We use a stripped down 2-period model, which
reduces the problem to the essential features we wish to explore. The model re‡ects
the aforementioned aspects of adaptation decisions in that the agent may adapt by
either saving money or investing in damage reduction. The agent we consider can
just as well be thought of as a sovereign nation planning adaptation unilaterally: e.g.
Bangladesh, The Netherlands, the UK, an individual household making adaptation
decisions: crop choice; ‡ood defenses; saving, or anything in between. The model
embodies the principle of subsidiarity in that agent can be thought of as being at
the appropriate organisational level for the decision at hand and knows best how
much adaptation is desirable. Decisions are made against a backdrop of exogenous
mitigation policies and available information about the damage that climate change
will cause. Before introducing the theoretical model, the following section outlines
some measurement issues associated with valuing the arrival of informative signals
in the context of adaptation.
[insert Figures 2 and 3 here]
13

4.1

The impact of the impact of adaptation: measurement
issues

Our analysis considers adaptation measures at an aggregated level. Thus, for example, we do not assess whether a house is built on stilts, a wetland is restored, a
factory is put in a less convenient but better protected position or a less valuable but
more drought-resistant crop is planted. The …rst part of our model focuses merely
on raising or lowering period 1 consumption as the signal on the period 2 climate effects, i.e., the level of the future endowment, arrives. Subsequently, in our numerical
calculations, we consider period 1 physical adaptation expenditures.
Most economic analyses of climate change focus on GDP, and treat it almost
equivalently to welfare. Though our analysis is fundamentally economic, and pays
primary attention to consumption levels, it di¤ers from these treatments in several
ways. First, it recognizes that climate change may bring about e¤ects quite apart
from GDP that a¤ect welfare. For example, a higher sea level might destroy beaches
where humans had liked to recreate. Higher temperatures may a¤ect health via
pollution e¤ects or disease vectors. It would not be surprising that if climate change
is severe, a sizeable portion of the welfare losses, whether GDP-related or not, would
result from human actions in response to climate change that adversely a¤ected other
humans. For example, if climate change creates signi…cant migrations, which in turn
create debilitating ethnic tensions, wars or political disruptions, humans would be
much worse o¤, even if GDP were not in‡uenced. Such non-GDP e¤ects are implicitly
included in the loss of endowments in future periods.
Second, GDP, as currently measured, does not consider capital destroyed or rendered less valuable. Regions that experience natural disasters often experience rises
in measured GDP, given the reconstruction activity that follows. That would be true
even if all the reconstruction dollars came from the a¤ected communities. However,
that is just a mis-measurement problem. Our focus is on consumption as commonly
understood, goods and services available to provide consumptive pleasures. The
adaptation measures explicitly considered here all take place in the …rst period. Of
course, whether climate change is moderate or severe, there will also be responsive
adaptation in the second period, such as moving production facilities or building a
sea wall. The reader should think of the cost of those measures being added to any
losses in second-period consumption as being part of the reduction of the secondperiod endowment.
Thus, the basic framework we are considering chooses consumption and (subsequently) physical adaptation expenditures in period 1 taking into account what is
known about the the period 2 endowment. Its primary goal is to determine how im-

14

proved knowledge of that endowment a¤ects welfare and …rst-period expenditures.
There is one class of measures that could be undertaken to cope with climate change
that is not explicitly part of this analysis, geo-engineering and research into geoengineering. Geo-engineering could be thought of either as adaptation or mitigation. The former interpretation looks at its potential to decrease the losses from
climate change; the latter sees that, if successful, it actually reduces climate change.
Readers who wish to, however, could interpret …rst-period undertakings related to
geo-engineering as being self insurance expenditures.19

4.2

The Theoretical Model

We consider an agent at time 1
who is anticipating decisions that he or she
might make one instant later at t = 1, the outset of period 1. The level of income
for period 1, e1 , is known now, but the decision the agent must make is how much
of this endowment to consume immediately, c1 , and how much instead to save in a
zero-interest rate bank account.20 The agent knows that in the second, and …nal,
period, the level of climate change will be either moderate or severe and assigns
unconditional probabilities of p and 1 p respectively to those two states occurring.
Income for period 2, e2 , will be high, h, if climate change is moderate, or low, l, if
it is severe. To reiterate, income in period 2 is what is available for consumption.
Thus, it is net of adaptation expenditures made that period.
We consider the value of scienti…c knowledge that arrives in the interval t 2
[1
; 1], what we treat as a signal, that helps the agent re…ne the probabilities
of the moderate and severe states. A signal can be good or bad. A good signal
increases the probability that the agent assigns to climate change being moderate
to p + "G for 0
"G
1 p, whereas a bad signal reduces that probability to
p "B for 0 "B p: The realisation of climate change at time 2 is consistent with
these revised probabilities. In the case when "G = "B = 0; the signal is completely
uninformative. When "G = 1 p and "B = p, then the signal is fully informative and
all uncertainty is resolved at t = 1 rather than t = 2. Other permissible values of
"G and "B that do not lead respectively to a sum of 1 or 0 represent partial signals.
At time 1
, the agent does not know whether the signal will be good or bad.
However, he is anticipating scienti…c advances that will result with probability in
19

Geo-engineering as a response to climate change has been discussed at length in a special issue
of the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A [46]
20
The model could readily accommodate a non-zero interest rate. However, the notation would
become more complex whereas understanding would not be enhanced. In the numerical section
below, we also introduce a second investment option at t = 1, which is a physical adaptation
measure that gives partial economic protection in the severe state.

15

the good signal arriving and (1
) in the bad signal arriving. The parameter values
; "G , and "B are all known at t = 1
. For consistency with the unconditional
probabilities, these three variables are constrained through the relationship "B =
"G = (1
) for any p.
Since the bank interest rate is zero, the agent faces the budget constraint that
c1 + c2 = e1 + e2 , where c2 is period 2’s consumption level. Except in the case of a
full signal, e2 remains unknown at t = 1; thus uncertainty over period 2 consumption
will remain when the savings decision is made. c1 is chosen to maximise the agent’s
expected total welfare over the two periods. It is assumed that this welfare can
be expressed in terms of a time-separable utility function in the single consumption
good, U (c) ; where the rate of pure time preference is equal to zero.21 The agent’s
optimisation problem can then be expressed as:
subject to c1 + c2 = e1 + e2 :

= max E1 [U (c1 ) + U (c2 )]
c1

It is assumed that the utility function is monotonic increasing and concave (U 0 > 0; U 00 < 0).
These assumptions capture the characteristics that more consumption is preferred
to less and that the Pratt-Arrow measure of absolute risk aversion, A = U 00 =U 0 ;
is positive. We also impose the restriction that the [47] measure of absolute prudence, P = U 000 =U 00
0, or equivalently, that the third derivative of the utility
function is non-negative. This condition is intimately connected to risk aversion.
It is easily veri…ed that P = A A0 =A, so a su¢ cient (but not necessary) condition
for non-negative prudence is the agent’s coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion is not
increasing in consumption. As discussed below, prudence, an empirically plausible
assumption, plays an important role in this model.
The primary variable of interest is E1 [ ], the future welfare that the agent
currently expects to enjoy. Speci…cally, in what ways does scienti…c advances in
the interval t 2 [1
; 1] increase E1 [ ] despite the fact that the signal neither
enables the agent to reduce greenhouse gas emissions nor directly protect himself
from the economic consequences of climate change? A second variable of interest is
E1 [c1 ]. Under what circumstances will a signal lead to an increase in the expected
consumption level the next instant?
To begin, we compare the case of a full signal ( G = 1 p, B = p) to that of no
signal, ( G = B = 0). 22 In this case:
Result 1.
If we receive a full signal in the interval [1
to the case of receiving no signal:
21
22

; 1], then compared

Again, it would be straightforward to extend the model for non-zero rates of time preference.
We relax these assumptions in Result 2 below and our numerical illustrations.

16

1.1 Expected welfare, E1

[ ], increases.

1.2 Expected time t = 1 consumption, E1
prudence is positive (prudence is zero).

[c1 ] ; increases (stays the same) if

A formal proof of the result is presented in the Appendix, but the intuition behind
it is straightforward. If all uncertainty is removed at time 1 then we can perfectly
smooth consumption between times 1 and 2. c1 = c2 = (e1 + h) =2 if the signal is
good or c1 = c2 = (e1 + l) =2 if the signal is bad. Smooth consumption is always
optimal in this economy because U 00 < 0. Therefore a perfect signal allows us to
make the best possible consumption decision at t = 1 and expected welfare increases.
Result 1.2 follows from the precautionary savings motive described originally by
[48]. If an agent is prudent, then future endowment uncertainty will make him save
more today against possible future bad outcomes. A full signal completely eradicates
uncertainty and therefore the precautionary savings demand is eliminated, raising the
expected consumption level at t = 1.
Result 1.1 veri…es the importance of scienti…c advances even when such enhanced
knowledge does not lead to better (or even di¤erent) policies, hence not to any
alteration in either temperature change or future economic damages. In the appendix
we prove that this result applies also to partial signals for any value of p. We de…ne
a signal as getting stronger if "G increases.23
Result 2. As the strength of any signal that we receive in the interval [1
gets stronger:
2.1 Expected welfare, E1

; 1]

[ ], increases.

2.2 Expected time t = 1 consumption, E1
prudence is positive (prudence is zero).

[c1 ] ; increases (stays the same) if

This demonstrates that any scienti…c advances increases expected welfare as it
allows the agent to make a better consumption-savings choice in period 1. This
holds even when there are no projects available to help mitigate the impact of climate
change. This is our central qualitative lesson.
23

"B also increases as the signal gets stronger as "B = "G = (1

17

).

5

Numerical examples

We now consider the quantitative magnitude of the e¤ects described in the previous
section. For our numerical examples, we de…ne the moderate state to be the least
damaging 70% of possible outcomes and the severe state to include the most damaging 30% of outcomes. We are currently at year -5 and will, in …ve years’ time
(t = 1) ; through the advances of science, receive with equal probability ( = 0:5) a
good or a bad signal about future climate change. This will then enable us to update
our probability of the moderate state occurring to 70% + " or 70% " depending on
which signal we receive for " 2 [0; 0:3]. " = 0 represents an entirely uninformative
signal. When " = 0:3, a good signal is fully informative but a bad signal is not.
There is no material greenhouse gas e¤ect over this initial …ve year period. Then, t1
years after the initial signal, the true state of the world is perfectly revealed and, for
t2 = 300 t1 years, we evaluate the economic damages. For the baseline calibration
we set t1 = 50 years but, in sensitivity analysis, also consider t1 = 100 years.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) will take the value of Sm or Ss depending
on whether the state of the world is ultimately moderate (m) or severe (s). We
de…ne Tm;t = 2Sm 1 0:5t=100 , which loosely follows [49], to describe the evolution
of temperature should the state be moderate. This implies that, at t = 100, temperature changes equal the ECS and as t ! 1 so Tm;t ! 2Sm . We de…ne the
variable Ts;t = 2Ss 1 0:5t=100 analogously for the severe state.
It is assumed that over the …rst time interval, t 2 [1; t1 ], the agent is currently
certain that the temperature will follow Tm;t . During the second period, which
ends three hundred years after the signal is received, the temperature also follows
Tm;t if the state is moderate. However, if the state is severe, then temperatures
move smoothly away from the Tm;t path towards the Ts;t trajectory as t ! 300.
Speci…cally, if the state is severe, then for t 2 [t1 + 1; 300], Tt = wt Tm;t + (1 wt ) Ts;t
for a weighting function wt de…ned by:
wt =

1
;
1 + exp ( )

= 0:04 (t

(t1 + 300) =2) :

This is an inverted S shaped sigmoid function that gives a smooth transition over
the period [t1 + 1; 300]. Notice that when t = t1 + t2 =2, or half way through the
second period, the temperature is half way between Tm;t and Ts;t .
The values of S are calibrated as follows. [49] describes the probability density
function for the ECS by a displaced gamma distribution, ( ; ; c) with shape parameter = 3:8, scale parameter = 0:92 and location parameter c = 1:13. This
gives a mean, standard deviation and skewness for the ECS of 3 degrees, 2.11 degrees and 9.76 respectively. We take the “moderate” outcome to represent values
18

of the ECS that are less than 3.8 degrees. This is the value at which the cumulative
distribution function for ( ; ; c) is 70%. The severe outcomes represent values of
ECS over 3.80 degrees.
To choose Sm and Ss , we take the mean of the truncated displaced gamma distribution ( ; ; c; u; l) where u and l are the upper and lower points of the truncation
of the distribution. For the moderate state, u = 3:80 and l = c, while for the severe
state, u = 1 and l = 3:80.24 This gives values of Sm = 1:89 degrees and Ss = 5:59
degrees. At t = 300, these correspond to temperature rises of 3.31 degrees and 9.74
degrees respectively if t1 = 50 years, both well exceeding the 2 degree limit. We plot
the evolution of temperature for the severe and moderate states in the top graph of
Figure 4.
[Insert Figure 4 around here]
The change in temperature over time is converted into damages as follows. Let
e0 = 1 describe the level of income today. In the absence of climate change damage,
et = (1 + g)t e0 for some …xed underlying growth rate g. To keep the model as parsimonious as possible, we set g = 0, but again the analysis could be easily adapted to
consider non-zero core growth rates. In the presence of climate change, endowment
is a¤ected by a loss function L (Tt ) which depends on the level of temperature change
at that given time. We take a multiplicative loss form, et = L (Tt ) et where the loss
function is given by a negative quadratic exponential form used by [51] and [49, 52]:
L (Tt ) = exp

T2

for some constant . We set this parameter value equal to = 0:003206. This
represents a 5% loss in income should the temperature rise by 4 degrees centigrade.
[49] notes that this is consistent with the IPCC upper 83% estimate of potential
damages for this level of temperature change. The bottom graph in Figure 4 plots
income levels under the moderate and severe scenarios over the interval t 2 [0; 300]
when t1 = 50 years.25
Pt1
Total
endowment
in
the
…rst
period,
E
=
1
t=1 et and in the second period E2 =
P300
t=t1 +1 et . When t1 = 50 years, average annual income in the …rst period is very
close to current levels (E1 =t1 = 0:9985). For the second period, average annual
24

Closed form expressions for the means of truncated univariate distributions are given in [50].
We actually believe that this estimate may be far too low because it fails to take into account
the expectation in loss of GDP, correctly measured, that human actions, such as war and ethnic
strife might bring to the world.
25

19

income is not heavily a¤ected in the moderate state (E2 =t2 = 0:9787) but in the
severe state drops by just over 11% (E2 =t2 = 0:8885) compared to the current level.
In sensitivity analysis below we also consider the case when E2 =t2 = 0:8.
Since there are no within-period changes in information and as the rate of pure
time preference is zero, this implies that the optimal consumption level remains
constant within time periods, but will change from period 1 to period 2. We denote
the annual consumption levels by c1 and c2 ; and note that the budget constraint
is t1 c1 + t2 c2 = E1 + E2 . The optimisation problem facing the agent is directly
analogous to that described in the theoretical section above. In period 1, endowment
can either be saved in a risk-free zero-interest rate bank account or consumed. The
savings decision will be in‡uenced by the signal received. Second period consumption
is determined by the realisation of S and the savings decision taken in period 1. If
we save $b in the bank each year in period 1, then period 2 consumption is raised by
$bt1 =t2 in each year.
We consider …ve utility functions. Three have constant relative risk aversion
(CRRA), which we call “Gamma = 0.5”, “Gamma = 3”and “Log”respectively:
8 1
1
< ct
2 f0:5; 3g
:
U (ct ) =
: 1
ln (ct )
=1

The remaining two functions have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA or “Exponential”), U (ct ) = exp ( ct ) ; and zero prudence (“Quadratic”), U (ct ) = 2ct
0:5c2t . Both the exponential and quadratic utility functions have the same level
of risk aversion as log utility at the current level of endowment ct = e0 = 1. In
addition, the quadratic utility function has the same marginal utility as log utility
at this level of consumption. This makes the utility functions broadly comparable
in the analysis.
To determine the optimal level of consumption in the …rst time period, we use
a numerical solver. We report results for E1 [c1 ] = 0:5 (c1G + c1B ) and E1 [ ]
= 0:5 ( G + B ) where c1G and c1B represent optimal annual period 1 consumption
levels contingent on receiving a good and bad signal respectively.
G and
B
represent expected welfare contingent on these respective signals. We report E1 [ ]
in certainty equivalent consumption form, cCE : This variable is de…ned by 300U (cCE )
= 0:5 ( G + B ). The bene…t of a signal, ", is then expressed in terms of the relative
change in certainty equivalent consumption with a signal compared to the case of no
signal: cCE (") =cCE (" = 0) 1.
Figure 5 reports results for E1 [c1 ] and cCE (") =cCE (" = 0) 1 as the strength
of the signal changes when t1 = 50 years. These results are consistent with the
20

theoretical results described above. In all cases expected welfare is improved by a
stronger signal as it allows us better to smooth consumption between periods. The
expected level of period 1 consumption also uniformly increases with the strength of
the signal for all utility functions except the quadratic, for which E1 [c1 ] is invariant
for any level of signal. That is because this utility function has zero prudence.
[Insert Figure 5 around here]
The e¤ects are of considerable economic signi…cance at the global level. Based
on world GDP of $87.25tn in 2013 (CIA World Factbook 2015), a full good signal
(" = 0:3) compared to no signal increases global welfare, in certainty equivalent consumption terms, by between $2.5bn ( = 0:5) and $16.7bn ( = 3) per year for
the next 300 years. Let us stress again that this comes not from either changing
future temperature levels, or by reducing our economic exposure to climate change,
but instead just by learning something earlier about the true level of the ECS which
enables us to make better consumption and savings decisions.
Taking log utility as an example, with no signal, each year we consume 95.8% of
our time 0 endowment level, e0 = 1, during this period, saving 4.1% annually in a
bank for the second period. With a full signal, annual savings go down to 1.65% of
time zero income if the signal is good, while rising to 6.33% if the signal is bad. It is
clear that early information has a material a¤ect on behaviour and, overall, increases
the expectation that we calculate today of future wellbeing.

5.1

Physical adaptation measures against the severe state

In the theoretical section and the …rst set of numerical examples, the only mechanism
by which agents are able to smooth consumption between the …rst and second periods
is through savings at a zero risk-free rate. In this subsection, we introduce a second
option for moving resources to the second period. The agent can now choose, in
addition to savings, to allocate money over the …rst t1 years into a real investment
project that partially protects against the severe outcome, but that has no e¤ect
should the state turn out to be moderate. We might imagine this as, for example,
the Dutch enhancing their sea defences to protect against the possibility of ’very
high sea level rises’, or in any nation, factories being placed in less convenient but
more secure locations.26 This project does not alter the evolution of Tt , but instead
partially mitigates against the economic impact of severe climate change.
26

For a discussion of how technology can lead to more ‡exible adaptation to environmental change
without overly exploiting natural systems, see [53]

21

Let E2 = h; l represent the total income levels over years t 2 [t1 + 1; 300] in the
absence of any physical adaptation if S = Sm , Ss respectively. On the calibrations
given above, h = 244:69 and l = 222:13. Denote by y 0 the annual investment in
the mitigation project over the …rst t1 years. Then total endowment over the second
period is unchanged if the state is moderate, but equals l if the state is severe,
where:
l

= h
= h

(h
(h

l) exp (20y ln (0:5))
l) 0:520y

(1)

l = l as required if y = 0 and l = h if y = 1. In…nite investment – obviously
impossible since period 1 has only a …nite endowment – in this physical adaptation
measure will make the economic impacts of moderate and severe temperature changes
the same. If we invest 5% of current income in the project for the next t1 years
(y = 0:05), then we halve the economic di¤erential between the severe and moderate
outcomes compared to the case when y = 0. The residual b = e1 c1 y is saved
in the bank at a zero interest rate.27
We again use a numerical solver to choose c1 and y so as to optimise welfare
at t = 1 dependent on the signal that we receive. We impose the restriction that
c1 + y e1 , which prohibits the agent from borrowing resources against the future.
In Figure 6 we report E1 [y] and E1 [b]; the amount we expect to invest in physical
adaptation and save in the bank respectively.
[Insert Figure 6 around here]
Both these variables are non-montonic as the signal strengthens. For all utility
functions, with " = 0, it is optimal to invest approximately 5% of time 1 endowment
in the physical adaptation measure, with nothing saved in the bank. As the strength
of the signal increases, so physical adaptation declines or increases depending on
whether the signal is good or bad. Initially the decline with a good signal is greater
than the increase with a bad signal, so the expected level of mitigation investment
decreases. However, once the signal reaches a certain strength (approximately " =
0:15) the level of physical adaptation following a good signal falls to zero. Beyond
this point, E1 [y] increases along with the signal strength, driven entirely by higher
levels of mitigative investment following a bad signal.
27

In sensitivity analysis below, we consider the case when t1 = 100 years. We then change
equation 1 so that we need to invest 2% of income per year over this horizon to halve the impact
of severe climate change compared to the moderate outcome.

22

The expected level of bank savings is zero with no signal; we are better investing
in the physical adaptation measure. Further, we never use the bank if the signal is
bad. However, when the signal is good and once investment in mitigation approaches
zero, then we start to put savings away. For certain moderate signals money is both
saved in the bank and invested in the physical adaptation measure, but then the riskfree savings absorb everything invested on behalf of period 2. This savings level then
drops as the signal gets stronger still, as there is less need to smooth consumption
between the two time periods. In all cases, investment in the physical adaptation
measure is expected to be higher than the level of bank savings as it is, in general,
a much more e¤ective way of promoting welfare.28
Figure 7 is analogous to Figure 5, addressing the case when there is the potential
to undertake physical adaptation.
[Insert Figure 7 around here]
Consumption now takes a more complex, non-linear, form compared to when
there is no opportunity to invest in physical adaptation. Even when prudence is
zero (quadratic utility) expected consumption varies with the strength of the signal.
In all cases, E1 (c1 ) initially increases as the signal strengthens, but then it declines
once " is greater than approximately 0.05. This result is again driven by behaviour
following a bad signal, when the desire to move endowment away from consumption
and into the self insurance mechanism gets very strong for greater ".
As intuition would suggest, expected welfare remains monotonic increasing in the
strength of the signal. The e¤ect is an order of magnitude greater in the presence
of a physical adaptation measure compared to when there is no project that partly
mitigates against the economic consequences of severe temperature change. Now
the expected annual gain at the global level in consumption equivalent terms when
going from no signal to a full good signal is approximately $500bn in all cases: The
value of early information increases substantially if we can directly protect ourselves
against severe outcomes.

5.2

Heterogeneous outcomes

We now incorporate the possibility that not everyone will be equally a¤ected by a
severe outcome. If the state of the world is moderate, then the total endowment
over the period t 2 [t1 + 1; 300] is E2 = h with certainty. However, if climate change
is severe then, with 5% probability, E2 = 0:7l. This re‡ects the fact that some
28

This result, of course, comes from the posited values in equation 5.1

23

members of the population are likely to be much more severely a¤ected by extreme
climate change than others and we are currently unable to determine whether or
not we are in the high-risk group. Alternatively, we might posit that individuals
are saving or self insuring for the next generation, and care about all its members
equally. For the 95% of the population who are not a¤ected, E2 = 1.0158l. This
keeps the economy-wide average income level in the severe state the same as in the
homogeneous agent example. l follows equation 1 for both the 95% and 5% groups.
Thus, a 5% endowment spend over the next t1 = 50 years will halve the di¤erence in
income between the moderate and severe states when compared to the no insurance
case.
Both in the presence and absence of a mitigative project, the broad shapes of
expected consumption, welfare and savings follow the patterns described in Figures
5-7. When physical adaptation is not possible, t = 1 expected consumption will
increase for all four of the positive prudence utility functions as the signal gets
stronger. For all …ve utility functions, expected welfare increases in signal strength.
Further, the relative bene…t of the full good signal when compared to no signal also
now rises for all four of the positive prudence utility functions when compared to the
heterogeneous agent model. For example, for = 3, the annual certainty equivalent
consumption level globally rises from $16.7bn for the homogeneous agent model to
$23.4bn when there are unequal outcomes.
In the presence of a physical adaptation measure, expected consumption at t = 1
decreases slightly compared to the homogeneous agent model in all cases. The
reduced consumption is primarily transferred into the mitigative project. We invest
more in physical adaptation with stronger good signals than in the homogeneous
agent case, resulting in the turning points in expected insurance investment and
expected consumption being slightly further to the right than in the top graphs of
Figures 6 and 7.
With the potential to self insure and heterogenous agents, the annual certainty
equivalent bene…t from a full good signal is now over half a billion dollars for all
utility functions considered. This is clearly a major societal gain, and it comes even
though there is no reduction in future climate change itself.
In Table 1 we summarise the gains in welfare, cCE (") =cCE (" = 0) 1; for sixteen
models when receiving the full good signal versus no signal. These unit combinations
of four di¤erent frameworks: (i) t1 = 50 years and t1 = 100 years; (ii) l calibrated
as described above and l = 0:8t2 , or income is 80% per year of current endowment
in the second period if the state is severe; (iii) homogenous and heterogeneous agent
models, and; (iv) bank savings only and bank savings plus the potential to employ
the physical adaptation measure.
24

[Insert Table 1 around here]
In all cases, the signal improves welfare, as expected. For our particular parameter values, though not in general, greater gains came from the shorter …rst period
(t1 = 50 years). In general, welfare is improved more when physical adaptation
measures are available, income levels are low in the severe state, and agents have
heterogeneous incomes.

6

Conclusion

Climate scientists would have good reason to feel discouraged. Policy makers may
pay strong lip service to their warnings, but they take modest actions. Advances in
the science have also disappointed: Scientists’ …ndings have gained little precision
in decades, and strong variation and disagreement remains across the assessments
of di¤erent climate models and among experts. Fortunately, the uncertainty that
blights predictions of climate change and its impacts is likely to be reduced in some
key areas. As long as scienti…c research continues, some of Nature’s secrets will
inevitably be revealed. Yet, what would be the value of such an advance in the
science if policy makers do not respond? This article responds to this question and
provides a di¤erent and supplementary justi…cation for a vigorous climate science
research e¤ort: better predictions on the consequences of climate change will lead to
better decisions on adaptation.
The basic intuition behind this result is as follows. If future climate change will be
severe, GDP will be signi…cantly impaired and major capital losses will be incurred.
If climate change is only moderate, the losses will be much less. The welfare that
we can expect when confronted by such uncertainty depends on the information we
have about the likelihood of severe and moderate climate change, and how we use
this information in making our adaptation decisions. Our welfare will therefore also
depend on how ‡exible our adaptation strategies are. The adaptation strategies we
address are saving for an impaired tomorrow and physical adaptation measures, such
as building seawalls or locating facilities in less desirable but less vulnerable locations.
Better predictions on the probabilities of severe and moderate consequences will
improve adaptation decisions and thus raise welfare. Even when we are in a constrained world in which the only adaptation decision concerns saving for an uncertain
future. Better predictions will raise expected welfare by reducing the need for precautionary savings, and allowing more e¤ective consumption smoothing. When physical
adaptation measures are also available, the prospect of improved signals is valued
even higher. In essence, a better signal allows us to …nd the correct balance between
25

damage limitation investments and precautionary saving and tailor the adaptation
to the e¤ects of climate change in di¤erent future states of the world.
Given the renewed prominence of adaptation in the high-level negotiations on
climate change, this is at the very least a morale boosting result for climate scientists.
The results show there is good reason to provide more re…ned scienti…c information
about climate change at the level of those who inevitably must adapt.

References
[1] IPCC 2014. Summary for policymakers. In Climate Change 2014: Impacts,Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ, Mach
KJ Mastrandrea MD, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, Estrada YO, Genova RC,
Girma B, Kissel ES, Levy AN, MacCracken S, Mastrandrea PR, and White LL
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and NewYork,
NY, USA, pp. 1 32.
[2] IPCC 2013 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth
sessment Report, Final Synthesis Report for Policy Makers.
http://www.ipcc.ch/index.htm.

AsSee

[3] IPCC 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report, Working Group I. http://www.ipcc.ch/index.htm.
[4] Copenhagen
Accord
(2009).
FCCC/CP/2009/11/Add.1
http:/unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/cop15/eng/11a01.pdf.

See

[5] Barrett S, Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental TreatyMaking, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[6] Barrett S, The theory of international environmental agreements, in: Maler KG
and Vincent J (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental Economics, vol. 3, Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 2005, 1457–1516.
[7] Finus M 2001. Game Theory and International Environmental Cooperation, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.
[8] Wagner UJ 2001. The design of stable international environmental agreements:
economic theory and political economy, textitJournal of Economic Surveys 15,
3, 377 411.
26

[9] Barrett, S 2013. Climate treaties and approaching catastrophes, J Environ Econ
Manage, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2012.12.004i
[10] Groom B, Gatti JRJ, Goeschl T and Swanson T 2012. Bargaining over Global
Public Goods. Chapter 12 In: Global Environmental Commons: Analytical and
Political Challenges in Building Governance Mechanisms, Edited by Brousseau
E, Dedeurwaerdere T, Jouvet P-A and Willinger M, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
[11] Wolfram C, Shelef O, and Gertler PJ 2012. How will energy demand develop
in the developing world?. NBER working paper 17747. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[12] Kahn M 2014. Climate Change Adaptation: Lessons from Urban Economics. NBER Working Paper 20716, National Bureau of Economic Research
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20716
[13] Schelling T 1995. Intergenerational Discounting. Energy Pol., 23, 4 5, 395 401.
[14] Roy D and Zeckhauser R 2015. Grappling with Ignorance: Frameworks from
Decision Theory, Lessons from Literature. Journal of Bene…t Cost Analysis,
forthcoming.
[15] Millner A 2012. Climate prediction for adaptation: Who needs what?, Climatic
Change, 110, 1 2, 143 167 http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0073-1
[16] Dessai S, Hulme M, Lempert R and Pielke Jr R 2007. Climate prediction: a
limit to adaptation? Ch 5 in Adapting to Climate Change: Thresholds, Values, Governance, eds. Adger WN, Lorenzoni I and Oï¿12 Brien KL. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
[17] Seo NJ and Mendelsohn R 2012. An analysis of crop choice: Adapting to climate
change in South American farms, Ecol. Econ. 67, 109–116.
[18] Epstein LG 1980. Decision Making and the Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty,
Int. Econ. Rev., 21, 2, 269 83.
[19] Gollier C, Jullien B and Treich N 2000. Scienti…c progress and irreversibility:
an economic interpretation of the Precautionary Principle. J. Pub. Econ., 75,
229–253. w

27

[20] Kelly DL and Kolstad CD 1999. Bayesian learning, growth, and pollution, J.
Econ. Dyn. Contr. 23 4, 491 518.
[21] Millner A, Dietz S, Heal G (2013) Scienti…c ambiguity and climate policy. Environ Resource Econ 55: 21–46.
[22] Hall JW, Fu G and Lawry J 2007. Imprecise probabilities of climate change:
aggregation of fuzzy scenarios and model uncertainties, Climatic Change 81,
3–4, 265 281
[23] Weitzman ML 2010. What Is The Damages Function For Global Warming —
And What Di¤erence Might It Make?. Climate Change Economics 1, 1, 57 69.
[24] Pindyck RS 2013. The Climate Policy Dilemma. Rev Environ Econ Policy 7, 2,
219 237.
[25] Nordhaus W 2008. A question of balance. Princeton Press.
[26] Freeman MC, Wagner G and Zeckhauser R 2015. Uncertainty, Scienti…c advances on Climate Change, and Consumption Decisions, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.
A This edition of the journal.
[27] Roe GH and Baker MB 2007. Why Is Climate Sensitivity So Unpredictable?
Science, 318 pp 629 33.
[28] Wagner G and Weitzman ML 2015. Climate Shock: the Economic Consequences
of a Hotter Planet. Princeton University Press.
[29] Millner A, 2011. Do Probabilistic expert elicitations capture scientists’
uncertainty about climate change?, Climatic Change, 116, 427 436,
doi.10.1007/s10584-012-0620-4
[30] Zickfeld K, Morgan MG, Frame DJ, Keith DW (2010) Expert judgments about
transient climate response to alternative future trajectories of radiative forcing.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 28, 12451 12456. doi:10.1073/pnas.0908906107
[31] Botzen WJW, Aerts, JCJH and van den Bergh JCJM 2009. Willingness of
homeowners to mitigate climate risk through insurance. Ecol. Econ., 68 8 9,
2265 2277.
[32] Huppert HE and Sparks RSJ 2006. Extreme natural hazards: population
growth, globalization and environmental change. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 364,
1875 1888, doi:10.1098/rsta.2006.1803.
28

[33] Pielke Jr RA, Sarewitz D and Byerly Jr R 2000. Decision making and the future
of nature: understanding and using predictions, in Prediction: Science, Decision
Making and the Future of Nature Sarewitz D, Pielke Jr RA and Byerly Jr , R
(eds.). Washington, DC : Island Press, 361–387.
[34] Pielke Jr R, Prins G, Rayner S and Sareqitz D 2007. Lifting the taboo on
adaptation. Nature, 445, 8.
[35] Stern N 2007. The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[36] Adger NW, Paavola J, Huq S and Mace MJ 2008. Fairness in adaptation to
climate change. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[37] Huq S, Rahman A, Konate M, Sokona Y and Reid H 2004. Mainstreaming
adaptation to climate change in Least Developed Countries (LDCs). Clim. Pol.,
4, 1, 25 43.
[38] CAF 2007. The Cancun Adaptation Framework, http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/2010/cop16/eng/07a01.pdf
[39] Fankhauser S, Smith J, Tol R 1999. Weathering climate change: some simple
rules to guide adaptation decisions, Ecol. Econ. 30, 67–78.
[40] Konrad, KA and Thum MP 2012. The Role of Economic Policy in Climate
Change Adaptation. Working Paper of the Max Planck Institute for Tax Law
and Public Finance No. 2012 08,http://ssrn.com/abstract=2158578
[41] Gorst A, Groom B and Dehlavi A 2015. Crop Productivity and Adaptation to
Climate Change in Pakistan. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change
and the Environment Working paper No. 189.
[42] Di Falco S, Veronesi M and Yesuf M 2011. Does Adaptation to Climate Change
Provide Food Security? Micro Evidence from Ethiopia. Amer. J. Ag. Econ. 93
3, 829 846.
[43] Dell M, Jones BF and Olken BA 2014. What Do We Learn from the Weather?
The New Climate-Economy Literature. J. Econ. Lit., 52, 3, 740 98.
[44] Kahn M 2005. The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income,
Geography, and Institutions. Rev. Econ. Stat., 87 2, 271 284.

29

[45] Botzen, WJW and van den Bergh, JCJM 2012. Risk attitudes to low-probability
climate change risks: WTP for ‡ood insurance. J. Econ. Beh. and Org., 82, 1,
151 166.
[46] Ridgwell A, Freeman C and Lampitt R (eds) 2012. Geoengineering: taking control of our planet’s climate?, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 370, 1974,
[47] Kimball, Miles S 1990. Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large.
Econometrica, 58 1, 53 73.
[48] Leland, Hayne E 1968. Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for
Saving, Q J Econ, 82 3, 465 473.
[49] Pindyck, Robert S. 2012. Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy. J
Environ Econ Manage, 63 3, 289 303. (doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2011.12.001).
[50] Jawitz James W 2004. Moments of Truncated Continuous Univariate Distributions. Adv Water Resour, 27 3, 269 281 (doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2003.12.002).
[51] Weitzman, Martin L. 2009. On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate Change. Rev Econ Stat, 91 1, 1 19.
(doi:10.1162/rest.91.1.1).
[52] Pindyck, Robert S. 2013. The Climate Policy Dilemma. Rev Environ Econ Policy, 7 2, 219 237. (doi: 10.1093/reep/ret007).
[53] Berkhout F, Gouldson AP 2003. Shaping, Modulating, Adapting: Perspectives
on technology, environment and policy, In: Berkhout F, Leach, M and Scoones
I (Eds) Negotiating Environmental Change: Advances in environmental social
science, Edward Elgar.
[54] Marshak, Jacob 1971. Economics of Information Systems, J Am Stat Assoc, 66
333, 192 219.
[55] Hirshleifer J, John G. Riley 1979. The Analytics of Uncertainty and Information
- An Expository Survey. J Econ Lit, 17 4, 1375 1421.

7

Appendix

In this appendix we prove Results 1 and 2.

30

7.1

Result 1

If we receive the full signal at t = 1, then future endowment is fully known. In
this case, given that the utility function is concave, it is optimal to perfectly smooth
consumption across time: ct = (e1 + e2 ) =2 for t = 1; 2. Therefore the expected
welfare at time t = 1
is:
E1

[ ] = E1

2U

e1 + e2
2

:

With no signal, E1 [ ] = ; since there is no new information. Expectations are
the same whether taken at time t = 1
or t = 1. Therefore:
E1

[ ] = max U (c1 ) + E1 U (e2 + e1
c1

c1 ):

Undertaking the optimisation gives:
U 0 (c1 ) = E1 U 0 (e2 + e1

c1 );

where c1 denotes the optimal consumption level. By Jensen’s inequality
E1 U 0 (e2 + e1

c1 )

U 0 (E1

[e2 + e1 ]

c1 )

U 000 ( )

0;

where the inequality is strict if and only if U 000 ( ) = 0. Then
U 0 (c1 )

U 0 (E1

[e2 + e1 ]

Now notice that if
c 1 = E1

c1 )

e2 + e1
;
2

U 000 ( )

0:

(2)

(3)

then the left- and right-hand sides of equation (2) are equal. This is the expected
level of time 1 consumption under a full signal. When equation (2) is an inequality,
c1 must be less than the right hand side of equation (3) because U 00 ( ) < 0. This
proves Result 1.2.
To establish Result 1.1, note that c1 cannot be equal to both (e1 + l) =2 and
(e1 + h) =2, the optimal consumption levels at time t = 1 following the receipt of a
bad and good signal respectively. Since consumption decisions under no signal do not
optimise expected welfare in the presence of a signal, the result follows immediately.
This is also a special case of Result A2.4 below.

31

7.2

Result 2

We prove four sub-results.
immediately

From them Result 2 in the body of the text follows

Result A2. If we receive a partial signal in the interval [1

; 1], then:

A2.1 Let 21 denote the volatility of time 2 endowment, e2 , as calculated at time 1.
Let 21 = 2G if the signal received is good and 21 = 2B if the signal received is
bad. Then 2G < 2 if "G > 1 2p and 2B < 2 if "B > 2p 1, where 2 is
the volatility of time 2 endowment calculated at time 1
. In addition, the
2
,
+
(1
) 2B , is monotonic
expectation of 21 as calculated at time 1
G
decreasing in the strength of the signal, "G .
A2.2 If prudence is zero, then the expectation at time t = 1 of time 1 consumption,
E1 [c1 ] ; is una¤ected by the anticipation of any signal.
A2.3 If prudence is positive, then the stronger the signal that we will receive (the
greater is "G ), the higher is our expectation of time 1 consumption, E1 [c1 ].
A2.4 For all monotonic increasing and concave utility functions, the stronger the
signal that we will receive, the larger is the expected welfare as calculated at
time t = 1
; E1 [ ]
Proof. Use the notation = ph + (1 p) l and 2 = p (h
)2 + (1 p) (l
)2
to denote the mean and variance of time 2 endowment conditional on the information
available at t = 1
. It is straightforward to verify that 2 = p (1 p) (h l)2 .
Similarly, let G = (p + "G ) h + (1 p "G ) l, B = (p "B ) h + (1 p + "B ) l;
2
2
2
2
2
"B ) (h
p "G ) (l
B) +
G ) + (1
G ) , and B = (p
G = (p + "G ) (h
2
(1 p + "B ) (l
B ) denote the means and variances of time 2 endowment conditional on receiving the good (G) and bad (B) signal in the interval [1
; 1]. It is
again straightforward to verify that, for G = "G (h l) and B = "B (h l):
G
B
2
G
2
B

=
=
=
=

+

G
B

2

+ "G (1
2
"B (1

2
G

< 2 if and only if 1 2p "G < 0.
straightforward to verify that:
2
G

+ (1

)

2
B

=

l)2
l)2 :

2p "G ) (h
2p + "B ) (h
2
B

For
2

1
32

<

2

,1

"2G (h

2p + "B > 0. It is also
l)2 ;

which decreases as "G increases. This proves Result A2.1.
Now consider the welfare function at time 1 conditional on receiving the good
signal, G . Again, EG [ ] denotes the expectation taken at time t = 1 conditional
on the good signal.
G

= max U (c1 ) + EG [U (e1 + e2

c1 )] :

c1

De…ne the variable as follows. Let e2 = G + = + G + for = h
or
G
=l
depending on which state of the world occurs at t = 2. Undertaking
G
the optimisation and using c1G to denote optimal consumption at time 1 conditional
on receiving the good signal:
U 0 (c1G ) = EG [U 0 (e1 +

+

G

+

(4)

c1G )] :

First consider the case when U 000 ( ) = 0. Then, by Jensen’s inequality:
U 0 (c1G ) = U 0 (e1 +
showing immediately that c1G = (e1 +
receive the bad signal, c1B = (e1 +
E1

+

G

c1G ) ;

+ G )=2. By an analogous argument, if we
B ) =2. This results in

[c1 ] =

c1G + (1
) c1B
(1
e1 +
G
+
=
2
2
"G (1
e1 +
+
=
2
2

)

B

) "B

(h

l) ;

and, through the relation between "G and "B ; this is equal to (e1 + )=2 for any
potential signal that we might receive. This proves Result A2.2.
With U 000 ( ) > 0, we can view U 0 ( ) as a pseudo-utility function that is monotonic
decreasing and convex. Again, suppose that we have received the good signal at
t = 1. Note that V ar ( ) = 2G and, as usual, c2G = e1 +e2 c1G = e1 + + G + c1G .
Using a standard Pratt-Arrow approach, we can replace this stochastic consumption
with the expected consumption level e1 + + G c1G minus a prudence adjustment
G:
EG [U 0 (e1 +

+

G

+

c1G )] = U 0 (e1 + + G c1G
1 2 U 000 (e1 + + G
G
2 G U 00 (e1 + + G
1 2
=
PG ;
2 G
33

G)

c1G )
c1G )

where PG = U 000 (e1 + + G c1G ) = U 00 (e1 + + G c1G ) is the prudence of
consumption at time 2 in the good state if endowment equals the expected value at
this time conditional on the signal received at t = 1.
Given this, from equation 4:
c1G =

e1 +

+
2

G

G

:

Similarly,
c1B =
B

=

e1 +

B

B

2
1
2

2
B PB :

Therefore, under the assumption that prudence is approximately constant at value
P over the range of interest:
E1

[c1 ] =

c1G + (1
) c1B
"G (1
e1 +
+
=
2
2
e1 +
2
=
2
1

) "B

(h

"2G (h

2
G

l)
l)2

+ (1
4

)

2
B

P

P
:
4

The …nal term gets less negative the stronger is the signal "G . A more powerful
signal increases expected time 1 consumption provided the agent is prudent. This
proves Result A2.3.
Result A2.4 follows immediately from, for example, [54] and [55]. A less clear
signal can be treated as a “garbled” interpretation of a stronger signal. As an
example, consider a world where unconditionally the moderate and severe outcomes
at t = 2 are equally likely. Assume that, if we receive the stronger good (bad)
signal at t = 1, then the probability of having the moderate outcome is revised to
70% (30%). A good (bad) weaker signal instead revises these probabilities to 60%
(40%).
The weak signal can be imaged as a world where we receive the strong signal, but
where it may be misread or “garbled”. In the example, imagine that there is a 25%
chance that we will mis-read a true good (bad) strong signal as being bad (good)
instead. Then on receiving a truly good strong signal, there is a 75% probability that
this will be interpreted correctly as a good strong signal and a 25% that it will be
mistakenly read as a bad strong signal. The estimated probability of the moderate
state occurring at time 2 is 75%*70% +25%*30% = 60% conditional on receiving
34

this garbled signal. Similarly, on receipt of a bad signal, the estimated probability
of the moderate state occurring at time 2 is 75%*30% +25%*70% = 40%. The
probabilities are identical to those we assign under the weaker signal in the absence
of garbling. As the probabilities of the stronger signal bracket the probabilities
of the weaker signal, it is generally true that weaker signals can be interpreted as
garbled stronger signals.
Under these conditions, as argued by [55] (p. 1397), the stronger signal “must
lead to higher utility so long as there is any change in best conditional action under
either message”. As shown above, optimal consumption levels at t = 1 depend on
the value of "G , so conditional action does depend on the strength of the message.
This completes the proof of Result A2.4

35

36
1.92
80.22
2.01
80.32

Homogeneous: savings only
Homogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation
Heterogeneous: savings only
Heterogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation

t1 = 100 and t2 = 200
l calibrated
0.98
3.17
0.91
48.35 49.62
48.31
1.12
4.35
0.95
49.23 52.12
49.08
l = 0:8e0
3.98 13.52
3.48
80.25 80.18
80.23
4.24 15.90
3.55
80.44 80.73
80.41

3.08
80.22
3.08
80.38

0.85
48.28
0.85
48.96

2.01
100.65
2.01
100.86

0.51
58.06
0.51
58.96

= 3 Exponential Quadratic

t1 = 50 and t2 = 250
l calibrated
0.60
1.92
0.55
58.00 57.21
58.03
0.68
2.68
0.58
59.17 60.60
59.05
l = 0:8e0
2.66
9.08
2.29
100.36 97.66
100.52
2.84 10.75
2.33
100.61 98.50
100.75

Log

Table 1. Certainty Equivalent Gains in Annual Consumption from a Full Signal (measured in
basis points). For the sixteen calibrations and …ve utility functions considered, this table presents the basis
point increase in the certainty equivalent annual consumption level that arises as a consequence of having a
full signal rather than no signal at the start of t = 1; cCE (") =cCE (" = 0) 1. l is the income in the severe
state, and is either calibrated as described in the body of the text or set equal to 80% of current endowment.

0.48
47.97
0.53
48.42

1.28
101.16
1.34
101.29

Homogeneous: savings only
Homogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation
Heterogeneous: savings only
Heterogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation

Homogeneous: savings only
Homogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation
Heterogeneous: savings only
Heterogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation

0.29
58.23
0.32
58.82

Homogenoeus: savings only
Homogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation
Heterogeneous: savings only
Heterogeneous: savings and phys. adaptation

= 0:5

Figure 1: Estimates of Climate Sensitivity Probability Densities [21]

Figure 2: Timeline for valuation, decision and realisation of uncertainty

37

Figure 3: Illustration of ‘Good’signals and ‘Bad’signals

38

10

Temperature change (degrees centigrade)

9
Moderate

8

Severe

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

50

100

150
Time (years)

200

250

300

200

250

300

1

0.95

Annual income

0.9

0.85
Moderate
Severe

0.8

0.75

0.7
0

50

100

150
Time (years)

Figure 4. The Evolution of Temperature Change and Annual Income
Under the Moderate and Severe Scenarios.

39

0.96

Expected consumption at time 1

0.959

0.958

0.957

0.956

Gamma = 0.5
Log
Gamma = 3

0.955

Exponential
Quadratic
0.954
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

2.5

Increase in expected utility (basis points)

Gamma = 0.5
2.0

Log
Gamma = 3
Exponential
Quadratic

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

Figure 5. Gains in Consumption and Expected Utility as Signal Strength
Increases. This shows the expectation, as calculated at t = 1
, of t = 1
consumption and expected future welfare expressed as a basis point (1/100th %)
increase in the certainty equivalent consumption level (compared to the no signal
case) as the strength of a partial signal changes. Endowment over the …rst t1 years
must be either consumed or saved in a risk-free asset with a zero interest rate.
40

Expected annual self insurance in period 1

0.055

0.05

0.045

0.04
Gamma = 0.5
Log
0.035

Gamma = 3
Exponential
Quadratic

0.03
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

0.016

Expected annual bank savings in period 1

0.014
Gamma = 0.5
Log

0.012

Gamma = 3
Exponential

0.01

Quadratic
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

Figure 6.
Investment in Physical Adaptation and Savings as Signal
Strength Increases. This shows the expectation, as calculated at t = 1
,
of the levels of investment in the self insurance policy and the risk-free savings opportunity. Endowment at t = 1 can be either consumed, saved in a risk-free asset
with a zero interest rate, or invested in a physical adaptation project that partially
protects against the severe outcome.
41

0.954
Gamma = 0.5

Expected consumption at time 1

0.952

Log
Gamma = 3
Exponential

0.95

Quadratic
0.948

0.946

0.944

0.942
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

Increase in expected utility (basis points)

70

60
Gamma = 0.5

50

Log
Gamma = 3

40

Exponential
Quadratic

30
20

10

0
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Probability of moderate outcome following good signal

1

Figure 7. Gains in Consumption and Expected Utility with Physical
Adaptation as Signal Strength Increases. Following Figure 3, this shows the
expectation, as calculated at t = 1
, of t = 1 consumption and expected future
welfare expressed as a basis point (1/100th %) increase in the certainty equivalent
consumption level (compared to the no signal case) as the strength of a partial
signal changes. Endowment at t = 1 can be either consumed, saved in a risk-free
asset with a zero interest rate, or invested in a physical adaptation measure that
partially protects against the severe outcome.

42

