NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLY SHOCKS IN MACROECONOMICS

Matthew 0. Shapiro

Working Paper No. 2146

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2146
February 1987

Supply Shocks in Macroeconomics

ABSTRACT

Supply shocks played an important role in macroeconomic fluctuations during
the 1970's. Supply shocks are also increasingly important in Keynesian and
neo-classical models of the business cycle. This paper is a short survey of
these theoretical models. It also discusses the history of supply shocks in
recent business cycles.

Matthew D. Shapiro
Cowles Foundation for
Research in Economics
Yale University
Box 2125 Yale Station

New Haven, CT 06520

The decade of the 1970's saw a resurgence of interest in the influence

of the supply side on macroeconomic phenomena. The new attention paid to
the supply side was driven by two major factors. First, the world economy
faced a series of major supply-side shocks. These shocks lead to a
breakdown of major relationships embodied in macroeconomic models. Second,
the new classical macroeconomics brought about a reconsideration of the

Keynesian emphasis on the demand side. The breakdown of the relationships
in the Keynesian models would have been predicted by the new classical

economists. These relationships were often based on historical correlations
that could shift when the nature of the underlying shocks facing the economy

changed. Keynes emphasized the role of effective demand in business cycle
fluctuations. Following Keynes, much macroeconomic analysis neglected the
role of the supply side. In periods when shocks to supply are minimal doing
so will provide an adequate, if incomplete, understanding of economic

fluctuations. The emphasis on effective demand proved inadequate for
forecasting, analysis, and policy prescription in the face of supply shocks
of the 1970's.

Output. the Price Level, and Aggregate Supply
If prices and wages are less than fully flexible, changes in the cost

of production will have important effects on both the aggregate price level

and aggregate output. Shocks to the cost of production yield very different
business cycle correlations of prices and output than do the shocks to

effective demand. It is convenient to study these movements in terms of the

-2-

aggregate supply and aggregate demand schedules in price-output space. The
aggregate demand curve traces out the negative relation between aggregate

demand and output which holds as long as the interest elasticity of demand

for goods and for real balances are both negative. The aggregate demand
curve defines the set of equilibria in the goods market and asset market for

a fixed price level. Along the aggregate demand curve, output increases as
price decreases because real balances increase. An aggregate demand curve
(DD) is drawn in the Figure. Stimulative shocks to demand such as a tax cut

or a monetary expansion will raise aggregate demand given price. To close
the model, the price level is determined by the intersection of aggregate

supply and aggregate demand. The aggregate supply curve is determined by
the productive capacity of the economy and the market forces determining

factor cost. In the strict, neo-classical case, aggregate supply will be
fixed for all levels of the general price level. More generally, if
frictions in markets for factors of production, especially the labor market,
prevent instantaneous adjustment of prices to shocks, then there will be a
positive relation between the general price level and aggregate supply.

That is, if firms see their prices increasing due to an aggregate demand
shock, but do not expect or perceive that their costs may (eventually)

increase proportionally, they will supply more output, In the long run,
these changes in cost will be fully realized, so there is no long run

positive relationship between the aggregate price level and supply. An
aggregate supply curve (SS) is drawn in the Figure. The point A, the
intersection of the aggregate supply and demand schedules indicates

equilibrium output. The long run aggregate supply curve is defined by FF.

-3In the long run the level of output is invariant to the general price level.
The point A is a long run as well as a short run equilibrium.
The positive slope of the aggregate supply curve can be rationalized by

a variety of models. If firms set their prices as constant mark ups over
their costs and if these costs- -especially labor costs- -react slowly to

changes in demand there will be a positive relation between the aggregate

price level and output. [See Dornbusch and Fischer (1984) for a Keynesian
treatment of aggregate supply.] The derivation of the positive aggregate
supply relation between price and quantity does not depend, however, on

Keynesian price stickiness. If firms have imperfect knowledge of the prices
facing other agents in the economy, they will not know exactly the relative

prices of their outputs and inputs. If, as the general price level
increases, the firm first perceives the increase in the price of its output,

it will increase output, at least temporarily, when the general price level

increases. [See Lucas (1981).] It is difficult to distinguish in the data
these two sources of the positive slope of the aggregate supply schedule.

Misperceptions of the general price level should be short-lived, but costs
of adjustment and other rigidities could make the consequences of a
transitory misperception be long-lived.

The observed correlations of aggregate output and the aggregate price
level will depend on the shape of the aggregate supply and demand curves and

on the nature and magnitude of the shocks shifting them. Different types of
shocks will be more or less important at different times, so the output-

price correlation will change accordingly. Supply shocks will shift the
aggregate supply curve. Specifically, an adverse supply shock will lower

-4-

aggregate supply given the aggregate price level. Exaniples of adverse
shocks include declines in productivity and increases in crude materials

prices. In order to accommodate such shocks at full employment, the real
wage must fall. If nominal wages are sticky, some of this decline will be
accomplished through an increase in the general price level. As costs
increase due to increases in crude materials prices or declines in
productivity, firms raise prices for a given level of output.
Consider the correlation of aggregate output and prices when the

economy is subject to both aggregate supply and demand shocks. If the
Keynesian view that demand factors are the major determinants of output
fluctuations at business cycle frequencies is correct, then one would expect
to see a positive correlation of price and quantity in the aggregate data.

Business cycles would be fluctuations of demand which would trace out a

relatively stable aggregate supply relationship. This positive correlation
of price and output is related to, but not identical to the positive

correlation of inflation and output (or negative correlation of inflation

and unemployment) known as the Phillips curve. With lags of adjustment and
data alignment it is difficult, however, to distinguish the relationship in
levels and differences. No attempt is made here to sort out these lags.
Suppose, on the other hand, that fluctuations in aggregate supply are

relatively more important over the business cycle. That is, that
fluctuations in the cost of production trace out a relatively stable

aggregate demand relationship. An adverse aggregate supply shock will shift
the aggregate supply schedule upward from SS to S'S'. At any level of real
economic activity, the price level is higher. The observed correlation

-5-

between price and output caused by supply shocks will be negative in the

aggregate data. Examination of this correlation, if done in the context of
a structurally invariant model, can provide evidence as to the nature of the
shocks.

Supply Shocks and Stagflation

The 1970's saw a distinct shift in the output-price correlation. In
the 1960's, the correlation was strongly negative. In the 1970's, the
correlation became positive. Hence, although in the 1960's, there appeared
to be a trade-off between prices and output, the 1970's witnessed the
combination of stagnant real economies and increasing prices that became
known as stagflation.

[See Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (1978), Blinder

(1979), and Bruno and Sachs (1985) for extensive discussion of these events

and their ramifications for economic theory.] During the 1970's, there were
a series of supply shocks that can explain the changing correlation of
output and prices and that caused substantial output loss as world economies

adjusted to the shocks. In the early seventies, there were a series of bad
harvests that raised agricultural prices. These occurred after a policy in
the U.S. of depleting grain reserves. The low stockpiles exacerbated the
price increases. The price of oil rose dramatically during the 1973/74
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Organization's (OPEC) embargo and again

in 1979/80 following the fall of the Shah of Iran. Each of these shocks
have the effect of increasing goods price relative to wages and hence
require an increase in the general price level unless nominal wages fall.

Consequently, the aggregate supply curve shifts upwards. The direct effect

-6of the energy and food price increases is illustrated in the Table. The
first column gives the annual inflation rate of consumer prices in the U.S.

The next two columns give the inflation rates for energy and food. These
rose dramatically in 1973. Energy prices again began to rise dramatically
in 1979. The last column gives the inflation for all items excluding food
and energy. The direct impact of increases in food and energy prices
accounted for almost all the acceleration in inflation in 1973 and a high
fraction of it in the later episode.

The decade of the seventies also witnessed the a dramatic slowdown in
the rate of productivity growth in industrialized nations.

Measured by per

capita real gross national product, productivity in the U.S. grew at 2.8

percent per year from 1964 to 1973. In the European Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries it grew 3.7 percent

over the same period. From 1973 to 1981, these rates fell to 1.3 percent in
the U.S. and 1.5 percent in Europe.

[See Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development, Historical Statistics, 1952-1982 (Paris, 1984),

p. 86, for these statistics.] A decline in productivity growth directly
reduces the rate of output growth. It also has an indirect effect through
the aggregate supply-aggregate demand mechanism. Lower productivity means
higher costs of production for firms. This shifts the aggregate supply
schedule up. Consequently, output falls, at least in the short run, by more
than the amount due directly to the productivity shock.

This list of supply shocks--those due to OPEC, poor harvests, and slow
productivity growth- - is clearly motivated by the experience of recent

history. It is by no means definitive. Shocks could include exogenous

-7-

changes in any commodity price, natural disasters such as earthquakes,
floods, and draughts, and man-made disasters such as wars or nuclear

accidents. Of course, the shocks need not be adverse. Specifically,
technological improvement has been the key to economic growth in the West
since the Renaissance.

To see how a supply shock propagates in an economy with less than
perfectly flexible prices, consider in detail the effect of an increase in

the price of imported oil. Firms will immediately attempt to raise prices
to pass through the higher cost of oil used as an input. As long as noncommodity prices are less than perfectly flexible in the short run, the

increase in the price of oil will increase the aggregate price level. If
the oil price increase took place instantaneously and the cost increase were

reflected in final goods prices instantaneously, the price level would rise

once and for all. Because of lags in adjustment and reporting, prices will
rise only slowly. The slow adjustment of the price level will appear in the
data, and perhaps be perceived by households, firms, and policy makers, as

an increase in the inflation rate. In terms of the Figure, the aggregate
supply curve has shifted up. Holding government policy constant, output
will be lower as the economy moves up the aggregate demand curve. The
increase in the price level reduces real balances and hence raises the real

interest rate and lowers aggregate demand. The change in relative prices
could also have income effects that would shift the aggregate demand curve.

These are neglected in this discussion. For the economy to return to the
long run, full employment equilibrium, real wages must fall. Workers must
be less well off because of the increased payments for imported oil. Note

-8that this real wage cut must be taken in the face of reduced purchasing
power for consumer goods that require a large amount of energy to produce or

to maintain. Consequently, there is the danger that a wage-price spiral
will ensue.

Absent government policy intervention, a protracted period of less than
full employment may follow the supply shock during which real wages are

reduced. The supply shocks may be attenuated by government policy
intervention. Wage-price controls or incomes policies could be used to

combat the inflationary pressure from the cost increase. These are likely
to be counter-productive, however, because the relative prices of goods and

factors of production must adjust after a supply shock. Since the relative
price of some goods must rise, price controls are likely to cause shortages.

The supply shock can be accommodated by fiscal and monetary policy. Recall
that a protracted recession may be necessary to reduce real wages following

the supply shock. Expansionary policy can ameliorate this fall in output at
the cost of even higher prices. While any expansionary policy will raise
demand, cutting excise taxes would have the compound benefit of producing a

favorable supply shock by lowering costs of production. The extra inflation
from expansionary policy may be a relatively painless way of accomplishing

the reduction in real wages necessary to achieve long run equilibrium. On
the other hand, contractionary policy to combat the incipient inflation from
the supply shock will be particularly costly because it will add to the
recessionary pressures from the supply shock itself.
It is instructive to consider briefly actual policy experience in light

of the supply shocks of the 1970's. In the U.S., the Nixon price freeze and

-9-

controls and the Carter guidelines were ineffective in containing price

increases. Moreover, price controls on gasoline created long lines in both
1972 and 1979. Monetary policy became contractionary following the oil
price increases of 1973-4 rather than accommodative and produced what was

then the largest recession since the Great Depression. [See Blinder (1979)
and Solow (1980) on the neo-Keynesian model of supply shocks, the shocks of
the 1970's, and the policy experience in the United States.]

In Europe, unlike the United States, there was virtually no recovery

between the first and second oil price shocks. Consequently, unemployment
was high in Europe throughout the 1970's. In the U.S., there have been
recoveries punctuated by increases in oil prices. In Europe, real wages
appear to be more rigid than in the United States. Centralized,
synchronized wage negotiations allow unions to take into account the effect

of the wage bargains on the price level. Hence, achieving real wage cuts is
difficult. Moreover, unions appear to have preferred to reduce employment
rather than the wages of employed workers. Consequently, the adjustment to
accommodate the higher oil price was costly in terms of forgone employment

and output. (See Bruno and Sachs (1985)).

Supply Shocks without Price Stickiness
Simultaneously with the collapse of the Phillips curve correlation

between price and output there was an attack on the theoretical

underpinnings of the neo-Keynesian model. In particular, the belief that

- 10

there

-

was an exploitable trade off between output and inflation was called

into question. The theoretical revolution, called rational expectations or
the new classical macroeconomics, denied the role of Keynesian effective

demand by reintroducing price flexibility into macroeconomics. The
Keynesian macroeconomics models were criticized for treating reduced form
correlations such as the negative correlation between output and inflation

as structurally invariant. Specifically, the models were criticized for the
fact that the correlations embodied in them would change when economic

policy was exercised. [See Lucas and Sargent in Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston (1978) and Lucas (1981)].

This critique can be broadened to encompass the case where the changes
in the reduced form correlations do not arise from attempts by policy makers
to exploit them but rather from changes in the nature of the shocks facing

the economy. As discussed above, such a change occurred in the decade of
the 1970's when supply shocks were more important than they had been in the

past. The development of new classical macroeconomics was certainly driven
by theoretical considerations, but its wide acceptance was probably abetted
by its explanation of the collapse of the neo-Keynesian models of the
1960's.

Supply shocks can have an important role in economies not characterized

by price stickiness. Indeed, since the new classical economics discarded
effective demand as a source of fluctuations in output, it is natural that

the supply side features prominently in its analyses of business cycles. In
most textbook treatments of macroeconomic fluctuations, the business cycle
is treated as a cyclical deviation of output from a path determined by

- 11

factors

-

relating to long term growth. These factors- -growth in population

and labor supply, technological progress, and increases in the capital-labor
ratio- -are assumed to evolve independently of fluctuations at business cycle

frequencies. Hence, whether they are deterministic or random, macroeconomic
phenomena could be analyzed by abstracting from long run growth in the

economy. This dichotomy is especially appealing given the view of business
cycle fluctuations as demand driven deviations from supply determined trend.
Emphasis on supply factors, especially productivity shocks, in business

cycles vitiates the dichotomy. If factors affecting long term growth are
also important at business cycle frequencies then, in both theoretical and
empirical studies, business cycle fluctuations cannot be divorced from long

term growth. Moveover, statistical tests suggest that it is difficult to
reject the hypothesis that current shocks to aggregate output have a

permanent component. (In the language of statistical time series analysis,
it is difficult to reject the hypothesis that output has a unit root.) The
persistence of output shocks does not guarantee, however, that productivity

shocks are important in the short run. Demand shocks, especially in an
imperfectly competitive economy, may be very persistent.

Consider the macroeconomic effects of a shock to productivity. The
effects will depend on whether the shock is temporary (from the weather, for

example) or permanent (a technological innovation, for example). A
temporary shock will affect output directly, but should not affect the

technology or level of factor input in the long run. A permanent shock will
affect output in the short run, but the entire response of output should not

take place immediately. Because capital is costly to adjust and investment

- 12

entails

-

delivery lags, the response of the capital stock to a productivity

shock will take time. Hence, output may appear to be leading investment
despite the fact that they are each responding to the same, underlying
productivity shock.

If productivity shocks are an important determinate of output at
business cycle frequencies, two long-standing empirical puzzles are

resolved. Real wages are acyclical or slightly pro-cyclical. Both
Keynesian sticky wage theory and neo-classical marginal product theory

suggest that real wages should vary counter-cyclically. If productivity
shocks are important at business cycle frequencies, wages will be pro-

cyclical. Productivity shocks can also account for the short run increasing
returns to labor. The estimated short run elasticity of output with respect
to labor equals or exceeds one, which is inconsistent with a neo-classical,

constant returns to scale production function. Such a correlation would be
expected, however, if productivity shocks were jointly moving output and

labor demand. Short run Increasing returns to labor is, however, also
consistent with labor hoarding in response to a demand shock.
There are difficulties, however, with attributing too much of the

business cycle variance in output to productivity shocks. It seems unlikely
that technology moves enough on a quarter to quarter basis to account for

all of the variability of observed output. Because it is unlikely that
technological regress can be an importance source of fluctuations in modern
economies, that output falls in recessions might be taken as evidence that

demand as well as supply factors account for fluctuations. Hence, to
attribute a high fraction of output variance at the business-cycle

- 13

frequencies

-

to technological shocks, it is necessary to postulate frictions

or costs of adjustments of either Keynesian or classical character that

magnify the effects of the shocks. Examples of such frictions include the
cost to workers of changing jobs or locations in response to technological
change and the difficulty of adapting old capital to new techniques.

Fiscal and Monetary Policy and the Supply Side

Although fiscal and monetary policy are usually thought to work
primarily through aggregate demand, they have important supply side effects.

Certain supply shocks can be said to be induced by policy decisions. Tax
rules that reduce the cost of capital by investment tax credits and
accelerated deductions for depreciation expenses have been an important
supply side component of fiscal policy in the United States since 1962.
(See the Economic Report of the President (1962) for a discussion of these
investment incentives in particular and for an early treatment of the

supply-side effects of macroeconomic, demand-management policies.) Tight
fiscal policy will encourage investment (for a given level of aggregate
demand) by increasing the supply of saving and hence reducing interest
rates.

Monetary policy can also have important consequences for the supply

side. Monetary tightening will increase the required rate of return for
holding commodities or the domestic currency. As the interest rate
increases, the opportunity cost of holding these assets increases. Hence, a
monetary contraction will reduce commodity prices and appreciate the

currency. Such relative price changes work just as uncontrollable supply

- 14

-

shocks by changing the cost of production and hence shifting the aggregate
supply schedule. This supply-side channel for monetary policy thus creates
a supply shock that amplifies the demand-side deflationary pressure of a
monetary contraction.

- 15

-

REFERENCES

Blinder, Alan S. (1979).

Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation.

New York, Academic Press.

Bruno, Michael and Jeffery D. Sachs (1985). The Economics of Worldwide
Stagflation. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer (1984). Macroeconomics third

ed. New York, McGraw-Hill.

Economic Report of the President (1962). Washington, D.C., U.S.
Government Printing Office.

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (1978). After the Phillips Curve:
Persistence of High Inflation and High Unemployment. Boston.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1981). Studies in Business-Cycle Theory.
Cambridge, Mass., Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.

Solow, Robert M., What to Do (Macroeconomically) When OPEC Comes, in
Rational Expectations and Econometric Practice, Stanley Fischer, ed.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

FIGURE

Aggregate Supply and Aggregate Demand

F
Price
Level

/

/

/

/
/

SI
S

/

/

/

/

/

/

/
S

S

F

Aggregate
Output

- 16

-

TABLE

Consumer Price Inflation in the United States:
All Items, Energy, and Food

all items

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

1984
1985

5.9

4.2
3.3
6.2
11.0
9.2
5.7
6.5
7.6
11.3
13.5
10.4

6.2
3.2
4.3
3.5

energy

food

2.7
3.9
2.7
8.1
29.3
10.6
7.2
9.5

5.6

excluding
food and energy

3.0

6.3
4.7

4.4

3.0

14.4
14.4

8.3

8.5
3.1
6.3

3.5

9.2

6.5
6.3
7.3
9.7

6.4
25.2
30.8
13.5

10.0
10.9

1.5

4.0

12.4
10.5
7.4

.7

1.0

2.1
3.9

3.9
5.0

.7

2.2

4.4

8.6
7.8

Data are annual percent changes in the United States Consumer Price Index.
Source: United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.

