                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   LONG RUN TRENDS IN UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION
                              IN CHINA

                                            Shuaizhang Feng
                                              Yingyao Hu
                                             Robert Moffitt

                                         Working Paper 21460
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21460


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2015




We thank Albert Park, Xin Meng, Tony Fang and audiences at Southwest University of Finance and
Economics, Peking University, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, and at the 2014 Fall NBER China conference for valuable comments. Jinwen Wang
and Gaojie Tang provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21460.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Shuaizhang Feng, Yingyao Hu, and Robert Moffitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Long Run Trends in Unemployment and Labor Force Participation in China
Shuaizhang Feng, Yingyao Hu, and Robert Moffitt
NBER Working Paper No. 21460
August 2015
JEL No. J64,O15,O53

                                              ABSTRACT

Unemployment rates in countries across the world are typically positively correlated with GDP. China
is an unusual outlier from the pattern, with abnormally low, and suspiciously stable, unemployment
rates according to its official statistics. This paper calculates, for the first time, China’s unemployment
rate from 1988 to 2009 using a more reliable, nationally representative household survey in China.
The unemployment rates we calculate differ dramatically from those supplied in official data and are
much more consistent with what is known about China’s labor market and how it has changed over
time in response to structural changes and other significant events. The rate averaged 3.9% in 1988-1995,
when the labor market was highly regulated and dominated by state-owned enterprises, but rose sharply
during the period of mass layoff from 1995- 2002, reaching an average of 10.9% in the subperiod from
2002 to 2009. We can also calculate labor force participation rates, which are not available in official
statistics at all. We find that they declined throughout the whole period, particularly in 1995-2002
when the unemployment rate increased most significantly. We also report results for different demographic
groups, different regions, and different cohorts.


Shuaizhang Feng                                                 Robert Moffitt
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics                    Johns Hopkins University
Shanghai China                                                  3400 North Charles Street
shuaizhang.feng@gmail.com                                       Baltimore, MD 21218
                                                                and IZA
Yingyao Hu                                                      and also NBER
Department of Economics                                         moffitt@jhu.edu
Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
yhu@jhu.edu
1       Introduction
        The unemployment rate is one of the major indicators of the state of a country’s labor
market. Market economies are normally thought of as having a natural rate of unemployment
that is the lowest long-run unemployment rate that can be sustained with a stable rate
of inflation. That rate differs from country to country and over time depending on the
efficiency of the labor market, the availability of unemployment benefits and other sources
of income while not working, taxes and the incentive to work, and the presence or absence
of other types of labor market barriers and impediments. The unemployment rate is also a
measure of the severity and phase of a business cycle, measuring the slackness in aggregate
demand which is presumably temporary before the rate returns to its natural level. While
the standard definition of unemployment as requiring search has many long-standing issues
(e.g., the exclusion of discouraged workers who have stopped searching), it is nevertheless a
key economic indicator.
        How the unemployment rate changes over the course of economic development is an
important question in development economics.               The traditional stylized fact is that the
unemployment rate tends to rise with development.                 The upper four lines in Figure 1,
drawn from World Bank statistics which classify countries by their gross national income per
capita into high income, upper middle income, lower middle income, and low income groups,
supports this stylized fact. Although the ordering varies a bit over the 1988 to 2013 time
period, it is always the case that high income countries have the highest unemployment rates
and low income countries have the lowest ones, with middle income countries in between.
The upper and lower middle income countries vary in their unemployment rate ordering
depending on the time period.1 This ordering may seem surprising given the common view
that labor markets are less efficient at low levels of development than at high levels, but an
old hypothesis for this pattern is known as the “luxury unemployment hypothesis” which
    1
    The unemployment series in Figure 1 is not based on official unemployment rates published by each
country because those are often noncomparable in terms of coverage and consistency with standard definitions
requiring search. Instead, the series is based on ILO models which adjust the official series to put them on
a comparable basis.



                                                     1
suggests that, in lower income countries, the lack of unemployment benefits, savings, and
other sources of income while unemployed means that reservation wages are necessarily
very low and that the only individuals who can afford significant periods of job search are
secondary workers from families with high incomes (Turnham and Jaeger, 1971, Udall and
Sinclair, 1982). While there have been many objections to this hypothesis, both those which
suggest that the positive correlation between unemployment and development is a result of
other factors (e.g., more underemployment in low-GNI countries) and those which dispute
the correlation itself (Turnham and Erocal, 1990), the data in Figure 1 do support the basic
empirical pattern.
       This paper is concerned with the unemployment rate in China. Figure 1 shows the
official Chinese government unemployment rate series and makes clear that it is an extreme
outlier. The World Bank classifies China as an upper middle income country in terms of
its GNI per capita, yet the series shows the rate to be below not only that of other middle
income countries but even that of low income countries. While it has risen somewhat over
time and therefore the gap between it and other countries has narrowed, it has never risen to
reach even the average level of low income countries. In addition, despite economic ups and
downs since 2002, including the 2008-2009 global financial crisis, it only fluctuated within
a very narrow range between 4% and 4.3% since then and has stayed fixed at 4.1% since
the third quarter of 2010.2 While it is in principle possible that China’s labor market was
simply more efficient and unchanging over time than that of other countries over this period,
that view conflicts with everything that is known about the Chinese labor market. As we
discuss below, the Chinese economy has been gradually transformed from one governed by
central planning to one that is mainly market-driven, including the restructuring of the State-
owned-enterprises (SOEs), increases in rural-to-urban migration, World Trade Organization
(WTO) entry, and an expansion of college enrollments. It is implausible that these major
events have not affected the unemployment rate more than the official series indicates.
   2
    The ILO calculates a “modeled” unemployment rate series for China that is supposed to reduce noncom-
parabilities with other countries and to correct for definitional differences. However, that modeled series is
also an outlier, fluctuating only between 4 and 5 percent over the 1991-2013 period.



                                                      2
       Instead, the more probable explanation for the deviation of China in Figure 1 is that
it is a result of deficiencies in the measured official series, deficiencies which have been
discussed extensively in the literature. Although many of China’s official statistics have
been viewed with considerable suspicion (see e.g. Ravallion and Chen, 1999, Rawski, 2001,
Young, 2003), the official Chinese unemployment rate is thought to be probably the least
informative among all key economic indicators.3 The primary deficiency is that the official
Chinese unemployment rate is calculated as the share of total registered unemployed people
over the total labor force, which is known to underestimate total unemployment.                             That
underestimation is likely to be particularly severe in China for three reasons: (1) a large
fraction of the population lacks local household registration (Hukou) status4 and hence many
unemployed people are not qualified to register with local employment service agencies, (2)
even qualified unemployed people may lack the incentive to register because of very low
levels of unemployment benefits, and (3) the total number of registered unemployed people
are aggregated bottom-up within the bureaucratic system, thus subject to aggregation errors
and potential data manipulations (Giles et al., 2005 and Liu, 2012). Also, the total labor
force, which is the denominator in the calculation of unemployment rate, is also subject
to error for many reasons. One recent article that reviewed the quality of Chinese labor
statistics claimed that the official unemployment rate is “almost useless” (Cai et al., 2013).
Another important and related labor market indicator - the labor force participation rate -
is not even reported in official statistics.5
       Despite the popular disbelief of official figures, it is not easy to find an alternative.
Many researchers have attempted to estimate China’s true unemployment rate and usually
end up with numbers significantly higher than the official ones. The most common solution
   3
     Many studies have examined the validity of China’s GDP figures and, in general, most researchers have
found the statistics to be at least usable and informative in understanding the Chinese economy, see e.g.
Chow (2006), Fernald et al. (2013), Holz (2014).
   4
     China’s Hukou system has both a “rural/urban” dimension and a geographic dimension. Since the
reform and open-up policy in late 1970s, the Hukou system has gradually evolved towards a weakening of
the rural/urban divide, but a strengthening of the geographic element. Currently, Hukou is in some sense a
local “citizenship”, see e.g. Chan and Buckingham (2008).
   5
     In principal, one can infer the labor force participation rates using official statistics on total employment,
registered unemployment and population, as Cai et al. (2008) did for 1996-2004.



                                                        3
is to rely on published government aggregate data and simply add laid-off (or “Xiagang”
in Chinese) workers to the registered unemployed in order to derive a total unemployment
figure. But, as pointed out by Giles et al. (2005), many officially laid-off or registered
unemployed workers may actually be working part- or full-time or may be out of the labor
force. In addition, administrative labor statistics are also unreliable, as discussed in Cai
et al. (2013). A few studies have employed micro-level data but typically such data were
only available for selected regions and for a few number of years. For example, Giles et al.
(2005) used self-collected data in five big cities in 2002 and retrospective information for the
1996-2001 period to estimate the national level of unemployment. Liu (2012) used China
Household Income Project (CHIP) data in 1988, 1995 and 2002 which covered around 10
provinces in China. Owing to different data and methodologies, the existing alternative
estimates also vary greatly (see e.g. Table 2 of Giles et al., 2005), making it difficult for any
potential user to choose among them.
       In this paper, we provide a new long series of estimates of nationally representative
levels of unemployment rates and labor market participation rates in China over the period
1988-2009, using newly available microdata from a household survey that covers all of urban
China. The Urban Household Survey (UHS) has been administered by China’s National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS) since the 1980s. Although the data have been widely used to
study various aspects of China’s labor market and the urban economy, no previous study has
focused on the issue of unemployment and labor force participation.6 In addition, previous
studies have typically only had access to a subsample of the UHS consisting of only several
provinces, while we have the most complete access to UHS annual data from 1988 to 2009
covering all provinces.7
       Our results completely change the picture of where China fits into the world picture
portrayed in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 2, while we find that, while the Chinese un-
   6
     Topics that have been examined based on UHS include wage structures (Ge and Yang, 2014), gender
wage gap (Zhang et al., 2008), return to education (Zhang et al., 2005), income and consumption inequalities
(Meng et al., 2013 and Cai et al., 2010), household savings (Chamon and Prasad, 2010), among others.
   7
     For example, Zhang et al. (2008) use samples from 6 provinces, Meng et al. (2013) only use samples
from 16 provinces, Cai et al. (2010) use data from 1992 to 2003, while Ge and Yang (2014) goes from 1992
to 2007.


                                                     4
employment rate was only somewhat above the official series from 1988 to the mid-1990s,
it rose dramatically shortly thereafter. In fact, we find that by approximately 2002, the
unemployment in China was actually higher than that of high income countries, exactly the
opposite of what is implied by the official series.
     Our explanation for the time series pattern is that when unemployment rates were low
in the early period, the urban labor market was still characterized by the so called “iron rice
bowl”, with state-assigned jobs and life-time employment, mainly in the state sector–the
unemployment rate averaged 3.9% in 1988-1995. But the dramatic rise in the rate in 1995-
2002 coincided with a period of mass layoffs from state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and with a
sharp increase in rural-to-urban migration. The rising trend stopped in approximately 2002,
partly as a result of WTO entry that increased the demand for labor, and partly as a result
of a major expansion of college enrollment which improved the overall quality of labor. We
also analyze patterns by different demographic groups, different regions, and different cohorts
and find them to be largely consistent with the features of labor market developments we
have described. Our new calculations of labor force participation rates show that they were
quite high, averaging 83.1% in 1988-1995, but fell thereafter.
     The reminder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section briefly discusses
key events and policy changes related to the development of China’s urban labor market
since 1988. Section three introduces the data set - Urban Household Survey (UHS). This is
followed by section four, which reports a long run (1988-2009) time series of estimates for
Chinese urban unemployment rates and labor force participation rates, as well as results for
different demographic groups, different regions, and different cohorts. We also discuss the
reliability of our estimates and conduct various robustness checks including correcting for
possible misclassifications in labor force status using the method proposed by Feng and Hu
(2013). The last section summarizes our main findings and discusses possible future research
areas.




                                               5
2         Historical Background
          In this section, we provide a narrative of major events and institutional changes that
have happened during the last several decades. Our main focus is on the development of
China’s urban labor market.

2.1         Prior to 1995
          The Chinese economy has experienced tremendous changes since the open-door and
reform policy initiated in the late 1970s. However, changes in urban labor markets came
much later. In the first half of the 1980s, reform was primarily in rural areas characterized
by decollectivization (see e.g. Lin, 1992). Throughout the 1980s and the early 1990s, state-
owned firms were gradually given some autonomies in making production decisions, and
private and foreign firms started to emerge. Nevertheless, until the mid-1990s, the urban
labor market was essentially still under the central planning regime. The majority of workers
in cities were still employed in State-owned-enterprises. By 1995, around 60% of all urban
workers were still hired by the state sector (National Bureau of Statistics). It was very
difficult, if possible at all, for firms to dismiss redundant workers (Dong and Putterman,
2003).

2.2         1995-2002
          Since the mid-1990s, China’s urban labor market has experienced significant transfor-
mations and structural changes (see e.g. Li et al., 2012 and Meng, 2012). Along with the
product market reforms and the emergence of the non-state-owned sector, the state-owned
firms began to experience substantial financial difficulties in the 1990s (Lardy, 1998). Start-
ing from 1995, government began a policy of “seizing the large and letting go of the small
(in Chinese, Zhua da fang xiao)”, to privatize small and medium-sized SOEs while retain
control of large enterprises. This triggered large-scale lay offs from SOEs and, indeed, 1995
was the first year with no absolute growth in state employment.8 During the period from
1995 to 2001, there were an estimated 34 million workers laid off from the state sector (Giles
    8
        Based on National Bureau of Statistics and cited also by Giles et al. (2006).



                                                         6
et al., 2006).
      In line with the transformation of China’s labor market, the first labor law of the
People’s republic of China became effective on January 1st, 1995 (Cai et al., 2008). The
law formally enacted the regulations of the labor contract system and made labor contracts
mandatory in all industrial enterprises. The labor contract system allowed firms to select and
hire suitable individuals. The law also permitted no-fault dismissal of workers by employers.
On the other hand, employees were given the right to negotiate the duration, terms, and
conditions of their employment, as well as the right to resign.
      During roughly the same period of time, rural-to-urban migration picked up. Histori-
cally, migration of peasants to cities was highly regulated with the Hukou system. Essentially
all migrants living in cities without local Hukou were officially illegal and subject to forced
deportation. But since the mid-1990s, along with the changes in product market and labor
market in the urban sectors, the demand for cheap labor increased and the government grad-
ually relaxed restrictions on population movements. In 1995, the central government started
to allow migrants to stay in cities if they possessed four documents: a national identification
card, a temporary resident permit in cities, employment certificates issued by the local labor
bureau in cities, and an employment card issued by the labor bureau in their origin location
(Cai et al., 2008). According to Meng et al. (2013), in 1997 there were around 39 million
migrant workers in cities and, by 2009, this increased to 145 million, with the most significant
inflow occurring during the early 2000s. Meng et al. (2013) also argues that the main effect
of migrant inflows on the urban market was a “quantity” effect rather than a “price” effect.
The urban Hukou population enjoys various forms of protections in the labor market and
benefits, such as subsidized housing, health insurance, unemployment insurance, minimum
living standard subsidies, and thus have significantly higher reservation wages than rural
migrants. When rural migrants came to the cities, many urban workers dropped out of the
labor force or became unemployed instead of staying employed with a much lower wage.




                                               7
2.3    Post-2002
      On December 11, 2001, China officially became WTO’s 143rd member. China’s WTO
entry has triggered profound changes. Total exports increased from $266 billion USD in 2001
to $2.2 trillion in 2013 (National Bureau of Statistics). The domestic manufacturing sector
thrived and the demand for labor increased, which generated employment opportunities for
both rural migrants and urban residents. In addition, in 1999, China implemented a major
college enrollment expansion, resulting in a dramatic increase in enrollment from about 1.1
million in 1998 to about 5.5 million in 2006, and to 6.3 million in 2009 (National Bureau of
Statistics). College expansion has drastically increased the number of workers with college
degrees since 2002, the first year that three-year college students enrolled in 1999 graduated.
      During this period of time, the flow of rural migrant labor to the cities also slowed
considerably. This has resulted a shortage of cheap labor in China’s affluent costal areas
and a sharp rise in real wages. Zhang et al. (2011) identifies the year 2003 as the time when
China crossed the so called “Lewis turning point”, when the excess supply of cheap rural
labor to the urban sector came to an end. This of course would have beneficial impacts on
the labor market prospects of urban Hukou population, especially for low skill workers.


3     Data
3.1    The Urban Household Survey data
      The primary data source for this study is the 22 consecutive years of Urban Household
Surveys (UHS) conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China for the
1988-2009 period. The survey design of the UHS is similar to that of the Current Population
Surveys (CPS) in the U.S., which is the source of official US labor market statistics including
unemployment rates and labor force participation rates. The UHS is also the only nationally
representative household dataset in China that encompasses all provinces and contains yearly
information dating back to the 1980s.
      Every three years, the NBS draws a first-stage sample of households from selected cities


                                              8
and towns in each province probabilistically in a multistage fashion, starting from cities and
towns, then districts, residential communities, and finally housing units. A final sample is
then randomly selected from the first-stage sample for detailed interviews and diary-keeping
every month. Each year, one third of the households in the final sample is replaced by
other households from the first-stage sample. Nevertheless, the design has not been always
strictly enforced in all years. In the years prior to 2002, for example, it is likely that those
households with workers in state-owned enterprises were oversampled (we adjust for this
possibility as described below). In addition, in a couple of cases, some provinces may have
delayed withdrawing and replacing the first-stage sample at the end of the three-year period
for funding reasons. In addition, household identifiers that are necessary to match the same
households in different years are only available since 2002. The survey questionnaires have
also been updated several times along the way, with two major changes in 1992 and 2002,
and minor changes in 1997 and 2007.
      Throughout the analysis, we restrict the sample to those aged between 16 to 60 for
males and for those aged between 16 and 55 for females. This is because that the official
retirement age is 60 for males and either 50 (for blue collar jobs) or 55 (for white collar
jobs or so called “cadres”) for females. We conduct some robustness checks to these sample
restrictions later.
      The main analyses of this paper focus on people with local household registration
(those with local urban Hukou) for several reasons. First, because of policy restrictions,
there were very few non-local-hukou people in cities in the 1980s and early 1990s. Thus,
in order to examine the long run trend of a homogenous group, it would be preferable to
stick with people with local Hukou throughout the whole period. Second, while the UHS
also covers non-local-Hukou people since 2002, the coverage is less than satisfactory because
of the difficulties in interviewing non-local-Hukou individuals, as discussed in Ge and Yang
(2014) and many other studies that use UHS data. Therefore, it is not possible to use UHS
data, or any other existing data sets, to study the long run labor market outcomes of all
urban residents. Last but not least, the Hukou population is also the more politically salient


                                               9
group, as unemployed migrant workers without Hukou can return to their rural hometown
or migrate to a different city. For the same reason, the labor market performance of people
with local Hukou is probably a better indicator of China’s overall labor market conditions
than that of all urban residents, as the non-local Hukou population is a highly self-selected
sample of all potential migrants. Most previous studies on long run labor market employment
conditions also focus only on the local Hukou population, such as Giles et al. (2005).
      Sample summary statistics are given in Table A1. We divide the sample into 8 different
demographic groups by sex (male or female), age (less than 40 or 40+) and education (college
education or high school and below). The total sample size was more or less stable before
2002, but jumped from 36,529 in 2001 to 92,337 in 2002 because of a change in UHS sample
design, and has increased further after that.
      As we described above, prior to 2002 it is likely that the UHS oversampled certain
strata of the population. In addition, the UHS appears to have non-random nonresponse,
with older and more educated people more likely to respond and hence to be over-represented
in the sample (see e.g. Ge and Yang, 2014 and Meng, 2012). However, the UHS provides no
weights prior to 2002 and, since 2002, it provides weights that only adjust for probabilities
of selecting a city of given size (large, medium or small) into the sample within a province,
i.e., all the individuals in the large(medium/small)-sized cities in a province would receive
the same weight. To insure that the sample is representative, we calculate our own weights
based on Census data for all periods, both before and after 2002. We use data from the three
decennial censuses (1990, 2000, and 2010) and,9 starting from the urban Hukou population in
each age (5-yr categories)/province/sex/education cell, we interpolate/extrapolate linearly
for all other years in our sample, then calculate weights as the ratio of population size and
sample size for each cell. Thus two persons in the same cell, i.e., two sample individuals
in the same province, with the same sex, the same age (5-yr category), the same education
group(above college or below) will have the same weight in a given year. Figure A1 shows that
   9
     we use 1% census micro sample for 1990 and 2000. For 2010, since micro data are not available, we use
summary statistics and impose the assumption that education distributions are the same for all provinces
conditional on sex and age category.



                                                   10
the unweighted UHS sample has a much higher ratio of college educated and 40+ individuals
than the weighted sample and the time trends are also quite different. For example, in 2009,
the percentage of male sample individuals with college education is around 40%, but after
the adjustment using the weights, it drops to only 20%.

3.2     Labor force status classifications in UHS
       The annual UHS data have information regarding labor force status in December of
that year, which allows us to calculate unemployment rates and labor force participation
rates. During the 1992-2009 period, fifteen categories for “employment status” are consis-
tently reported for all sampled individuals:10 including (1) staff and workers in state-owned
economic units, (2) staff and workers in urban collectively-owned economic units, (3) staff
and workers in other types of economic units, such as foreign owned enterprises, (4) self-
employed workers or owners of enterprises, (5) persons employed by private firms, (6) retired
staff and veteran cadre who are reemployed, (7) other employees, (8) retired people, (9)
people who are unable to work because of disabilities or in chronic conditions, (10) people
who are mainly responsible for housekeeping (housewives), (11) people waiting to be em-
ployed, (12) people waiting for assignment, (13) students at school, (14) people waiting to
enter higher levels of schools, and (15) other non-working-age nonemployed people. For the
1988-1991 period, we are also able to reconstruct these same 15 categories based on two
variable, one for employment status and one for occupation.
       The exact meanings of the 15 labor force status categories are translated from the
original Chinese interviewer manual and included in the Appendix. We assign categories (1)
to (7) as employed; categories (11) and (12) as unemployed; and categories (8), (9), (10),
(12), (14) and (15) as not-in-labor-force(NILF).11 A careful perusal of the explanations of
the 15 labor force categories suggests that our classification of employment, unemployment
  10
      The order of the 15 categories listed here applies to 1992-2001. The 2002-2009 period contains exactly
the same categories but the order is slightly different.
   11
      There is some ambiguity on whether category (15) should fall into the unemployed or NILF group.
However, most people in this category have passed the official retirement age and are thus not included in
our sample, so this should not significantly affect our results. We also provide a robustness check on this
issue below.



                                                    11
and NILF are largely consistent with the ILO definitions adopted in 1982 for internationally
consistent unemployment rate comparisons.12 For example, to be qualified as “unemployed”
(category 11 in UHS), one has to be “capable of working, has performed paid work before,
but do not have a job at the time of the survey, and are actively looking for job, and are
currently available for work”. UHS is also careful in assigning people as “mainly responsible
for housekeeping” (category 10) only if they “have no intention to seek paid employment
outside home”.
        Nevertheless, readers should still be cautious when comparing our results with labor
statistics from other countries, particularly those in the OECD, for there are at least three
differences between the UHS-based and many developed-country definitions of labor force
status. First, there was no clear reference week for the labor force status in UHS in a given
month. Second, the exact definitions of employment are slightly different. If a full-time
student on summer break works for even one hour for pay during the reference week, then
he is defined as “employed” according to many surveys (such as the U.S. Current Population
Survey), while he would be classified as NILF in the UHS. Third, in terms of job search,
which is an important criterion for unemployment, some surveys (e.g., the CPS) have a four
week reference period and lists specific activities to be qualified as active searching, while no
such details are given in UHS (we discuss this measurement issue further below).


4       Trends in unemployment and labor force participa-

        tion
4.1       National results
        Table 1 reports our main results from 1988 to 2009. Consistent with the developments
of the labor market in China over the past several decades as described in section 2, we
divide the whole time period into three equal subperiods: 1988-1995, 1995-2002, and 2002-
2009. In the first subperiod, unemployment rates were relatively stable at a low level, with
 12
      http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/c3e.html.



                                                      12
an average of 3.9%, which was higher than the official average of 2.5% but the discrepancies
are relatively small and stable. Nevertheless, in 1995-2002, the UHS-based unemployment
rate climbed rapidly, gaining one percentage point each year. The official rate only increased
very mildly. In the last subperiod of 2002-2009, the UHS-based unemployment rate reached
a peak and declined somewhat, with an average of 10.9%. The official rate lagged far behind
at an average of only 4.2%, or less than half of the UHS-based rate.
     Figure 2, referenced in the Introduction, shows that our results completely change the
comparison of China with other countries. From 1988 through 1995, the unemployment rate
in China was indeed lower than that of other countries, even low income countries, even
if somewhat higher than the official series. This was, as we have noted, the SOE period.
However, the post-SOE period led the unemployment rate to jump to a level even higher than
that of high income countries, although it has drifted down slowly since its 2003 peak. Still,
the labor market in China has not yet recovered from the SOE period and unemployment
remains high relative to its stage of development as represented by GNI per capita. This is
a major conclusion of our paper.
     The UHS-based unemployment rates are also plotted in Panel A of Figure 3 together
with the official rates. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that the overall rate of labor force par-
ticipation has dropped significantly from 1988 to 2009, with most of the declines happened
in 1995-2002. Table 1 also reports the average participation level and annual rate of change
by subperiod in Panel B. In 1988-1995, there were not much changes with labor force par-
ticipation rates averaging 83.1%. During the second subperiod when mass-layoff in SOEs
and rural-to-urban migration occurred, participation rates declined substantially, by 0.8 per-
centage points each year. In the last subperiod, labor force participation stabilized again at
around 74%.
     The overall trends of unemployment and labor force participation shown by UHS data
correspond very well with China’s economic transformations and institutional changes in
different development stages. As reviewed in the section on historical background, no major
labor market reforms occurred in 1988-1995. The state sector remained predominant in the


                                             13
economy despite the emergence of non-state firms. For state employers, it was still very
difficult, if not completely impossible, to dismiss redundant workers. Most jobs were still
“iron rice bowls”. Therefore, unemployment rates were very low and stable during this
period of time, and labor force participation rates were high.
     With the kickoff of massive SOE layoffs, things changed dramatically during the second
subperiod. Together with the development of the non-state sector, the state employment
share declined by half, from 60% to 30% in 1995-2002, as shown in Panel C of Figure 3. Rural-
to-urban migration also gained momentum, which severely worsened labor market conditions
of low-skilled urban residents. These events underlay the massive rise in unemployment
rates that we observe during this period. The enactment of the labor law also signalled
the structural change in China’s labor market from centrally-controlled to market-oriented.
Some groups, such as older less educated females, suffered especially from the mass-layoffs.
Regions that had more SOEs and layoffs also had witnessed a more severe worsening of
labor market conditions, characterized by both rising unemployment and declining labor
force participation.
     In the last subperiod from 2002 to 2009, WTO entry helped to improve labor demand.
The college enrollment expansion, which increased quality of labor force, also served to halt
the rising trend in unemployment. Meanwhile, unemployment rates became substantially
more volatile, suggesting that the labor market was more sensitive to changes in macro
economic conditions as a result of the structural changes. After the unemployment rate
peaked in 2002-2005, it started to decline slightly, and sharply dipped in 2007, with an
recovery in 2008. The decline in unemployment rate during the 2005-2007 period can be
considered as a recovery from the end of SOE mass layoffs. The 2007 dip in unemployment
rate coincided with an exceptionally high real GDP growth rate of 14.2%, as compared to
only 9.6% in 2008 (see Panel D of Figure 3). The rebound after 2007 can be linked to the
global financial crisis. Overall, it seems that the most recent natural rate of unemployment
rate are very different from the 1980s and early 1990s because of fundamental changes in the
labor market and the overall economic structure.


                                             14
4.2      Subgroup Results
4.2.1     Results by demographic group
        Panel A of Table 1 also presents results for different demographic groups for the three
subperiods, with more detailed information shown in Figure A2. The patterns displayed
by all groups are similar: unemployment rates increased most during the 1995-2002 period,
while experiencing considerably smaller changes in the first and last subperiods. Three
groups have witnessed the highest growth rates in unemployment rate during 1995-2002:
non-college younger females (1.8 percentage points increase p.a.), non-college younger males
(1.2 percentage points p.a.) and non-college older females (1.1 percentage points p.a.).
As a result, during the last subperiod of 2002-2009, these three groups also posted the
highest unemployment rates. The average unemployment rates for the non-college younger
females, non-college younger males, and non-college older females were 18.3%, 14.5% and
9.9%, respectively. On the other hand, older college males and females posted the lowest
unemployment rates in all subperiods. Even in 2002-2009, both groups had unemployment
rates of less than 2%. Overall, we see that people without college degrees, younger people,
and females systematically face more slack labor markets than their more educated, older,
and male counterparts. Figure A3 show that if we keep the 1988 demographic composition
unchanged, unemployment rates would have increased much more significantly. This is
understandable as levels of education have improved substantially, especially for younger
people in the post-2002 period.
        In terms of labor force participation, we see a sharp decline for young people in the
1995-2002 subperiod (see Figure A2 and Panel B of Table 1). For male non-college youths, the
labor force participation rate was 83.9% in the first subperiod and declined steadily to around
72.1% in the last subperiod, representing almost a 12 percentage point decline. Similarly,
male college educated youths and female non-college and college educated youths all have
experienced more than a 10 percentage point decline, with the decreasing trend continuing
in the last subperiod. The results suggest that cohort differences might be in play and that
the younger generation may have faced higher cost and/or lower benefit in participating

                                               15
labor market. Of course, for people below 25, the decline in labor force participation may
be related to increased schooling. Note that for less educated youth, given the coinciding
movements in both the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate, rather
than just selecting out of labor market voluntarily, they are likely to have faced increasingly
tougher labor market conditions compared to other groups.
        Figure A3 shows that, unlike unemployment, changes in overall labor force participation
over time are not a result of demographic changes. If we fix the demographic composition in
the population at the 1988 level, we would only have witnessed slightly lower participation
rates in the last subperiod.
4.2.2     Results by region
        We also present results for different regions in China, including North, Northeast, East,
South Central, Southwest, and Northwest.13 Panel A of Table 1 gives results by subperiods,
while the graphs are shown in Figure A4. Overall, different regions follow quite similar pat-
terns: unemployment rates remained at low levels in the first subperiod, rose rapidly during
the second subperiod, and then declined slightly during the last subperiod. Nevertheless, for
regions with more SOE layoffs, the rise in unemployment rate in 1995-2002 was more signif-
icant. As shown in Table A2, the three regions with largest increases in unemployment rate
during the 1995-2002 period are the Northeast (1.2 percentage point increase p.a), South
Central (1.3 percentage point increase p.a.) and Southwest (1.1 percentage point increase
p.a.). These regions happen to be the top three in terms of SOE layoff. For example, in
the Northeast region, which was one of the hardest-hit areas during the SOE reform pe-
riod, 7.3 million workers were laid off during the 1995-2002 period, or 42% of its total SOE
employment in 1995.
        Panel B of Table 1 show labor force participation results for different regions (see also
Figure A4). The general patterns are quite similar, with all regions experiencing consistent
  13
   The provinces included in different regions are as follows. North (5 provinces): Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei,
Shanxi, Inner Mongolia. Northeast (3): Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang. East (7): Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang,
Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi, Shandong. South Central (6): Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan.
Southwest (5): Chongqing, Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan, Tibet. Northwest (5): Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai,
Ningxia, Xinjiang.



                                                    16
declines throughout the study period, but especially in 1995-2002. The Northwest region
seems a bit different from other regions, with a relatively low participation rate of 80.5% in
the 1988-1995 period and the most significant decline in 1995-2002. As a result, its average
participation level was only 69.8% in the last subperiod of 2002-2009. This was likely a result
of cultural differences, as the Northwest provinces are populated by Muslim ethnic groups.
The East region, which is the most economic developed, always had the highest participation
rates.
4.2.3      Results by cohort
         Finally, we examine patterns for different birth cohorts. Panel A of Figure A5 shows
unemployment rates for males for four different cohorts: those who were born before 1960,
those born in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, while panel B depicts results for females. The
most striking pattern is that younger people had very high unemployment rates, especially
for more recent cohorts. This is doubtedly a result of timing when the different cohorts
entered the labor market. Even at the age of around 30, the 1970s female cohorts had
roughly a 10% unemployment rate, as compared to only 3% for females born in the 1960s.
For males, the pre-1970 cohorts also had unemployment rates around 5 percentage points
lower than that of those born after 1970 when they were 30. However, as workers age, the
gap in unemployment rates gradually closes. At around 40, the 1960s cohort and 1970s
cohort had roughly the same unemployment rate. It is important to note that the patterns
shown are gross estimates for different cohorts at different ages. As we have not controlled
for year effects and changes in demographic composition, the estimates cannot be simply
understood as a cohort effect.
         For different cohorts, as shown in Figure A5 (Panel C and Panel D), younger gener-
ations have significantly lower participation rates when they were young, which should be
partly a result of increased schooling years, particularly the college enrollment expansion
that affected the 1980s cohort. Nevertheless, for males (Panel C), at around age 30, differ-
ent cohorts converged. For females, more recent cohorts had somewhat lower participation
rates continuously, possibly due to changes in and out of labor market that makes women’s


                                               17
participation more difficult (or less rewarding). For example, Maurer-Fazio et al. (2011) and
Du and Dong (2013) have discussed the role of child care on the decline of married women’s
labor market participation in China.

4.3    Comparison with other estimates
      Although many researchers have tried to estimate China’s true unemployment rates
and labor force participation rates, the studies vary in methodology and most of them also
suffer from serious data limitations (see reviews by Giles et al., 2005). The study of John
Giles, Albert Park and their coauthors (see. e.g. Giles et al., 2005 and 2006) was exceptional
in two senses. First, they used self-collected individual-level data. Second, their questions
regarding labor force statuses were based on ILO standards. The main limitation of their
study is that their data were collected in only five large cities (Fuzhou, Shanghai, Shengyang,
Wuhan and Xi’an) in 2002, although respondents were also asked to recall information for
the 1996-2001 period. National statistics were then estimated using information from the
five cities. Nevertheless, it is still informative to compare our results with Giles et al. (2005)
and other studies.
      Regarding the unemployment rate, our results are fairly consistent with most other
existing estimates on two important points. First, the actual levels of China’s unemployment
rates are significantly higher than the official ones, especially since the mid-1990s with the
kickoff of labor market reforms. Second, there were significant increases in unemployment
from the mid-1990s to the early 2000s. Based on estimates from Giles et al. (2005), the urban
unemployment rate rose from 6.1% in 1995 to 10.8% in 2001, or an increase of 4.7 percentage
points. As a comparison, our estimated unemployment rate increased 4.5 percentage points
for the same period. It was 8.8% for year 2001, up from 4.3% in 1995. Therefore, although the
Giles et al. (2005) estimates are higher than ours in levels, the change during this time period
was strikingly similar. Both sets of results are much higher than the official unemployment
rate, which was only 3.6% in the year 2001. In another study also based on micro level data,
Liu (2012) reported that the 2002 unemployment rate was 9.5% using China Household
Income Project (CHIP) compared to our rate of 11.4% in that year. But CHIP only covers


                                               18
around 10 Chinese provinces and has a much smaller sample size than the UHS. Still, the
rise in the unemployment rate between CHIP1995 and CHIP2002 was significant and similar
to UHS-based estimates.14
       Although the Chinese government does not release official labor force participation
rates, two alternative estimates are available from existing studies for the years roughly
corresponding to our second subperiod of 1995-2002. Both series show a significant decline
in labor force participation similar to what we observed based on UHS data. Cai et al. (2008)
use official aggregate labor statistics and report that labor force participation rates for the
working age population declined from 73% in 1996 to 64% in 2004. Using the Chinese Urban
Labor Survey (CULS) that was conducted in five large Chinese cities by the authors, Giles
et al. (2006) find that the labor force participation rate in these cities declined from 83.3%
in 1996 to 74.4% in 2001. These trends are similar to our estimates based on UHS. Studies
of female labor force participation have also documented similar declining trends based on
other data sets as ours, see e.g. Du and Dong (2013) and Maurer-Fazio et al. (2011).

4.4     Measurement of search and unemployment
       A serious concern for the UHS data is that the NBS does not specifically ask for labor
search activities, which is necessary in order to use definitions given by the ILO. Rather,
the labor force statuses fall into 15 different categories based on the information provided
by the respondent and using the interviewer’s judgement. Despite that, the study of Giles
et al. (2005) has shown that the NBS-based classification may be quite close to ILO-based
measures. The authors surveyed labor force status in five Chinese cities in 2002 using ques-
tionnaires consistent with ILO standards and then compared the generated unemployment
rates with the predicted ones based on historical NBS-based unemployment rates. They
found the difference to be quite small. The actual ILO-based unemployment rates are only
  14
    The latest Chinese census suggests that unemployment rate was 4.9% for urban residents aged between
16-59 (including both with and without local hukou). There are two new nationally representative surveys
launched after 2010, China Household Finance Survey (CHFS) by Southwest University of Finance and
Economics, and China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) by Peking University. While CHFS reports that
unemployment rate for the urban hukou 16-55 population in 2011 was 11.2% (CHFS, 2012), CFPS reports
a much lower unemployment rate of 4.6% for 2012 for those urban hukou people aged 16-59 (CFPS, 2013).
Our latest number was 10.4% for the year of 2009, which is closer to the CHFS estimate.


                                                  19
1.064 times the predicted rates based on historical NBS-based rates. To show the magnitude
of the difference, if the ILO-based unemployment rate is 9%, the predicted rate would be
8.5%. The actual difference between ILO-based and NBS-based unemployment rates could
be even smaller if prediction errors are taken into account.
     After a careful examination of all the 15 labor force statuses categories, we find that
the most ambiguous category is “other non-working-age nonemployed people”. Because no
further information is provided, it is difficult to be certain whether this belongs to unemploy-
ment or not-in-labor-force. Fortunately, this group mostly applies to those who have passed
the official working age upper limit. Thus, it should not affect our results much regardless.
As a robustness check, we classified those “other non-working-age nonemployed people” as
unemployed. The results (Table A3) show that doing this only increased unemployment
rates slightly and hardly affected labor force participation rates. For example, in 2002-2009,
the average unemployment rate was 11.2% as compared to our baseline result of 10.9%, and
the average labor force participation rate was 74.2%, only slightly higher than the baseline
rate of 73.9%.
     Another concern regards laid-off workers, which is particularly an issue for middle-
aged and old SOE workers in the SOE reform period. If the laid-off worker has no hope
of returning to her previous job despite a nominal relationship with her previous employer,
it seems not appropriate to classify her as ‘employed’. On the other hand, as discussed by
Giles et al. (2005), it may be also too simplistic to classify laid-off workers as ‘unemployed’.
Nevertheless, to shed light on the possible magnitude of this problem, we conduct a test
by assigning all SOE workers aged 35 and above who have no wage income as unemployed
rather than employed. The results are shown in Table A3. As expected, this mostly affects
the 1995-2002 mass-layoff period. The unemployment rate averaged 7.2%, which is 0.6
percentage points higher than our baseline estimate. The results for the 1988-1995 and 2002-
2009 periods are negligible. Of course, without further information on search activities, we
can never be completely sure about the labor force status of these workers, but this does not
seem to affect the trends in different subperiods.


                                              20
       A more general approach to measurement errors in the unemployment rate can be
achieved by following Feng and Hu (2013) by modeling the underlying true labor force
status as a latent process potentially subject to measurement error. Using matched annual
UHS data, we estimate the misclassification probabilities for different demographic groups,
as shown in Table A4. Overall, there were many fewer measurement errors compared to the
US (see Table 1 in Feng and Hu, 2013). Once we correct the unemployment rates and labor
force participation rates (Table A3) using the estimated misclassification probabilities, we
find that the corrected rates are very close to the baseline results.15

4.5     Additional robustness checks
       In this subsection we perform some additional exercises to insure that the main trends
that we report are robust. The main results in the paper are all weighted based on population
Census. Previous studies based on UHS (see. e.g. Ge and Yang, 2014) have noted that the
UHS samples overrepresent older people, especially those from the state sector. Therefore,
it is important to weight the sample in order to derive correct statistics. To illustrate the
effects of weighting, we also show the unweighted results (see series A4 in Figure A6 and
row A4 in Table A3). In general, compared to our baseline results which are weighted,
the unweighted unemployment rates are significantly lower and the unweighted labor force
participation rates are higher. This is mainly because young people which have relatively
high unemployment rates and low labor force participation rates are under represented in
UHS. Figure A1 demonstrates how weighting changes the distributions in terms of age and
education in the UHS sample.
       A related issue that has been overlooked in the literature is attrition. By design,
sample households may stay in UHS for up to three years, but they always enter the UHS
in January and, when they exit, it should always be December. However, the annual file of
UHS only includes labor force status of December of that year. Thus even if the sample was
  15
     The latent variable approach might not be able to identify measurement errors that are systematic over
time. For example, if discouraged workers as always classified as unemployed rather than not-in-labor-force,
then the approach used by Feng and Hu (2013) would not be able to identify such measurement errors. In
this example, Assumption 5 in Feng and Hu (2013) that requires each individual to be more likely to report
the true labor force status than to report any other possible values are violated.


                                                    21
representative initially (in January), it may no longer be so in the data we actually use (in
December) if there is non-random attrition. To address this issue, we have used the internal
UHS monthly sample from January 2004 to December 2006, which allow us to observe the
detailed monthly attrition patterns for these years. Based on the attrition rates for each
demographic groups,16 we calculate attrition weights and then apply them to adjust the
unemployment rates and labor force participation rates for all years. Under the assumptions
that attrition is random conditional on demographics and that the attrition process stays the
same during the whole study period, our procedure adequately addresses the issue. Series A5
in Table A6 shows that attrition matters very little for our estimates. The unemployment
rates stay virtually unchanged and the labor force participation rates are only slightly lower
after we correct for attrition.
       We also consider different sample selection rules. First, we restrict the sample differ-
ently to include both males and females aged between 16 to 60. This makes the sample more
comparable to international practice despite the fact that the official working age upper limit
is 55 for females in China. As shown in Table A3, doing so reduces labor force participation
rates somewhat. This is hardly surprising as women aged between 55 and 60 are much less
likely to participate in the labor market.
       We also include the non-local-urban-hukou people in the sample for the post-2002
years. As we can seen from Table A3 (row A7), the unemployment rates and labor force
participation rates are basically unchanged. Thus, the migrant sample in the UHS are very
similar to the hukou population in terms of labor market activities. This does not imply that
migrants as a whole are similar to local people with hukou. The UHS may well under-sample
temporary migrants for at least two main reasons. First, many migrants live in group living
quarters such as construction sites not included in the sampling frame of UHS. Second, non-
response rates are also much higher for more temporary migrants. The study of labor market
conditions of migrants without local urban hukou is beyond the scope of this paper.
  16
    We divide the sample into 8 demographic groups using sex/age/education the same way as elsewhere in
the paper.




                                                  22
5     Summary

     The official unemployment rate series for China is implausible and is an outlier in the
distribution of unemployment rates across countries ranked by their stage of development.
There is strong evidence that this is the result of mismeasurement of the official rate. We
provide the most comprehensive evidence to date that this mismeasurement is the source of
the outlier status of China in the world distribution of unemployment rates. We show that,
when properly measured, the unemployment rate in China is consistent with its economic
and labor market history and its unemployment rate can be reconciled with those of other
countries.
     This paper bases its new findings on a nationally representative household survey in
China. The survey is administered by the National Bureau of Statistics and is the only
source of information regarding Chinese labor market during the last two decades. Our
specific contributions are three. First, we report, for the first time, a nationally representative
time series on the unemployment rate and labor force participation rate dating back to the
late 1980s. Second, we identify several demographic groups that post high unemployment
and low participation rates, including younger less educated people and older, less educated
females. We also show that regions with more SOE layoffs experienced a greater increase in
unemployment. These particular demographic groups and regions deserve policy priority to
achieve maximum employment. Third, we compare different cohorts and show that recent
cohorts experience significantly higher unemployment rates and lower participation rates
than those of their predecessors, particularly when they were young.
     The regularities that this paper reveals are largely consistent with the economic trans-
formations and macroeconomic developments in China during the past several decades. How-
ever, we view this paper only a first step toward a full understanding of the Chinese labor
market over that period. Because of data limitations we have not studied labor market
outcomes for people living in cities but without official registration status, a group that has
becoming increasingly important since late 1990s. The exact labor market consequences of


                                                23
many important events, such as rural-to-urban migration, WTO entry, and mass layoff from
SOEs, as well as secular social and cultural changes that may have affected participation
patterns, are left for further investigation in the future.




                                               24
References
Fang Cai, Albert Park, and Yaohui Zhao. The Chinese labor market in the reform era. In
  Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, editors, China’s Great Economic Transformation.
  Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Fang Cai, Yang Du, and Meiyan Wang. Demystify the labor statistics in China. China
  Economic Journal, 6(2-3):123–133, 2013.

Hongbin Cai, Yuyu Chen, and Li-An Zhou. Income and consumption inequality in urban
  China: 1992-2003. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 58(3):385–413, 2010.

CFPS. China Family Panel Studies 2013. in Chinese, China Family Panel Studies, Peking
  University, 2013.

Marcos D. Chamon and Eswar S. Prasad. Why are saving rates of urban households in
  China rising? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1):93–130, 2010.

Kam Wing Chan and Will Buckingham. Is China abolishing the hukou system? The China
  Quarterly, 195(1):582–606, 2008.

CHFS. China urban unemployment report. In Chinese, China Household Finance Survey,
  Southwest University of Finance and Economics, 2012.

Gregory Chow. Are Chinese official statistics reliable? CESifo Economic Studies, 52(2):
  396–414, 2006.

Xiao-Yuan Dong and Louis Putterman. Soft budget constraints, social burdens, and labor
  redundancy in China’s state industry. Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(1):110–133,
  2003.

Fenglian Du and Xiao-yuan Dong. Women’s employment and child care choices in urban
  China during the economic transition. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 62
  (1):131–155, 2013.

                                            25
Shuaizhang Feng and Yingyao Hu. Misclassification errors and the underestimation of the
  U.S. unemployment rate. American Economic Review, 103(2):1054–1070, 2013.

John Fernald, Israel Malkin, and Mark Spiegel. On the reliability of Chinese output figures.
  FRBSF Economic Letter, 8:1–5, 2013.

Suqin Ge and Tao Yang. Changes in China’s wage structure. Journal of European Economic
  Association, 12(2):300–336, 2014.

John Giles, Albert Park, and Juwei Zhang. What is China’s true unemployment rate? China
  Economic Review, 16:149–170, 2005.

John Giles, Albert Park, and Fang Cai. How has economic restructuring affected China’s
  urban workers? China Quarterly, 185:61–95, 2006.

Carsten A. Holz. The quality of China’s GDP statistics. MPRA Paper No. 51864, 2014.

Nicholas R. Lardy. China’s unfinished economic revolution. Brookings Institution Press,
  1998.

Hongbin Li, Lei Li, Binzhen Wu, and Yanyan Xiong. The end of cheap Chinese labor. The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4):57–74, 2012.

Justin Yifu Lin. Rural reforms and agricultural growth in China. American Economic
  Review, 82(1):34–51, 1992.

Qian Liu. Unemployment and labor force participation in urban China. China Economic
  Review, 23:18–33, 2012.

Margaret Maurer-Fazio, Rachel Connelly, Lan Chen, and Lixin Tang. Childcare, eldercare,
  and labor force participation of married women in urban China, 1982-2000. Journal of
  Human Resources, 46(2):261–294, 2011.

Xin Meng. Labor market outcomes and reforms in China. The Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 26(4):75–102, 2012.

                                            26
Xin Meng, Kailing Shen, and Sen Xue. Economic reform, education expansion, and earnings
  inequality for urban males in China, 1988-2009. Journal of Comparative Economics, 41
  (1):227–244, 2013.

National Bureau of Statistics. China statistical yearbook. Various years.

Martin Ravallion and Shaohua Chen. When economic reform is faster than statistical reform:
  measuring and explaining income inequality in rural China. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
  and Statistics, 61(1):33–56, 1999.

Thomas G. Rawski. What’s happening to China’s GDP statistics? China Economic Review,
  12(4):298–302, 2001.

David Turnham and Denizhan Erocal. Unemployment in developing countries: New light
  on an old problem. 1990. Working Paper No. 22, OECD Development Centre.

David Turnham and Ingelies Jaeger. The employment problem in less developed countries.
  OECD Development Center Employment Series, (1), 1971.

Alan T. Udall and Stuart Sinclair. The ‘luxury unemployment’ hypothesis: A review of the
  recent evidence. World Development, 10(1):49–62, 1982.

Alwyn Young. Gold into base metals: Productivity growth in the People’s Republic of China
  during the reform period. Journal of Political Economy, 111(6):1220–1261, 2003.

Junsen Zhang, Yaohui Zhao, Albert Park, and Xiaoqing Song. Economic returns to schooling
  in urban China, 1988 to 2001. Journal of Comparative Economics, 33(4):730–752, 2005.

Junsen Zhang, Jun Han, Pak-Wai Liu, and Yaohui Zhao. Trends in the gender earnings
  differential in urban China, 1988-2004. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 61(2):
  224–243, 2008.

Xiaobo Zhang, Yang Jin, and Shenglin Wang. China has reached the Lewis turning point.
  China Economic Review, 22(4):542–554, 2011.

                                            27
Appendix: Detailed explanation of Employment Status

from the UHS interviewer manual
     Employment status refers to the current employment situation of the respondent, in-
cluding those who are not employed. All respondents are required to fill in the employment
status according to the following list of categories.
     1: Employees of state-owned economic units: refers to people working in and paid by
the following units: public institutions owned by the party or the government, state-owned
enterprises and their affiliated units. Workers in stock companies where the state has the
majority share are also included in this category. However, people reemployed after official
retirement are not included.
     2: Workers in urban collective economic units: refers to people working in and paid
by urban collectively-owned enterprises, collectively-owned public institutions and their af-
filiated economics units. Those who are reemployed after retirement are not included.
     3: Workers in economic units of other types: refers to people working in and paid
by economic units of mixed ownerships, joint-stock firms, foreign and Hong Kong, Macau,
Taiwan invested firms, and other types of economic units. People reemployed after official
retirement are not included.
     4: Urban self-employed and private entrepreneurs: also known as self-employed per-
sons (individual employers and self-employed persons), refers to an individual or a couple or
several partners work together, and own the production assets and the final product (and
income generated). They should have obtained the approval and receive the license for “in-
dividual or private business operations”. Those who have not obtained a license yet but has
normal operations at a fixed place should also be included in this category, including: Em-
ployer: refers to people who have the appropriate license and hire at least one employee (not
a household member) in their businesses. Self-employed persons: refers to people who have
a proper license but have not hired any other individuals (except for the family members).
     5: Employees in private enterprises: refers to people who are hired and paid by self-


                                              28
employed people and private entrepreneurs.
     6: Re-employed retirees: refers to people who are hired by their original employers or
other employers after official retirement, and receive payment other than their pension. Those
self-employed with a proper business license after retirement are also included. Retirees who
have performed some social activities during the survey month with remunerations enough
to cover basic living cost should also be included.
     7: Other employed people: refers to people who are employed but not included in the
above six categories, including: those without a stable job but has performed social activities
for more than half of the month during the survey month and earned remunerations enough
to cover basic living cost. Some examples are: people who take raw materials from a firm
and process in their own home, washing and mending from home, childcare, nanny, freelance
writers and painters, and people who provide service in information as intermediaries, stocks
and other investments in securities, and other self-employed without proper license or fixed
work place. Middle school, high school, college students who participate in work during the
holidays are not counted as employed people, although they may receive remunerations. The
payments they receive should be counted as “other labor income”.
     The following are the categories for non-employed people:
     8: Retirees: refer to people who are officially retired and rely only on pension for
living. Those who are reemployed after retirement should be considered as employed and
not included here.
     9: Incapacitated: refer to working-age people (16-60 years old for men and 16-55 years
old for women) who are unable to work due to psychological, physical disabilities, illnesses
or other reasons.
     10: People responsible for housekeeping: refer to working-age people who stay at home
to perform household duties and receive no remunerations, and have no intention to seek
paid employment outside home.
     11: Unemployed: refer to working-age people who are capable of working, has per-
formed paid work before, but do not have a job at the time of the survey, and are actively


                                              29
looking for job, and are currently available for work. Note those who are performing some
kind of paid work and seeking new jobs at the same time should be considered employed
and not included in this category.
     12: People waiting to be assigned to jobs: refer to people who are waiting to be assigned
to jobs by the government after they graduate from colleges, technical high schools and other
technical schools. Demobilized soldiers who have waited for less than a year to be assigned
to jobs by the government should also be included here.
     13: Students: refers to people who study in all types of schools.
     14: People waiting to enter the next level of schools: refers to middle school and high
school graduates who are waiting to enter the next level of schools, and high school graduates
studying at home to prepare for college entrance exams.
     15: Other non-employed people: refer to other non-employed people not included in
the above categories.




                                             30
                       Figure 1: Unemployment rates by country: 1988-2013.


           12
           10
           8
           6
           4
           2




                1988    1991       1994      1997      2000       2003      2006      2009   2012

                           High income countries                       low income countries
                           lower middle income countries               upper middle income countries
                           China − official




Source:        China-official:       National Bureau     of    Statistics   of     China.       Other   series:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS (accessed 5/21/15) .




                                                        31
Figure 2: Unemployment rates by country: 1988-2013, with China-UHS.


12
10
8
6
4
2




     1988   1991       1994       1997       2000       2003       2006       2009      2012

               High income countries                         low income countries
               lower middle income countries                 upper middle income countries
               China − official                              China − UHS




Source: China-UHS: Author’s calculations based on UHS. Other series are the same as in Figure 1.




                                              32
Figure 3: National Unemployment Rates and Labor Force Participation Rates: 1988-2009.


            .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12
                                                                Panel A: Unemployment Rates




                                     1988   1991   1994              1997               2000           2003   2006   2009

                                                                            UHS           Official



                                                           Panel B: Labor Force Participation Rates
            .85
            .8
            .75
            .7




                                     1988   1991   1994              1997               2000           2003   2006   2009

                                                                                  UHS



                                                          Panel C: State Sector Employment Ratio (%)
            70
            60
            50
            40
            30
            20




                                     1988   1991   1994              1997               2000           2003   2006   2009


                                                             Panel D: Real GDP Growth Rate (%)
            14
            12
            10
            8
            6
            4




                                     1988   1991   1994              1997               2000           2003   2006   2009




Note: Sample restricted to people with local urban hukou and aged 16-60 for males and 16-55 for females. In Panels A and B,
the shaded areas represent 95% confidence bands based on 500 bootstrapped samples.
Source: Panels A & B, author’s calculations based on UHS. Panels C & D: National Bureau of Statistics.



                                                                              33
 Table 1: Unemployment rates and Labor Force Participation rates by subperiod (%)

                             subperiod 1            subperiod 2             subperiod 3
                             (1988-1995)            (1995-2002)             (2002-2009)
                       Average Annual Chg. Average Annual Chg.         Average Annual Chg.
                                Panel A: Unemployment Rate
Nation                   3.9          0.1       6.6          1.0         10.9       -0.1
-by demographics
Male/Young/Non-col       6.1         0.4         10.2           1.2      14.5       -0.4
Male/Young/Col           0.9         -0.0        3.4            0.8      7.3        0.2
Male/Old/Non-col         0.1          0.0        1.3            0.6      5.3        0.2
Male/Old/Col             0.0          0.0        0.4            0.2      1.2        0.0
Female/Young/Non-col     5.9         0.2         11.4           1.8      18.3       -0.3
Female/Young/Col         1.4         0.0          3.8           0.8       7.9       0.5
Female/Old/Non-col       0.5          0.0        2.7            1.1      9.9        0.3
Female/Old/Col           0.0          0.0        0.5            0.2      1.7        0.0
-by region
North                     2.6         0.1         4.8            0.8      8.7        0.1
Northeast                 3.6         0.2         7.9            1.2     12.5       -0.3
East                      2.8         0.1         4.8            0.9      9.0       -0.1
South Central            4.6          0.0        7.7             1.3     12.3       -0.3
Southwest                5.6          0.1        8.3             1.1     13.4       -0.2
Northwest                6.9         -0.1        8.0             0.7     10.9        0.1
                           Panel B: Labor Force Participation   Rate
Nation                   83.1        -0.4        79.7           -0.8     73.9       -0.5
-by demographics
Male/Young/Non-col       83.9        -0.7        79.6           -1.0     72.1       -0.8
Male/Young/Col           83.1         0.1        80.3           -1.1     72.4       -0.3
Male/Old/Non-col         92.0        -0.1        89.7           -0.3     89.6        0.3
Male/Old/Col             98.1         0.0        96.2           -0.2     96.0       0.1
Female/Young/Non-col     83.6        -0.7        78.9           -1.1     69.2       -1.1
Female/Young/Col         79.1         2.2        78.8           -1.0     69.7       -0.6
Female/Old/Non-col       67.2         0.3        66.3           -0.4     63.2       -0.4
Female/Old/Col           95.7        -0.4        90.8           -0.7     89.7        0.0
-by region
North                    82.2        -0.4        78.1           -0.9     71.5       -0.5
Northeast                81.6        -0.2        79.1           -0.8     73.9       -0.7
East                     85.1        -0.5        80.8           -0.7     76.3       -0.3
South Central            82.8        -0.5        80.3           -0.7     74.1       -0.6
Southwest                83.4        -0.5        79.9           -0.7     73.6       -0.3
Northwest                80.5        -0.3        77.3           -1.3     69.8       -0.4




                                        34
Figure A1: Weighted and unweighted distributions on education and age


                           Male >=40 ratio                                                        Female >=40 ratio
1




                                                                        1
.8




                                                                        .8
.6




                                                                        .6
.4




                                                                        .4
.2




                                                                        .2
0




                                                                        0
     1988   1991   1994       1997      2000    2003      2006   2009        1988   1991   1994       1997      2000      2003      2006   2009

                          Unweighted           Weighted                                           Unweighted             Weighted




                          Male college ratio                                                      Female college ratio
1




                                                                        1
.8




                                                                        .8
.6




                                                                        .6
.4




                                                                        .4
.2




                                                                        .2
0




                                                                        0




     1988   1991   1994       1997      2000    2003      2006   2009        1988   1991   1994       1997      2000      2003      2006   2009

                          Unweighted           Weighted                                           Unweighted             Weighted




                                         Note: Authors’ calculations based on UHS.




                                                                   35
    Figure A2: Unemployment and Labor Force Participation by Demographic Group.

                                    Unemployment Rates by Demographic Group
          .2
          .15
          .1
          .05
          0




                1988   1991       1994                1997              2000                 2003     2006   2009


                                     Labor Force Participation Rates by Demographic Group
          1
          .9
          .8
          .7
          .6




                1988   1991       1994                1997              2000                 2003     2006   2009

                                         Male/Young/Non−College                Male/Young/College
                                         Male/Old/Non−College                  Male/Old/College
                                         Female/Young/Non−College              Female/Young/College
                                         Female/Old/Non−College                Female/Old/College




Note: Sample restricted to people with local urban hukou and aged 16-60 for males and 16-55 for females.




                                                                36
                              Figure A3: Effects of demographic changes

                                                 Unemployment Rates
          .14
          .12
          .1
          .08
          .06
          .04




                1988   1991         1994           1997               2000                2003    2006   2009


                                            Labor Force Participation Rates
          .85
          .8
          .75
          .7




                1988   1991         1994           1997               2000                2003    2006   2009

                                           UHS            Constant 1988 Demographic Composition




Note: Sample restricted to people with local urban hukou and aged 16-60 for males and 16-55 for females.




                                                          37
                Figure A4: Unemployment and Labor Force Participation by Region.

                                         Unemployment Rates by Region
          .15
          .1
          .05
          0




                1988    1991      1994         1997            2000              2003   2006   2009


                                             LFP Rates by Region
          .9
          .85
          .8
          .75
          .7




                1988    1991      1994         1997            2000              2003   2006   2009

                                              North              Northeast
                                              East               South Central
                                              Southwest          Northwest




Note: Sample restricted to people with local urban hukou and aged 16-60 for males and 16-55 for females.




                                                          38
        Figure A5: Unemployment and Labor Force Participation by Cohort.


               A: Unemployment rates for males, by cohort                        B: Unemployment rates for females, by cohort
   .8




                                                                       .8
   .6




                                                                       .6
   .4




                                                                       .4
   .2




                                                                       .2
   0




                                                                       0




          20    25     30          35    40    45       50   55   60        20     25     30          35    40    45       50   55   60

                            Pre_1960            y1960_1969                                     Pre_1960            y1960_1969

                            y1970_1979          y1980_1989                                     y1970_1979          y1980_1989




                      C: LFP for males, by cohort                                       D: LFP for females, by cohort
   1




                                                                       1
   .8




                                                                       .8
   .6




                                                                       .6
   .4




                                                                       .4
   .2




                                                                       .2
   0




                                                                       0




          20    25     30          35    40    45       50   55   60        20     25     30          35    40    45       50   55   60

                            Pre_1960            y1960_1969                                     Pre_1960            y1960_1969

                            y1970_1979          y1980_1989                                     y1970_1979          y1980_1989




Note: Sample restricted to people with local urban hukou and aged 16-60 for males and 16-55 for females.




                                                                   39
                              Figure A6: Robustness Check Results.


       .12
       .1
       .08
       .06
       .04
       .02




             1988     1991         1994                   1997          2000                  2003            2006   2009
       .85
       .8
       .75
       .7




             1988     1991         1994                   1997          2000                  2003            2006   2009

                                    Baseline                               A1: Alternative classification 1
                                    A2: Alternative classification 2       A3: Correcting misclassification
                                    A4: Unweighted                         A5: Correcting attrition
                                    A6: Age 16−60 both sex                 A7: Including non_hukou




Source: Authors’ calculation from UHS.




                                                                   40
                                          Table A1: Sample Size

       Male         Male       Male         Male    Female    Female   Female    Female
Year   Young        Young      Old          Old     Young     Young    Old       Old      Total
       Non-col      Col        Non-col      Col     Non-col   Col      Non-col   Col
1988   8727         1079       5569         1290    10268     609      5291      352      33185
1989   8092         1172       5422         1260    9458      605      5129      377      31515
1990   8094         1255       5684         1441    9581      743      5370      459      32627
1991   7905         1495       5365         1450    9459      917      5064      403      32058
1992   8852         2131       6423         2048    10668     1364     6207      705      38398
1993   8313         2067       6524         2111    10008     1368     6414      712      37517
1994   7824         2358       6463         2117    9524      1532     6493      758      37069
1995   7549         2302       6721         2113    9137      1546     6691      787      36846
1996   7319         2365       7012         2173    8790      1641     6932      838      37070
1997   7060         2441       7099         2076    8617      1764     7028      781      36866
1998   6940         2574       7183         2147    8349      1956     7218      830      37197
1999   6751         2552       7239         2295    7885      2124     7449      923      37218
2000   6350         2852       7026         2121    7599      2368     7184      887      36387
2001   6285         2798       7230         2136    7392      2414     7357      917      36529
2002   14536        7530       18447        6395    16912     6930     18762     2825     92337
2003   15764        8125       20633        7539    18168     7678     20985     3459     102351
2004   15333        8553       21463        8346    17534     8426     21607     4049     105311
2005   16175        9924       22177        9199    18226     9867     21875     4639     112082
2006   15977        10209      22565        9970    17740     10331    22308     5160     114260
2007   15786        11508      23775        10901   17623     12021    23236     5829     120679
2008   17077        13588      25412        10656   18558     14032    24076     5719     129118
2009   15570        13058      25179        11423   16906     13664    23713     6317     125830
 Source: Authors’ calculation from UHS.




                                                    41
                          Table A2: Unemployment and SOE mass layoff

                       Unemployment Rate                    SOE Layoff
                      Average   Annual Chg.   Total number of      % of total State
                    (1995-2002) (1995-2002) laidoff workers (mn) employment in 1995
North                   4.8         0.8             3.965                 22
Northeast               7.9         1.2             7.327                 42
East                    4.8         0.9             5.312                 19
South Central           7.7         1.3             7.102                 27
Southwest               8.3         1.1             2.856                 23
Northwest               8.0         0.7             2.066                 21
 Source: The first two columns are the same as in Table 1. The last two columns are from National Bureau of Statistics.




                                                        42
Table A3: Alternative Estimates of Unemployment rates and Labor Force Participation rates
(%)

                  subperiod 1               subperiod 2             subperiod 3
                  (1988-1995)               (1995-2002)             (2002-2009)
            Average Annual Chg. Average Annual Chg. Average Annual Chg.
                             Panel A: Unemployment Rate
   Baseline   3.9           0.1         6.6           1.0      10.9          -0.1
   A1         4.3           0.0         6.9           1.0      11.2          -0.2
   A2         4.0           0.1         7.2           1.0      10.9          -0.2
   A3         3.7           0.1         6.5           1.1      11.0          -0.1
   A4         3.1          -0.0         5.0          0.8        8.0          -0.1
   A5         3.9           0.1         6.6           1.0      10.9          -0.1
   A6         3.9           0.1         6.6           1.0      10.9          -0.1
   A7         3.9           0.1         6.6           1.0      10.8          -0.1
                       Panel B: Labor Force Participation Rate
   Baseline  83.1          -0.4        79.7          -0.8      73.9          -0.5
   A1        83.4          -0.4        79.9          -0.7      74.2          -0.5
   A2        83.1          -0.4        79.7          -0.8      73.9          -0.5
   A3        83.1          -0.4        79.7          -0.8      74.0          -0.5
   A4        85.0          -0.0        82.1          -0.8      78.3          -0.0
   A5        83.0          -0.4        79.6          -0.8      73.9          -0.5
   A6        82.8          -0.4        79.4          -0.8      73.5          -0.5
   A7        83.1          -0.4        79.7          -0.8      73.8          -0.4
   Note: A1: “Other nonemployed” classified as unemployed. A2: SOE workers older than 35 with no wage income classified
   as unemployed. A3: Corrected results using the approach by Feng and Hu (2013). A4: Unweighted results. A5: Results
   with attrition corrected. A6: Results using sample including all people aged 16-60. A7: Results using sample including all
   non-local-urban-hukou people.




                                                            43
                           Table A4: Misclassification Probabilities (%)

                     Group                 P21     P31    P12    P32    P13    P23
              Male/Young/Non-col           0.61    0.16   1.19   0.29   0.15   0.00
              Male/Young/Col               0.06    0.02   8.03   2.69   0.00   0.00
              Male/Old/Non-col             0.16    0.12   3.46   1.51   1.21   0.39
              Male/Old/Col                 0.08    0.06   7.44   0.00   0.99   0.79
              Female/Young/Non-col         0.80    0.19   2.08   1.35   0.26   0.00
              Female/Young/Col             0.37    0.04   5.95   0.00   0.00   0.00
              Female/Old/Non-col           0.21    0.26   2.53   2.66   0.67   0.00
              Female/Old/Col               0.06    0.05   4.42   0.00   2.48   0.04
Note: Pij stands for P (u = i|u∗ = j).




                                                  44
