NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF CONTROL AND COMMITMENT:
CAN DECREASING THE LIQUIDITY OF A SAVINGS ACCOUNT INCREASE DEPOSITS?
John Beshears
James J. Choi
Christopher Harris
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Jung Sakong
Working Paper 21474
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21474
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015
This paper was formerly titled “Self Control and Liquidity: How to Design a Commitment Contract.”
This research was made possible by grants from the Russell Sage Foundation and the Sloan Foundation
(joint grant 981011), the Pershing Square Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior,
the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health (awards P01AG005842, P30AG034532,
and R01AG021650), and the Social Security Administration (grant RRC08098400). We have benefited
from the comments of George-Marios Angeletos, B. Douglas Bernheim, Bruce Carlin, Stefano DellaVigna,
Ulrike Malmendier, Sendhil Mullainathan, Christopher Parsons, and Ivan Werning. We thank Christopher
Clayton, Peter Maxted, and Sean (Yixiang) Wang for excellent research assistance. The findings and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of the Russell
Sage Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, the Pershing Square Fund, the National Institutes of Health,
the Social Security Administration, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21474.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian,
and Jung Sakong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Self Control and Commitment: Can Decreasing the Liquidity of a Savings Account Increase
Deposits?
John Beshears, James J. Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and
Jung Sakong
NBER Working Paper No. 21474
August 2015
JEL No. D03,D14,D91
ABSTRACT
If individuals have self-control problems, they may take up commitment contracts that restrict their
spending. We experimentally investigate how contract design affects the demand for commitment
contracts. Each participant divides money between a liquid account, which permits unrestricted
withdrawals, and a commitment account with withdrawal restrictions that are randomized across
participants. When the two accounts pay the same interest rate, the most illiquid commitment account
attracts more money than any of the other commitment accounts. We show theoretically that this
pattern is consistent with the presence of sophisticated present-biased agents, who prefer more illiquid
commitment accounts even if they are subject to uninsurable marginal utility shocks drawn from a
broad class of distributions. When the commitment account pays a higher interest rate than the liquid
account, the relationship between illiquidity and deposits is flat, suggesting that agents without present
bias and/or naïve present-biased agents are also present in our sample.
John Beshears
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 439
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-12
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@gmail.com

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu

Brigitte C. Madrian
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu

Christopher Harris
Department of Economics
Cambridge University
Sidwick Avenue
Cambridge CB3 9DE ENGLAND
cjharris@econ.cam.ac.uk
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21474

Jung Sakong
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
jung.sakong@chicagobooth.edu

In the first quarter of 2015, U.S. households held $14.4 trillion in employersponsored defined contribution savings plans and IRAs (Investment Company Institute,
2015). These retirement savings accounts are partially illiquid: withdrawals before age
59½ incur a 10% tax penalty.1 There are at least two mutually compatible arguments for
why early withdrawal penalties are socially desirable. First, the penalties may address
moral hazard problems (discouraging mid-life spending reduces the social burden of
supporting retirees). Second, the penalties may help agents with self-control problems
commit not to prematurely spend their savings.2
If early withdrawal penalties are potentially beneficial, an open question is how
high they should be. While higher penalties may reduce premature withdrawals, they may
also discourage deposits, defeating the goal of raising net savings. On the other hand, if
savers recognize that penalties help them overcome self-control problems, they may
welcome higher penalties and make more deposits in response. In this paper, we use
experiments to study how the demand for commitment savings accounts is affected by
the strength of the commitment—that is, how illiquid the accounts are—and analyze
theoretically whether present-biased agents would indeed make more commitment
deposits in response to higher penalties.
The 1,045 participants in our two experiments are drawn from the American Life
Panel, which is selected to be broadly representative of the U.S. adult population. Each
participant is given $50, $100, or $500 and asked to allocate this money between a liquid
account, which does not limit withdrawals, and either one or two commitment accounts.
All participants have access to the same kind of liquid account, but the characteristics of
1

However, it is often possible to access 401(k) account balances by taking a penalty-free loan. In addition,
the penalty on withdrawals is sometimes waived. For example, for IRA accounts no penalty is charged
when the account holder (i) is permanently or totally disabled; (ii) has medical expenses exceeding 7.5% of
her adjusted gross income; (iii) uses the withdrawal to buy, build, or rebuild a home if the withdrawal is no
more than $10,000 and she has not owned a home in the previous two years; (iv) uses the withdrawal to pay
higher education costs; (v) uses the withdrawal to make a back tax payment to the IRS as the result of an
IRS levy; (vi) uses the withdrawal to pay health insurance premiums (if unemployed for more than 12
weeks); (vii) receives distributions in the form of an annuity; (viii) uses the withdrawal to make a
distribution to an alternate payee under a QDRO (Qualified Domestic Relation Order); or (ix) has been
affected by certain natural disasters (e.g., Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy).
2
There are of course other reasons for government intervention in retirement savings systems, such as
adverse selection (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004; Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf, 2010).

1

the commitment account(s) vary randomly across participants. The commitment accounts
either impose financial penalties on or completely prohibit withdrawals prior to a
commitment date chosen by the participant at the start of the experiment (the
commitment date can be as far as twelve months in the future). The commitment account
interest rate also varies across participants.
We find that commitment is appealing. When only one commitment account is
offered that pays the same interest rate as the liquid account, classical economic theory
predicts that nothing should be deposited in the commitment account. Instead,
participants allocate nearly half their money to the commitment account. Even when the
commitment account’s interest rate is less than that of the liquid account, the commitment
account receives one-quarter of the participants’ endowments. The chosen commitment
dates are widely dispersed over the duration of the experiments, and only a handful are
set at the earliest possible date.
More importantly, when the commitment account and the liquid account have the
same interest rate, allocations to the commitment account increase with the degree of
account illiquidity. Among participants offered only one liquid account and one
commitment account, those whose commitment account has an early withdrawal penalty
equal to 10% of the withdrawal allocate less to it than those whose commitment account
has a 20% early withdrawal penalty, who in turn allocate less than those whose
commitment account completely prohibits early withdrawals. When a participant has
simultaneous access to a liquid account and two types of commitment accounts, the
commitment account that prohibits early withdrawals receives twice as much money as
the commitment account with the 10% penalty.
We extend the theoretical results of Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006) to
show that the commitment deposits of sophisticated present-biased agents—agents who
are aware of their self-control problems—increase with the commitment accounts’
illiquidity under a wide range of assumptions, even if agents are subject to stochastic,
uninsurable taste shocks that affect future marginal utility and create a motive to provide

2

spending flexibility to the future self.3 Therefore, both the positive overall demand for
commitment and the increasing relationship between commitment deposits and the
commitment account’s illiquidity are evidence in favor of the presence of sophisticated
present-biased individuals in the U.S. adult population.
However, our experimental results also indicate that making 401(k) and IRA early
withdrawal penalties higher would not necessarily increase deposits to these accounts.
We find that when the commitment account pays a higher interest rate than the liquid
account—as is the case with 401(k) and IRA accounts—the empirical relationship
between the commitment account’s illiquidity and the deposits it attracts is flat. This
result suggests that the U.S. adult population contains not only sophisticated presentbiased individuals, but also naïve present-biased individuals (those who are unaware of
their present bias) and/or individuals without present bias. When the commitment account
pays an interest rate premium, these latter two groups make commitment deposits that are
positive but diminishing with the commitment account’s illiquidity. This decrease offsets
the increase in commitment deposits by sophisticated present-biased individuals as
illiquidity rises. Therefore, the aggregate relationship between commitment deposits and
illiquidity can take any sign, including the flat relationship we observe in our data. In
contrast, when the commitment account pays the same interest rate as the liquid account,
individuals without present bias and naïve present-biased individuals deposit nothing to
the commitment account regardless of its illiquidity, since individuals without present
bias have no need for commitment and naïve present-biased individuals believe that they
have no need for commitment. Only sophisticated present-biased individuals make
commitment deposits in this case, causing the aggregate relationship between illiquidity
and commitment deposits to be unambiguously positive, as we find empirically.
Demand for commitment devices has been documented in many different
3

Our analysis is an example of the approach used in the new dynamic public finance literature (e.g.,
Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning, 2007). Our setting is not constructed to allow us to explore alternative
mechanisms that could in principle mitigate self-control problems, such as trigger strategies that enable the
agent to behave patiently, incentivized by the threat of a breakdown in the cooperative regime (Friedman
1971; Aumann and Shapley, 1976; Ainslie, 1991) and reputation strategies that encourage the agent to
avoid lapses today because such lapses undermine credibility in the future (Kreps et al., 1982; Sobel, 1985;
Benabou and Tirole, 2004).

3

domains of behavior: completing homework assignments for university courses (Ariely
and Wertenbroch, 2002), cigarette smoking cessation (Gine, Karlan, and Zinman, 2010),
avoiding distractions in a computer-based task (Houser et al., 2010), achieving workplace
goals (Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan, forthcoming), reducing time spent playing online
games (Chow, 2011), performing an unpleasant task (Augenblick, Niederle, and
Sprenger, forthcoming), and going to the gym (Milkman, Minson, and Volpp, 2013;
Royer, Stehr, and Sydnor, 2015). Our paper is most closely related to the work of Ashraf,
Karlan, and Yin (2006), who offered Filipino households a savings account that did not
allow withdrawals until a certain date had passed or a goal amount had been deposited.
This illiquid account was taken up by 28% of households and increased savings among
households that were offered the account.4 Our key empirical contribution is to vary the
characteristics of the commitment savings accounts within the same setting to investigate
which contract design features are attractive to consumers.
Dupas and Robinson (2013) conduct a related field experiment in Kenya.
Participants in one treatment group received a lockbox, where they could deposit money
through a slit at the top, and the key to the lockbox. Participants in another treatment
group received a physically identical lockbox, but a research officer held the key, which
reduced the temptation to prematurely withdraw from the lockbox. The more illiquid
second lockbox also had the additional restriction that savings in the lockbox could only
be used to purchase preventative health products. Take-up of the lockbox where the
participant held the key is higher than take-up of the lockbox where the research officer
held the key. In contrast, when participants were offered an illiquid Rotating Savings and
Credit Association (ROSCA) account that could only be spent on emergency health
treatments, take-up is much higher than for the liquid lockbox.
Karlan and Linden (2014) report the results of a field experiment in Uganda.
Students were offered a commitment savings account from which balances could only be
withdrawn after the end of the school trimester, and 44% of students took up accounts.
4

Kast, Meier, and Pomeranz (2014) and Brune et al. (forthcoming) also study take-up of commitment
savings accounts and find similar results. For a caveat to the results of Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006), see
the related field experiment conducted by John (2015).

4

Although these students appear to value the lock-up period, they do not seem to value a
restriction on what the savings in the account can be spent on. More students used the
commitment savings account when withdrawals were available in the form of cash
compared to when withdrawals were only available in the form of vouchers for the
purchase of school supplies.
Finally, Burke, Luoto, and Perez-Arce (2014) build on our basic experimental
design to compare a commitment savings account that prohibits early withdrawals to a
savings account that creates a psychological commitment to savings but does not prohibit
early withdrawals. They find that the latter account attracts greater balances on average,
perhaps because the participants who were offered that account were encouraged to think
about the importance of achieving their savings goals. This inducement may have
increased their overall desire for savings, regardless of whether or not the savings account
prohibits early withdrawals.
The paper proceeds as follows. We start with the empirical results obtained from
two related experiments. Section I describes our experimental participant recruitment.
Section II discusses the design of our first experiment, and Section III presents the first
experiment’s results. Sections IV and V respectively describe the design and results of
our second experiment. Section VI presents our extension of the Amador, Werning, and
Angeletos (2006) modeling framework and discusses the relationship between our
theoretical results and our experimental findings on the demand for illiquid financial
accounts. Section VII concludes.
I. Participant recruitment
We conducted our two experiments using participants from the RAND American
Life Panel (ALP), a panel of respondents at least 18 years old who are selected to be
broadly representative of the U.S. adult population. ALP respondents participate in
approximately two half-hour surveys per month over the Internet, and respondents who
do not have their own Internet access have it provided to them by RAND.
For the first experiment, RAND sent an email in early 2010 to 750 ALP members
inviting them to participate in a year-long experiment on financial decision-making that

5

would provide at least $40 in compensation. 495 members consented to participate, and
all of them completed the study. Forty-one participants in the first experiment are in the
same household as at least one other participant in the first experiment.5
The recruitment procedure for the second experiment mirrored the procedure for
the first experiment. In early 2011, RAND emailed 737 ALP members inviting them to
participate in an experiment that would provide approximately $100 in compensation.
550 of the invited members completed the study. There is no overlap between the
participants in the first experiment and the participants in the second experiment.
Furthermore, no participant in the second experiment is in the same household as another
participant in the second experiment, although 21 participants in the second experiment
are in the same household as a participant in the first experiment.6
The demographic characteristics of the participants, which were collected by
RAND in other surveys, are summarized in Table 1. In both experiments, 43% of the
participants are male, and their ages are distributed fairly evenly across six ten-year age
categories. Nearly two-thirds have at least some college education. Less than 10% of
participants have annual household income below $15,000, while 17% of participants
have annual household income of at least $100,000. Two-thirds are married, and more
than 60% are currently working. Approximately 80% are White/Caucasian, and
approximately 10% are Black/African American. Finally, the median participant has one
other member in his or her household.
II. Design of Experiment 1
A. Experimental conditions
Participants in our first experiment allocated an experimental endowment between
a liquid account and a commitment account. We randomly assigned each participant to
one of seven experimental conditions. The features of the liquid account were constant
across conditions, but the features of the commitment account varied. Withdrawals from
the liquid account were allowed without restriction or penalty at any time starting one
week from the participant’s initial participation in the experiment. The illiquidity of the
5
6

Our results remain unchanged if these 41 participants are dropped from the sample.
Our results remain unchanged if these 23 participants are dropped from the sample.

6

commitment account varied across conditions: early withdrawals, defined as withdrawals
requested prior to a commitment date chosen by the participant at the outset of the
experiment, were subject to a penalty equal to 10% of the withdrawal, subject to a
penalty equal to 20% of the withdrawal, or disallowed altogether. The 10% penalty
condition was chosen to mirror the existing penalty levied on non-hardship pre-retirement
401(k) and IRA withdrawals in the U.S. The no early withdrawal condition mirrors the
complete lack of pre-retirement liquidity in some defined contribution retirement savings
systems in others countries (Beshears et al., 2015). No version of the commitment
account permitted withdrawals during the first week of the experiment. Balances in the
liquid account earned a 22% annual interest rate, while balances in the commitment
account earned a 21%, 22%, or 23% annual interest rate. The account interest rates were
chosen to be higher than typical credit card interest rates so that most participants would
not find it advantageous to allocate money to the liquid account in order to withdraw it
immediately to pay down credit card debt.
Table 2 summarizes the experimental design and gives the number of participants
in each condition.7 Instead of having a full 3 × 3 factorial design involving nine types of
commitment accounts (all three interest rates and all three degrees of illiquidity), the
experiment omitted the two arms where the commitment account has a 21% interest rate
and (i) imposes a 20% early withdrawal penalty, or (ii) prohibits early withdrawals. We
anticipated that commitment accounts with a 21% interest rate would not attract large
allocations, so we did not want to devote much of our sample to those conditions.
However, we did want to compare commitment account allocations when the
commitment account interest rate was lower than, equal to, or higher than the liquid
account interest rate. Therefore, we included one condition where the commitment
account paid a 21% interest rate.
B. Initial allocation task
Participants clicked through a series of screens describing the details of the
experiment. They would receive $50, $100, or $500, depending on a random number
7

The number of participants is not perfectly balanced across cells because the ALP’s random assignment
algorithm made the cell sizes equal only in expectation; the realized cell sizes could differ from each other.

7

drawn in the next national Powerball lottery. Their task was to make three allocation
decisions: divide each of the possible monetary endowments between a liquid account
and a commitment account. They would receive weekly emails that displayed their
account balances and a link to the webpage where they could request withdrawals
(including partial withdrawals). They could also log into the study website at any time to
view their balances and request withdrawals. Transfers between the two accounts would
be impossible after the initial allocation, and withdrawal requests would result in a check
being mailed to the participant within three business days.
Throughout the experiment, the liquid account was labeled the “Freedom
Account,” and the commitment account was labeled the “Goal Account.” These labels
were intended to help participants remember each account’s rules and understand their
purposes. The description of the liquid account emphasized that it permitted flexibility.
The description of the commitment account emphasized that it could help participants
reach their savings goals. Participants using the commitment account would have to
select a commitment date (labeled the “goal date”) no later than one year from the current
date, and this date might be associated with a gift purchase, a vacation, another special
event, or no particular purpose. Appendix Figures 1 and 2 show the screens explaining
the accounts.
All participants allocated the $50 endowment first, the $100 allocation second,
and the $500 allocation third. Whenever participants allocated any money to the
commitment account, they were invited (but not required) to associate a goal with the
commitment account. Appendix Figure 3 shows an example allocation page.
Finally, participants chose four Powerball numbers. In the twice-weekly
Powerball lottery, six integers from 1 to 39 are randomly drawn without replacement, and
one of these numbers is designated as the “Powerball.” All numbers have an equal
likelihood of being the Powerball. If the Powerball in the next drawing was the first or
second number chosen by the participant, she received a $500 endowment in the
experiment; if the third or fourth number chosen by the participant, she received $100;
and if any other number, she received $50. The money was then allocated between the

8

two accounts according to the participant’s stated wishes for the given monetary amount.
After the Powerball drawing, participants received emails indicating the dollar amount
they were given and reminding them of the allocation they had chosen for that amount.
All participants chose their allocations between February 1, 2010, and February 11, 2010.
C. Withdrawals
Appendix Figure 4 shows an example of the weekly email sent to participants,
and Appendix Figure 5 shows the summary webpage participants saw when they logged
into the experimental website. When a participant requested a withdrawal, a message
asked the participant to confirm the withdrawal amount and the amount by which the
account balance would be reduced.
If participants withdrew all the money from their accounts before a year had
elapsed, they were asked to complete an exit questionnaire asking whether any parts of
the study were confusing and whether they would have changed any of their decisions in
the experiment with the benefit of hindsight. If participants still had money in their
accounts one year after their initial allocation decision, their remaining balances were
automatically disbursed to them, and they were asked to complete the same exit
questionnaire.
III. Results of Experiment 1
A. Initial allocations
We first examine the initial allocation decisions of participants. We treat each
participant’s three allocation decisions as three separate observations, and we perform
statistical inference using standard errors clustered at the participant level.8 Table 3
shows the mean fraction allocated to the commitment account by experimental condition.
We have three main results.9
First, about half of initial balances are allocated to the commitment account when
it has the same interest rate as the liquid account (22% column), and about one-quarter of
initial balances are allocated to the commitment account when it has a 1% lower interest
8

Commitment account allocations generally increase as the initial endowment amount increases, but our
results are qualitatively similar if we separately examine $50 allocation decisions, $100 allocation
decisions, or $500 allocation decisions.
9
Our results are nearly identical if we control for participant characteristics using regressions.

9

rate than the liquid account (21% column). Thus, it seems that participants place some
value on commitment.
Second, when the commitment account and the liquid account have the same
interest rate (22% column), stricter commitment accounts are more attractive. As we
move from a 10% early withdrawal penalty to a 20% early withdrawal penalty to a
complete prohibition on early withdrawals, the fraction allocated to the commitment
account rises from 39% to 45% to 56%. The first and second percentages are not
statistically significantly distinguishable from each other, but the first and third are, as
well as the second and third. This result gives us some confidence that the value
participants place on commitment is not purely due to experimenter demand effects.
Although demand effects could explain why a positive amount is deposited to
commitment accounts, it is not obvious that demand effects would become stronger as the
commitment account becomes more illiquid. Variation in illiquidity occurred exclusively
between participants, and participants were not aware that illiquidity varied across
participants.
The effect of increasing the commitment account’s illiquidity can be
benchmarked against the effect of increasing the commitment account’s interest rate.
Comparing across conditions with a 10% early withdrawal penalty, as the commitment
account’s interest rate rises from 21% to 22% to 23%, the fraction allocated to it rises
from 28% to 39% to 58%. The differences across these three conditions are statistically
significant. Thus, starting with a 10% penalty commitment account with a 22% interest
rate, moving to a prohibition on early withdrawals has approximately the same effect on
commitment account usage as increasing the interest rate to 23%.
Third, when the interest rate on the commitment account is higher than the
interest rate on the liquid account, the relationship between commitment account
allocations and illiquidity disappears. Commitment accounts with a 23% interest rate
attract approximately 60% of the endowment regardless of their early withdrawal policy.
When participants allocate money to a commitment account, they are required to
specify a commitment date before which early withdrawal restrictions apply. Table 4

10

shows the mean number of days between the participant’s initial allocation date and his
commitment date. This mean varies between 186 days and 234 days across conditions. A
comprehensive measure of commitment must take into account both the amount of
money committed and the time until the commitment date. Thus, for each allocation
decision, we calculate the dollar-weighted days to commitment date, which is the fraction
of balances allocated to the commitment account multiplied by the number of days
between the allocation decision date and the commitment date.
Table 5 displays the mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date by
experimental condition. The results are similar to what we found for percentage
allocations to the commitment account, but slightly weaker statistically. When the
commitment account pays a 22% interest rate, the mean dollar-weighted days to
commitment date increases from 82 to 101 to 132 as we move from a 10% early
withdrawal penalty to a 20% early withdrawal penalty to a prohibition on early
withdrawals. When the commitment account has a 10% penalty on early withdrawals, the
mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date increases from 64 to 82 to 130 as the
interest rate increases from 21% to 22% to 23%. When the commitment account pays a
23% interest rate, the mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date has no relationship
with illiquidity.10
In Section VI, we show theoretically that sophisticated present-biased agents will
allocate more to the commitment account as its illiquidity rises under a wide range of
assumptions, which is exactly the pattern we observe when both the liquid account and
the commitment account pay the same interest rate. The lack of a relationship between
allocations and commitment account illiquidity when the commitment account pays a
higher interest rate than the liquid account can be explained if there are agents without
present bias and/or naïve present-biased agents also present among our participants.
Because of the commitment account’s interest rate premium, it attracts some deposits
10

A participant who is offered a commitment account with a 23% interest rate might allocate the entire
endowment to the commitment account but choose the earliest possible commitment date in order to earn
the higher interest rate while avoiding commitment. We see little evidence of this behavior. Of the 214
participants who had access to the 23% interest rate commitment account, only four participants selected
goal dates within the first two weeks after the initial allocation decision.

11

from these two groups.11 However, since they have no desire for commitment, their
commitment account allocations decrease as the account becomes more illiquid,
offsetting the rising allocations to the commitment account by sophisticated presentbiased agents. The result is little aggregate relationship between allocations and
commitment strictness. On the other hand, when the commitment account pays the same
interest rate as the liquid account, agents without present bias and naïve present-biased
agents allocate no money to the commitment account regardless of its strictness.
Therefore, the aggregate relationship between allocations and withdrawal penalties is
driven entirely by the sophisticated present-biased agents in this case.
We linked the data from our experiment with other participant data available from
the RAND American Life Panel, and in untabulated analysis, we examined correlations
between commitment account allocations in the experiment and variables such as credit
card usage. We did not identify any correlations that survive correction for multiple
testing.
B. Withdrawals
What happens to account balances after the initial allocation? For each participant
and day during the year-long experiment, we calculate the sum of the liquid account and
commitment account balances that the participant would have had if no withdrawals had
been requested. This hypothetical total balance uses the allocation decision for the one
endowment amount that the participant ended up receiving ($50, $100, or $500). We then
calculate the ratio of the participant’s actual balance to the hypothetical total balance on
each day, and plot the mean of this ratio against the number of days since the endowment
was received.12 In order to facilitate the relevant comparisons, we present subsets of the
seven conditions in each of the three graphs in Appendix Figure 6, with some conditions
appearing in more than one graph.
11

In theory, agents who believe themselves to be time-consistent should choose the earliest possible
commitment date for their commitment account. The absence of such behavior may be due to an
experimenter demand effect, where participants feel that they are “misbehaving” if they game the system
by allocating money to the commitment account while creating negligible commitment.
12
Recall that there was a gap between when the allocation decision was made and when the endowment
was received because we needed to wait for the next Powerball lottery drawing to determine how large the
participant’s endowment would be.

12

In all conditions, most of the money stays in the accounts until the very end of the
experiment. The lowest ending mean balance ratio is 0.626, and the highest is 0.723. The
top graph in Appendix Figure 6 shows that withdrawals take place earlier in the
experiment when the interest rate on the commitment account is lower. Holding fixed the
withdrawal penalty at 10%, the average balance ratio across all the days after endowment
receipt is 0.814 when the commitment account interest rate is 21%, 0.831 when the
commitment account interest rate is 22%, and 0.869 when the commitment account
interest rate is 23%. However, with a standard error on each average of about 0.03, we do
not have the statistical power to reject their equality.
The next two graphs indicate that withdrawal patterns do not vary strongly with
the commitment account’s degree of illiquidity. When both the commitment account and
the liquid account have the same interest rate, the average balance ratio across all days is
0.831 with a 10% early withdrawal penalty, 0.837 with a 20% early withdrawal penalty,
and 0.827 with no early withdrawals allowed. When the commitment account has a 1%
higher interest rate, the average balance ratio across days is 0.869 with a 10% early
withdrawal penalty, 0.829 with a 20% early withdrawal penalty, and 0.857 with no early
withdrawals allowed. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the average balance ratio does
not change as illiquidity varies while holding fixed the commitment account interest rate.
The above comparisons are imperfect measures of how commitment affects
withdrawals because the averages include days subsequent to each individual’s
commitment date, a period during which the commitment account is fully liquid. If we
instead examine the balance ratio averaged only over days on which the commitment
account is illiquid, we find some suggestive evidence that access to the fully illiquid
account raises balances. In order to adjust for the fact that the mean commitment date
differs across arms, we use the following procedure. Let the “adjustment factor” for
participant i be the difference between the mean commitment date (measured in days
since endowment receipt) in i’s experimental arm and the earliest mean commitment date
among the arms being compared. Let i’s “adjusted commitment date” be the larger of
zero and i’s goal date minus the adjustment factor. If there were no censoring at zero, this

13

adjustment would equalize the mean commitment date across the arms being compared.
We then compute commitment period balance ratios for each participant by averaging
that participant’s daily balance ratios from the endowment receipt date to the adjusted
commitment date. If a participant allocated zero dollars to the commitment account or
had an adjusted commitment date of zero, we classify the participant as having made no
withdrawals during the commitment period, and we therefore assign that participant a
commitment period balance ratio of one.
When the commitment account and liquid account have the same interest rate, the
average commitment period balance ratio is 0.967 with a 10% penalty, 0.961 with a 20%
penalty, and 0.982 with no early withdrawals allowed. When the commitment account
has a 1% higher interest rate, the averages are 0.932, 0.950, and 0.967, respectively.
However, holding fixed the commitment account interest rate, there are no statistically
significant differences among these averages, as the standard errors of the averages range
from 0.009 to 0.022.
Our failure to find a significant effect of illiquidity on withdrawal behavior may
be due to the fact that illiquidity did not vary sufficiently across our arms for us to be able
to detect its effect with our sample sizes. Even a 10% penalty was quite a deterrent to
early withdrawals. Only 3.0% of participants with a 22% commitment account interest
rate and 5.1% of participants with a 23% commitment account interest rate made an early
withdrawal when facing a 10% penalty, even though 10.6% of these participants with a
22% commitment account interest rate and 26.9% of these participants with a 23%
commitment account interest rate allocated money to their commitment account and had
less than $1 left in their liquid account on the commitment date. This means that much of
the variation in illiquidity across arms came from the amount allocated to the liquid
account. However, when the commitment account interest rate was 22% or 23%, the
amount allocated to the liquid account was no more than 17 percentage points higher in
the 10% or 20% penalty arms relative to the no-early-withdrawal arms. Furthermore,
69% of participants in the no-early-withdrawal arms allocated no money to the
commitment account or had at least $1 left in their liquid account when their commitment

14

date arrived. This means that the extra allocations to the liquid account in the less
restrictive arms would affect the withdrawals of only 31% of participants. Therefore, we
would expect any average differences across arms in balances prior to the commitment
date to be relatively small.
IV. Design of Experiment 2
Our second experiment investigates several questions motivated by the first
experiment. First, do voluntary commitment accounts discourage withdrawals? To
address this, we introduce greater exogenous variation in the strength of commitment in
order to be able to detect withdrawal effects more reliably. Second, given some
participants’ preference for more illiquid commitment accounts, why are such
commitment products rarely observed in the market? We test one hypothesis: a highly
illiquid commitment account is attractive when compared only to a fully liquid account,
but unattractive when a less illiquid commitment account is added to the choice set, since
the latter makes the highly illiquid account seem like an extreme option (Simonson,
1989). Furthermore, the complexity of choosing from a set with multiple commitment
accounts may make individuals favor the simple liquid account (Redelmeier and Shafir,
1995). Finally, strict commitment has the advantage of preventing overspending but does
not allow participants to access their funds in a financial emergency. Is a commitment
account that offers early liquidity only in the event of an emergency more attractive to
participants than a commitment account that prohibits all early withdrawals?
A. Experimental conditions
Participants in our second experiment were randomized into four treatment
conditions. In all conditions (and consistent with the first experiment), participants had
access to a liquid account that paid a 22% interest rate and allowed penalty-free
withdrawals. In contrast to the first experiment, the commitment accounts in this
experiment always paid a 22% interest rate and varied across conditions only in their
illiquidity characteristics. Two conditions mimicked conditions in the first experiment for
the purposes of replication. In the first arm (for replication), participants allocated their
endowment between the liquid account and a commitment account that imposed a 10%

15

penalty on withdrawals before the participant’s chosen commitment date. In the second
arm (for replication), participants allocated their endowment between the liquid account
and a commitment account that prohibited withdrawals before the participant’s selfselected commitment date. In the third arm, participants allocated their endowment
among the liquid account and two different commitment accounts, one that imposed a
10% penalty on early withdrawals and the other that prohibited early withdrawals
(mirroring the different goal accounts available to participants in the first two arms of the
experiment). Participants in this third arm could pick any convex combination across the
three accounts, and each commitment account could be assigned its own commitment
date if both were used. In the fourth and final arm, participants allocated their endowment
between a liquid account and a new type of commitment account with a “safety valve”
feature that prohibited early withdrawals unless a participant indicated that the funds
were needed for a financial emergency. Financial emergencies would not be verified, but
participants were asked to indicate honestly whether or not they were experiencing a
financial emergency. The safety valve commitment account attempts to impose a
psychological cost of lying only on participants who make an early withdrawal when they
are not experiencing a financial emergency, creating a state-contingent early withdrawal
penalty. This account was chosen to mirror the provisions that exist in 401(k) and IRA
accounts that allow for penalty-free pre-retirement withdrawals in the case of certain
financial hardships; some other countries with defined contribution retirement savings
systems also allow for pre-retirement withdrawals only in the case of certain financial
hardships (Beshears et al., 2015).
After participants indicated their desired allocations, they were randomly assigned
to receive either $100 allocated according to their wishes or $100 allocated entirely to the
liquid account. Table 6 shows the number of participants assigned to each experimental
condition, broken out into the number who received allocations according to their wishes
and the number who received all of their funds in the liquid account. We did not stratify
by experimental condition when randomly assigning participants to receive their chosen

16

allocations or the 100% liquid account allocation, so the distribution of participants
within each experimental condition is unbalanced.
B. Initial allocation task
Participants were told that they would receive $100 to allocate between the
accounts offered in their condition. The liquid account was again labeled the “Freedom
Account,” and the commitment accounts were again labeled “Goal Accounts.” The
experimental website would display balances and allow withdrawal requests at any
time,13 and weekly emails would also display balances and a link to the withdrawal
webpage. Transfers between the accounts would not be allowed, and checks would be
mailed within three business days of a withdrawal request.
The descriptions of the liquid account, the 10% penalty commitment account, and
the no-early-withdrawal commitment account were the same as the descriptions used in
the first experiment. When the 10% penalty account and the no-early-withdrawal account
were offered simultaneously, they were labeled “Goal Account A” and “Goal Account
B,” respectively (see Appendix Figure 7). Participants learned that the two commitment
accounts could be assigned distinct commitment dates (again labeled “goal dates”). In the
case of the safety valve account, participants were informed that early withdrawals were
possible only when a financial emergency occurred. Participants would be the sole judges
of whether or not an emergency was actually occurring (see Appendix Figure 8).
Participants were then told that they would receive their chosen allocation with
50% probability and an allocation selected by the experimenters with 50% probability.
They did not know that the allocation selected by the experimenters would place all of
the money in the liquid account. A computer rather than a public randomizing device was
used for this randomization procedure.
Finally, participants made their allocation and commitment date choices.
Participants were then informed whether they were receiving their chosen allocation or
the 100% liquid account allocation.

13

Like the first experiment, the second experiment permitted withdrawals no sooner than one week after
the initial allocation decision.

17

Participants completed this initial phase of the experiment between February 14,
2011, and March 2, 2011. The experiment ended for all participants on September 1,
2011. Therefore, unlike the one-year duration of the first experiment, the second
experiment’s duration was only about half a year.
C. Withdrawals
All participants who requested withdrawals were asked to confirm their requests.
In addition, participants who wished to make early withdrawals from the safety valve
account were shown the following text:
We are relying on you to be honest in judging whether you
have a financial emergency. If you are sure you want to
make a withdrawal, please type the sentence below, then
click “Next.” Otherwise, click “Cancel my withdrawal.”
The sentence that these participants were asked to type was, “I attest that I have a
financial emergency.” However, the website accepted any entered text.
The second experiment gave an exit questionnaire to participants who withdrew
all of their money before September 1, 2011. Participants who had remaining balances on
September 1, 2011, automatically received checks for their balances and received emails
with links to the same exit questionnaire. The exit questionnaire gave participants the
opportunity to identify confusing aspects of the experiment.14 Also, whenever
participants in the second experiment made any withdrawals (including partial
withdrawals) before September 1, 2011, they were given the option to provide the
reasons for the withdrawal.
V. Results of Experiment 2
A. Initial allocations
Table 7 shows the mean fraction of the endowment allocated to a commitment
account in each experimental condition. When participants are offered only the liquid
account and the 10% penalty account, the commitment account receives 46% of the
endowment. When participants are offered only the liquid account and the no-early-

14

In contrast to the first experiment, participants in the second experiment were not asked to explain
anything that they would have done differently in retrospect.

18

withdrawal account, the mean commitment account allocation is 54%, which is
significantly higher (p = 0.034) than the 46% allocation in the former condition. Thus, we
replicate the findings from the first experiment that commitment is desirable, and
stronger commitment is more attractive when the commitment and liquid accounts pay
the same interest rate.
The no-early-withdrawal account is appealing even when it is offered in the same
choice set as the 10% penalty account. In this arm, the no-early-withdrawal account
attracts 34% of the endowment, while the 10% penalty account attracts only 16%, a
difference that is highly significant (p < 0.001). We therefore find no evidence that the
lack of strict commitment accounts in the marketplace is due to the simultaneous
presence of partially illiquid accounts.
Surprisingly, total allocations to commitment accounts are not higher when two
commitment accounts are available rather than one. With two commitment accounts, the
commitment accounts receive 50% of the endowment in total. This is halfway between
the 46% allocation when the 10% penalty account is the only commitment account and
the 54% allocation when the no-early-withdrawal account is the only commitment
account. It is possible that the availability of two commitment accounts makes the
allocation decision more complex, leading participants to view the simple and distinct
liquid account as more desirable (Redelmeier and Shafir, 1995). Intuitively, if a
participant has a hard time choosing between two similar commitment accounts, the
participant may take the exit strategy of adopting a conflict-avoiding alternative (i.e., the
liquid account). This is an instance of “reason-based choice” (Shafir, Simonson, and
Tversky, 1993).
Our attempt to create a commitment account that is more appealing than the noearly-withdrawal account was unsuccessful. The safety valve account receives a mean
allocation of 45%. This is statistically indistinguishable from the 46% allocation to the
10% penalty account when it is the only commitment account available, and significantly
less (p = 0.018) than the 54% allocation to the no-early-withdrawal account when it is the
only commitment account available. It may be that the psychological cost of lying about

19

a financial emergency in order to make a withdrawal is too low for the safety valve
commitment account to be a strong commitment device.15
Table 8 displays the mean days between the initial allocation date and the
commitment date, and Table 9 shows the mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date.
The results in Table 9 are in line with the initial commitment account allocations in Table
7. Mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date rises from 62 to 64 to 75 in the single
commitment account conditions as the commitment account changes from safety valve to
10% penalty to no early withdrawals. The difference between the safety valve and no
early withdrawal conditions is significant (p = 0.046), but not the difference between the
10% penalty and no early withdrawal conditions (p = 0.137).16 When two commitment
accounts are available, the mean dollar-weighted days to commitment date of 71 lies
between the values in the arms where only one commitment account is available and the
commitment account either imposes a 10% penalty or does not allow early withdrawals.
B. Withdrawals
Because we randomly assigned half of participants to receive all of their
endowment in the liquid account, we have greater exogenous variation in liquidity than in
the first experiment, which we can use to identify whether the commitment accounts help
participants save more. Appendix Figure 9 shows the balance ratios over time for the four
experimental conditions, breaking apart participants by whether they received their
endowments allocated according to their choices or 100% in the liquid account.17
Because participants made initial allocation decisions on different dates but completed
the experiment on the same date (September 1, 2011), some participants participated in
the experiment for slightly longer periods of time than others. The figure displays only
15

All of the allocation results are qualitatively unchanged if we adjust for participant characteristics using
regressions, except that the difference between the safety valve account allocation and the no early
withdrawal account allocation when only one commitment account is offered is significant at only the 10%
level.
16
These two p-values are 0.101 and 0.099, respectively, when we control for participant characteristics.
17
For one participant in the no early withdrawal condition, we have conflicting records as to whether the
participant was randomly assigned to receive the chosen commitment account allocation or was randomly
assigned to receive the entire endowment in the liquid account. We drop this participant from the data set
when analyzing withdrawal patterns, but the results do not change materially if we assume that the
participant was randomly assigned to one group or the other.

20

the first 183 days since endowment receipt, so that the sample remains constant within
each graph.
Consistent with the safety valve account being a weak commitment device, the
balance ratios for those in the safety valve condition do not markedly differ when
participants receive all of their endowment in the liquid account instead of according to
their chosen allocation. In contrast, balance ratios are substantially lower in the 10%
penalty and no early withdrawal conditions with only one commitment account if all of
the endowment was deposited into the liquid account. The same pattern emerges when
there are two commitment accounts, although the gap is much smaller. In Table 10, we
report the difference in balance ratio means within condition at selected points in time
during the experiment, as well as for the four experimental conditions pooled. The results
for the pooled sample suggest that the commitment accounts do significantly reduce
withdrawals.
Withdrawals among participants who receive their entire endowment in the liquid
account provide a measure of self-control problems. It would be interesting if there were
a correlation between these withdrawals and chosen commitment account allocations, but
we do not find such a correlation in our sample. However, it is difficult to draw strong
conclusions from this analysis because withdrawals also reflect liquidity shocks and are
therefore at best a noisy measure of self-control problems.
VI. A theory of the commitment account allocations of sophisticated present-biased
agents
To study the tradeoff between commitment and flexibility in a
consumption/savings context, Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006; hereafter AWA)
use a model with three conceptual ingredients.
First, AWA assume dynamically inconsistent preferences generated by the
present-biased discount function
 1
D( )  
 

if   0
if   1

21


,


where 0 < β < 1 (Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Laibson, 1997).18 This discount function
implies that, from the perspective of period 0, the agent is more patient about tradeoffs
between periods 1 and 2 than she will be when period 1 actually arrives:

1 D(0)
D(1) 
  
.
D(1)
D(2)  
Dynamically inconsistent preferences generate a motivation for precommitment.
Second, they assume that the agent experiences transitory taste shocks that are not
observable in advance and are not contractable. Such taste shocks generate a motivation
to give future selves flexibility in choosing the consumption path.
Third, they assume that the agent has a very general commitment technology.
Specifically, she can manipulate the choice sets of future selves, trading off the benefits
of commitment (preventing later selves from overconsuming) and the costs of
commitment (preventing later selves from responding flexibly to the taste shocks).
We enrich AWA’s analysis by placing a bound on the strength of the commitment
technology. We show that, in this more general setting, the agent can still achieve the
(second-best) optimum using a simple commitment mechanism. Furthermore, we vary
the bound and explore the implications for the choice of commitment mechanism. These
comparative statics enable us to compare the model's predictions with the behavior of our
experimental participants.
We briefly describe the key properties of the model below. Appendices A-P
provide a complete exposition and analysis of the model.
A. Timing and preferences
The simplest model that elicits a tradeoff between commitment and flexibility has
three periods: an initial period in which some degree of commitment is created with
respect to future decisions; a following period in which a consumption/savings choice is
made with immediate utility consequences; and a final period in which residual wealth is
consumed.
18

The analysis that follows would be nearly identical if we were to use the more general quasi-hyperbolic
discount function by D(0) = 1 and D(τ) = βδτ for τ ≥ 1, where 0 < β < 1 and 0 < δ ≤ 1. For simplicity, we
follow AWA and set δ = 1.

22

Period 0. Self 0 chooses the commitment mechanism that will govern the choices of
selves 1 and 2. (There is no consumption in period 0.)
Period 1. A taste shock     [  ,  ] is realized. Self 1 observes θ and makes a
consumption/savings decision, subject to the constraints imposed by the commitment
mechanism chosen by self 0.
Period 2. Self 2 consumes all remaining wealth.
Section VI.B below describes the set of commitment mechanisms available to self 0, and
Section VI.C sets out our assumptions on the distribution of θ.
Let c1 and c2 denote the consumption levels of selves 1 and 2. Then underlying
preferences at dates 0, 1, and 2 can be specified as follows:

utility of self 0  U1 (c1 )  U 2 (c2 )
utility of self 1 

U1 (c1 )  U 2 (c2 )

utility of self 2 

U 2 (c2 )

Here U t is the utility function at time t. We assume that: U t :[0, )  [, ) ; U t  0 ;
19
U t 0 on (0,); and Ut(0)   .

We also assume that self 0 fully understands and anticipates the preferences of
self 1. That is, we assume that the agent is sophisticated.
B. Commitment technology
A commitment mechanism is modeled as a budget set B chosen by self 0. This B
is the set of consumption pairs (c1 ,c2 ) that can be chosen by self 1. Recall that the taste
shock is not yet observable in period 0, and that it will only be privately observable in
period 1, so B cannot be conditioned on the realization of the taste shock.
Let y > 0 be the agent’s exogenous budget and, without loss of generality, let the
gross interest rate be unity. Let the “ambient budget set” A be the set of all consumption
pairs (c1 , c2 ) such that c1 , c2  0 and c1  c2  y . Fix a parameter   [0, ) , which will

For example, it could be that Ut has constant relative risk aversion ρt > 0. In that case: if ρt  (0,1), then
Ut(0) > –∞; and if ρt  [1, ∞), then Ut(0) = –∞. In particular, we do not require Ut(0) = –∞.

19

23

bound the strength of the commitment mechanism. Then the budget set B chosen by self
0 must satisfy the following two constraints:
Constraint 1. B is a non-empty compact subset of A.
Constraint 2. The penalty for transferring consumption from period 2 to period 1 is no
greater than π.20
In other words, self 0 can choose a budget set of almost any size and shape. The only
restriction on size is that B must be small enough to fit inside A. The only restriction on
shape is that, starting from any consumption pair (c1 ,c2 ) B such that c2  0 , self 1 must
always be able to transfer a small amount Δ > 0 of consumption from period 2 to period
1. She may face a penalty for doing so, in the form of a reduction in consumption in
period 2 (over and above that resulting from the transfer itself). However, this penalty
will never be greater than πΔ.21
A wide variety of budget sets satisfy Constraints 1 and 2. For example, the budget
set shown in Figure 1 consists of: (i) a downward sloping budget curve that begins on the

c2 axis and ends on the c1 axis; and (ii) all the points of A that lie below or to the left of
the budget curve. It obviously satisfies Constraint 1. It satisfies Constraint 2 if π = 0.5,
but not if π = 0.1. Indeed, the slope of the budget curve at the encircled point is –1.3. This
is greater than –1.5 (the minimum slope that is permissible when π = 0.5), but less than
–1.1 (the minimum slope that is permissible when π = 0.1).22

20

To be precise, we require that, for all (c1 , c2 )  B and all c1  [c1 ,c1  11 c2 ] , there exists c2 such that: (i)

(c1, c2 )  B ; and (ii)

. In other words, if we take any point (c1 , c2 ) in B, and if we

draw a line L of slope (1   ) through (c1 , c2 ) , then: associated with every point (c1 , ĉ2 ) on the segment of
L that joins the points (c1 , c2 ) and  c1  11 c2 , 0  , there is a point (c1 , c2 )  B that either coincides with

(c1 , ĉ2 ) or else lies vertically above it. (Note that  c1  11 c2 , 0  is the point at which L crosses the c1 axis.)

21

Perhaps more intuitively, this property can also be expressed in differential terms: starting from any
consumption pair (c1 , c2 )  B such that c2  0, it must be possible to draw a curve in B of slope at least
(1   ), and to continue that curve up to the point at which it first hits the c1 axis.
22
Notwithstanding its obvious generality, this budget set is still special in a number of respects. We give
four examples. First, there is nothing in Constraints 1 and 2 that requires that the budget curve be
downward sloping. Indeed, these constraints place no upper bound at all on the slope of the budget curve.
Second, there is no reason why the budget curve needs to begin on the c2 axis. It could perfectly well begin

24

However, as we shall see, the optimum can be obtained using a particularly
simple kind of budget set, namely a two-part budget set. Such budget sets consist of: (i) a
budget curve that has slopes of –1 and –(1 + p) to the left and right of a kink at (c1 , c2 ) ;
and (ii) none, some, or all of the points of A that lie below or to the left of the budget
curve. For example, the budget set shown in Figure 2 consists of just such a budget curve,
together with all of the points of A that lie below or to the left of it.
Better still, two-part budget sets arise naturally in practical applications. Indeed,
suppose that self 0 sets up two separate accounts: (i) a fully liquid account with balance
c1 ; and (ii) a partially illiquid account with balance c2 and an early withdrawal penalty

p.23 Then self 1 will face a two-part budget set.
C. Distribution of the taste shock
AWA show that their problem can be reduced to a problem in the class of
optimization problems identified and analyzed by Luenberger (1969). We follow AWA’s
lead. We make the following assumptions on the distribution function F of the taste
shock θ.
A1 Both F and F' are functions of bounded variation on (0, ∞).24
A2 The support of F' is contained in [  ,  ] , where 0      .
at some (c10 , c20 )  A for which c10  0 . (Constraint 2 does, however, require that the budget curve end on
the c1 axis.) Third, there is no reason why points below or to the left of the budget curve need be included.
Fourth, there is no reason why the budget curve need be connected. It could perfectly well consist of two or
more components. For example, a first component might begin at some (c10 , c20 )  A for which c10  0 and
end at some (c11 , c12 )  A for which c12  0 . A second component might then begin at some (c12 , c22 )  A for
which c12  c11 and end at some (c13 , c23 )  A for which c23  0 . (Constraint 2 does, however, rule out budget
curves consisting of a finite set of points, unless these points all lie on the c1 axis.)
23
By saying that self 1 pays a penalty p on early withdrawals from the second account, we mean that if she
consumes Δ from the second account then that account is debited (1 + p)Δ.
24
A sufficient condition for A1 is that: (i) F' and F'' both exist; and (ii)  0 F ( ) d  and  0 F ( ) d are
both finite. In other words, if one walks along the graph of F' or F'', then the total vertical distance travelled
(both up and down) is finite. We do not use this stronger condition because we want to allow for densities,
like that of the uniform distribution, that have jumps at  and  . Indeed, a good way of generating
examples is to take a standard distribution and truncate it at suitable points  and  . This procedure
typically results in discontinuities in F and F' at  and  .

25

A3 Put G( )  (1   )  F ( )  F ( ) . Then there exists  M  [  , ] such that: (i) G  0
on (0, M ) ; and (ii) G  0 on ( M , ) .25
We now comment on these assumptions. A function f : (0,  )   is of bounded
variation if and only if it is the difference of two bounded and non-decreasing functions

f1 , f 2 : (0, )   . Since F is a distribution function, it is automatically a function of
bounded variation. The substance of A1 is therefore the requirement that F has a density
F' that is a function of bounded variation. A2 means that F' = 0 on (0,  ) \ [  ,  ] . Notice
that F' need not be continuous. In particular, it can jump up at  and down at  . A3
means that G is first increasing and then decreasing. It implies that the support of F' is
connected. It is preserved under truncation: if a distribution function F satisfies A3, then
so too does the distribution function obtained by truncating F at  and  .
A3 is satisfied by many of the distributions that one encounters in practice. To
illustrate this point, we have made a list of all the distributions occurring in either of two
leading statistics textbooks: Rice (1995) and Hogg, McKean, and Craig (2005). This list
contains 18 distributions. Of these, 14 satisfy A1-A3 for all parameter values (including

 and  ). More precisely, we have:
Remark Suppose that D is one of the Burr, Chi-squared, Exponential, Extreme Value, F,
Gamma, Gompertz, Log-Normal, Maxwell, Normal, Rayleigh, t, Uniform, and Weibull
distributions. Then, for any 0       , the distribution function F obtained by
truncating D at  and  satisfies Assumptions A1-A3.26
The four exceptions are the Beta, Cauchy, Log-Gamma, and Pareto distributions.
In the form in which it appears in both Rice and Hogg, McKean, and Craig, the Beta
25

A3 is slightly stronger than the analogous assumption in AWA, namely their Assumption A. However:
(i) it is not clear that our results for the model with π < ∞ actually hold under AWA’s A; (ii) A3 is easier to
state than AWA’s A; and (iii) it is easier to check whether a given distribution satisfies A3 than to check
whether it satisfies AWA’s A.

26

Notice that 5 of these 14 distributions (namely the Burr, Chi-squared, F, Gamma, and Weibull
distributions) are unbounded at zero for some parameter values. However, the truncated distributions all
satisfy A1 because   0 .

26

distribution does in fact satisfy A1-A3. However, for our purposes, it is more natural to
consider a generalization of the Beta distribution for which the support is a compact
interval contained in (0, ) . For this distribution, A3 is not always satisfied.27 Similarly,
the standard Cauchy distribution, which is the form of the Cauchy distribution considered
in both Rice and Hogg, McKean, and Craig, satisfies A1-A3. However, in its general
form, the Cauchy distribution fails A3 for some choices of the parameter values.28 Next,
the Log-Gamma distribution appears only in Hogg, McKean, and Craig. This distribution
may or may not satisfy A3, depending on the parameters.29 Finally, Rice and Hogg,
McKean, and Craig each consider a special case of the Pareto distribution. Both of these
special cases satisfy A1-A3. However, in general, the Pareto distribution fails A3 for
some choices of the parameter values.30 For additional discussion of these exceptional
cases, see Appendix Q.
D. Theorems and relationship to experimental results
AWA show that, when there is no bound on the strength of the commitment
technology, an optimal choice for self 0 is a minimum-savings rule. In our terminology,
this can be expressed by saying that an optimal choice for self 0 is to divide her
endowment y between two accounts: (i) a fully liquid account that places no penalty on
withdrawals in either period 1 or period 2; and (ii) a fully illiquid account that disallows

The density of the generalization of the Beta that we consider is proportional to  x  a 
the interval (a,b), where 0 < a < b < ∞ and ζ, η > 0. Exceptions to A3 occur when ζ < 1.

 1

27

28



The density of the general form of the Cauchy distribution is proportional to 1 

 
x

2 1



b  x 

 1

on

on  , where

   is a location parameter and σ > 0 is a scale parameter. Exceptions to A3 occur when μ/σ is large and
positive.
29

The density of the Log-Gamma distribution is proportional to x
Exceptions to A3 occur when ζ < 1 and η > 1 – β.

30

 1

 log( x ) 

 1



on (1,∞), where ζ, η > 0.

For example, the density of the Pareto type II distribution is proportional to 1 



x    1



on (μ,∞), where

   is a location parameter, σ > 0 is a scale parameter and ζ > 0 is a shape parameter. Exceptions to A3
occur when ζ is small and μ/σ is large and positive.

27

any withdrawals in period 1 but places no penalty on withdrawals in period 2.31,32 Our
first result generalizes AWA’s result to the case in which there is a bound π on the
strength of the commitment mechanism.
Theorem 1 Suppose that U1  U 2  U , and that U has constant relative risk aversion
ρ > 0. Then an optimal choice for self 0 is to divide her endowment y between two
accounts: (i) a fully liquid account with no penalty on withdrawals in either period 1 or
period 2; and (ii) a partially illiquid account, with a penalty p = π on withdrawals in
period 1 and no penalty on withdrawals in period 2.33
See Appendices B through I.
Theorem 1 implies that there is no advantage to self 0 in using more than two
accounts, in using accounts with more complex conditions attached to them, in using
accounts with a penalty p < π, or in using some commitment mechanism other than
accounts.
Our next result gives a sufficient condition under which self 0’s allocation to the
partially illiquid account is monotonic in p.

31

There is a small technical difference between a fully illiquid account and a partially illiquid account with
penalty p = ∞. If self 0 places yliquid in a fully liquid account and y – yliquid in a fully illiquid account, then
she is effectively choosing a budget set that consists of the line segment joining the two points (0, y) and
(yliquid, y – yliquid). On the other hand, if she places yliquid in a fully liquid account and y – yliquid in a partially
illiquid account with penalty p = ∞, then she is effectively choosing a budget set that consists of all points
on or vertically below the line segment joining the two points (0, y) and (yliquid, y – yliquid). (In effect, an
illiquid account with penalty p = ∞ gives self 1 the possibility of free disposal, whereas a fully illiquid
account does not.) Of course, these two mechanisms are equivalent from the point of view of self 0, since
self 1 will always choose from the line segment joining the two points (0, y) and (yliquid, y – yliquid).
Therefore, we shall not distinguish between them in what follows.
32
Ambrus and Egorov (2013) provide additional analysis of AWA’s model.
33
As the wording of the Theorem implies, the optimal choice of self 0 is not unique. Indeed, as long as one
thinks of self 0 as choosing a budget set B, her optimal choice is inherently non-unique. This is because,
starting from any given B (optimal or not), one can make equivalent budget sets by adding or removing
consumption pairs that would not be chosen by any type. This particular form of non-uniqueness can be
eliminated if, instead of thinking of self 0 as choosing a budget set B, we think rather of her as choosing an
incentive-compatible consumption curve c  (c1 , c2 ) :[ , ]  A .

28

Theorem 2 Suppose that U1  U 2  U , and that U has constant relative risk aversion
ρ = 1 (i.e., that U = log).34 Suppose further that self 0 must divide her endowment y
between two accounts: (i) a fully liquid account with no penalty on withdrawals in either
period 1 or period 2; and (ii) a partially illiquid account with a penalty p on withdrawals
in period 1 and no penalty on withdrawals in period 2. Denote the optimal allocations to
the two accounts by yliquid and y penalty . Then the correspondence mapping p to the set of
possible choices for y penalty is weakly increasing. Specifically:35
1. For small values of p, there may be a non-trivial interval [ y penalty , y penalty ] of
possible choices for y penalty .36 However, y penalty is strictly increasing in p, and

y penalty is independent of p.
2. For intermediate values of p, there is a unique choice for y penalty .37,38 This y penalty

We have conducted a number of simulations for the case ρ ≠ 1. These simulations suggest that, in
practice, ypenalty is non-decreasing in p for reasonable calibrations of the model. However, our analytic
results reveal that the simulation results are not completely generalizable, and we can construct
counterexamples to the claim that ypenalty is non-decreasing in p when ρ ≠ 1. We recover the result that
ypenalty is non-decreasing in p when ρ ≠ 1 if we impose further restrictions on the distribution function F
beyond Assumptions A1-A3 (see Appendix O).
35
In the current case, there exist two cutoffs  0  0 and 1   0 . We say that p is small if p  (0,  0 ) ,
intermediate if p  ( 0 , 1 ) , and large if p  (1 , ) . The significance of  0 is that the optimal allocation to
the partially illiquid account is non-unique when p   0 and unique when p   0 . The significance of 1
is that the maximum-penalty constraint is strictly binding when p   1 and strictly slack when p   1 . We
typically have  0  0 . In that case, non-uniqueness occurs only when p = 0, and then only for the trivial
reason that the liquid account and the partially illiquid account are indistinguishable (and self 0 is therefore
indifferent as to how she divides y between the two accounts). There is, however, a very specific scenario
in which  0  0 . In that scenario, non-uniqueness occurs for all p in the non-trivial range (0,  0 ) .
36
The form of non-uniqueness discussed here arises even if (as in Footnote 33) we think of self 0 as
choosing an incentive-compatible consumption curve. It can be eliminated, as we show in Appendix J, by
introducing an additional assumption, namely: (A4) G is strictly increasing on [ , M ) . However: (i) A4 is
a little out of keeping with the rest of our framework; (ii) we can obtain satisfactory comparative-statics
results without A4; and (iii) the form of non-uniqueness described rarely arises even in the absence of A4.
We do not therefore include A4 among our basic assumptions.
37
In other words, if one thinks of self 0 as taking the two accounts (including the penalty p on the partially
illiquid account) as given, then there is only one way in which she can allocate y between the two accounts.
38
Self 0’s choice is actually unique in a stronger sense than that given in Footnote 37. Suppose that we
confine her to using at most two accounts, and that we place an upper bound π on the penalty that she can
attach to either of these two accounts. Then she will attach a penalty of 0 to one account and the maximum
34

29

is strictly increasing in p.
3. For large values of p, there is again a unique choice for y penalty .39 This y penalty is
independent of p.
See Appendices J through O.
Theorem 2 aligns with our empirical results when the liquid account and the
illiquid account have the same interest rate (although log utility is a knife-edge case).
Specifically, as p rises exogenously across these experimental arms, the allocation to the
partially illiquid account rises. This is true in both the original experiment (where p rises
from 10% to 20% to ∞) and the second experiment (where p rises from 10% to ∞).
Theorem 3 Suppose that U1  U 2  U , and that U has constant relative risk aversion
  0 . Suppose further that self 0 must divide her endowment y among three accounts: (i)

a fully liquid account with no penalty on withdrawals in either period 1 or period 2; (ii) a
partially illiquid account with a penalty p on withdrawals in period 1 and no penalty on
withdrawals in period 2; and (iii) a fully illiquid account that disallows any withdrawals
in period 1 but places no penalty on withdrawals in period 2. Denote the optimal
allocations to the three accounts by yliquid , y penalty , and yilliquid . Then her liquid allocation
yliquid is unique and independent of p. By the same token, her total illiquid allocation
y penalty  yilliquid is unique and independent of p. Furthermore, self 0 weakly prefers the

fully illiquid account to the partially illiquid account. Specifically:40
1. For small and intermediate values of p, self 0 strictly prefers the fully illiquid
account to the partially illiquid account. More precisely: self 0 places her total
penalty of π to the other. Moreover there is only one way in which she can allocate y between the two
accounts.
39
Self 0’s choice is once again unique in a stronger sense than that given in Footnote 37. Suppose that, as
in Footnote 38, we confine her to using at most two accounts. Then she will attach a penalty of 0 to one
account and any penalty p in the range [1 ,  ] to the other. (The point here is that any penalty of at least 1
is sufficient to deter self 1 from making any withdrawal from the partially illiquid account.) So her choice
of accounts is no longer unique. However, there is only one way in which she can allocate y between the
two accounts, and this allocation is independent of the penalty on the partially illiquid account.
40
We say that p is small if p  (0,  0 ) , intermediate if p  ( 0 , 1 ) and large if p  (1 , ) . Cf. Theorem 2
and Footnote 35.

30

illiquid allocation y penalty  yilliquid in the fully illiquid account; y penalty = 0; and

yilliquid is unique and independent of p.
2. For large values of p, self 0 is indifferent between the fully illiquid account and
the partially illiquid account. More precisely: self 0 does not care how her total
illiquid allocation y penalty  yilliquid is divided between the partially illiquid account
and the fully illiquid account.
See Appendices M and N.2.
The logic behind Theorem 3 runs as follows. First, it follows directly from the
formulation of our problem that the maximum expected utility of self 0 is weakly
increasing in π. Second, if U1  U 2  U and U has constant relative risk aversion, then
self 0 can achieve this maximum using two accounts, namely a fully liquid account and a
partially illiquid account with penalty p   . Hence, if we restrict self 0 to dividing her
endowment between a fully liquid account and a partially illiquid account with penalty p,
then she will always weakly prefer a higher p. In particular, she will like p = ∞ best of all.
In other words, she weakly prefers the fully illiquid account to the partially illiquid
account.
Now suppose that the optimal allocation to a fully illiquid account is yliquid . If self
0 deposits yilliquid in a fully illiquid account, then there will be a 1 such that: (i) any self 1
of type   1 will choose freely from the line segment joining the points (0, y) and

( y  yilliquid , yilliquid ) ; and (ii) any self 1 of type   1 will end up choosing the endpoint
( y  yilliquid , yilliquid ) . If, however, self 0 deposits yilliquid in a partially illiquid account with
penalty p, then the behavior of self 1 will not change if and only if p  1 , where 1 is
the minimum penalty necessary to deter the  type of self 1 from increasing consumption
above yliquid  y  yilliquid .
Hence, if p  1 , then self 0 can attain the maximum expected utility associated
with a fully illiquid account by using a partially illiquid account with a penalty p instead.

31

She will therefore be indifferent between these accounts. On the other hand, if p  1 ,
then a penalty of p is no longer sufficient to deter the  type of self 1 from increasing
consumption above yliquid . Hence the behavior of self 1 will change if self 0 deposits

yilliquid in a partially illiquid account with penalty p. Furthermore, it can be shown that,
even when self 0 makes the optimal allocation to the partially illiquid account, her
expected utility will still be strictly lower than the expected utility that she can obtain
from the fully illiquid account. She will therefore strictly prefer the fully illiquid account.
This prediction of an overall weak preference for the fully illiquid account over
the partially illiquid account is consistent with our empirical results in the experimental
arm in which participants allocated their endowments across three accounts: a liquid
account, a partially illiquid account with a 10% penalty, and a fully illiquid account.
Among the participants in this experimental arm, 37 allocated money to the fully illiquid
account but not to the partially illiquid account, while only 8 allocated money to the
partially illiquid account but not to the fully illiquid account (76 allocated money to both
illiquid accounts, and 29 allocated money to neither). The average allocations to the
accounts follow a similar pattern: the partially illiquid account attracts 16% of the
endowment, while the fully illiquid account attracts 34% of the endowment. Furthermore,
Theorem 3 predicts that participants who allocate money to the partially illiquid account
do so because the 10% penalty is above 1 and therefore sufficient to deter early
withdrawals. There were 42 participants who allocated money to the partially illiquid
account and were randomly assigned to receive their chosen allocation (instead of having
all of their endowment placed in the liquid account), and out of those 42 participants,
only one made a withdrawal from the partially illiquid account before the goal date.
Thus, the data tend to support Theorem 3. However, it would be necessary to
extend the model to accommodate some of the nuances of the experimental design. Most
importantly, participants in the study were allowed to set different goal dates for the fully
illiquid account and the partially illiquid account, and 55 out of the 76 participants who
allocated money to both accounts took advantage of this flexibility. Among the

32

experimental participants who chose to allocate money to both the partially illiquid
account and the fully illiquid account, the average goal horizon for the partially illiquid
account was 116 days, and the average goal horizon for the fully illiquid account was 145
days, a difference that is statistically significant at the 1% level in a paired t-test. Hence,
participants tended to use the partially illiquid account to create short-run commitments
and the fully illiquid account to create long-run commitments. We do not know if
participants would prefer to use the fully illiquid account to create commitments at all
horizons (if they were given the option to do so).
VII. Conclusion
This paper studies the demand for commitment devices in the form of illiquid
financial accounts. We experimentally identify the features of commitment accounts that
make them attractive by asking participants to allocate an endowment between a liquid
account and one or more commitment accounts, which place restrictions on early
withdrawals.
We find that participants allocate meaningful fractions of their endowments to
commitment accounts. When the commitment account and the liquid account have the
same interest rate, commitment account allocations are increasing in the commitment
account’s degree of illiquidity. We extend the theoretical framework of Amador,
Werning, and Angeletos (2006) to show that this result is predicted by a model in which
sophisticated present-biased agents face a tradeoff between commitment and flexibility,
under a wide range of assumptions. However, when the commitment account pays a
higher interest rate than the liquid account, commitment account allocations do not vary
with the commitment account’s degree of illiquidity, which can be explained if
individuals without present bias and/or present-biased individuals who are naïve about
their present bias are also in our sample. Thus, increasing the illiquidity of 401(k) and
IRA accounts, which yield higher after-tax returns than more liquid accounts, may not
increase aggregate contributions to those accounts despite the desire for strict
commitment within a segment of the population.

33

Many retirement savings accounts only weakly restrict pre-retirement spending.
Withdrawals from 401(k) plans and IRAs before the age of 59½ generate only a 10% tax
penalty, and there are many classes of withdrawals from these accounts that are penaltyfree. It is estimated that 46% of workers with 401(k) accounts who leave their jobs
receive their 401(k) balances as a lump-sum withdrawal (Hewitt Associates, 2009), and
retirement savings plan managers assert that this “leakage” is socially sub-optimal
(Steyer, 2011). Beshears et al. (2015) find that U.S. employer-based defined contribution
accounts are unusually liquid in a comparison across six developed countries. Future
work should explore the optimal amount of illiquidity that a retirement savings system
should have.

34

References
Ainslie, George, 1991. “Derivation of ‘Rational’ Economic Behavior from Hyperbolic
Discount Curves.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 81.2, pp.
334-340.
Amador, Manuel, Ivan Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos, 2006. “Commitment vs.
Flexibility.” Econometrica 74.2, pp. 365-396.
Ambrus, Attila and Georgy Egorov, 2013. “Comment on ‘Commitment vs. Flexibility.’”
Econometrica 81.5, pp. 2113-2124.
Ariely, Dan and Klaus Wertenbroch, 2002. “Procrastination, Deadlines, and
Performance: Self-Control by Precommitment.” Psychological Science 13.2, pp.
219-224.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast:
Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Phillipines.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121.2, pp. 635-672.
Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger, forthcoming. “Working Over
Time: Dynamic Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Aumann, Robert and Lloyd Shapley, 1976. “Long Term Competition: A Game Theoretic
Analysis.” Mimeo, Hebrew University.
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, 2004. “Willpower and Personal Rules.” Journal of
Political Economy 112.4, pp. 848-886.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, Joshua Hurwitz, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian,
2015. “Liquidity in Retirement Savings Systems: An International Comparison.”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105.5, pp. 420-425.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Gine, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang, forthcoming. “Facilitating
Savings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Economic
Development and Cultural Change.
Burke, Jeremy, Jill E. Luoto, and Francisco Perez-Arce, 2014. “Soft versus Hard
Commitments: A Test on Savings Behaviors.” RAND Working Paper No. WR1055.
Chow, Vinci Y. C., 2011. “Demand for a Commitment Device in Online Gaming.”
Working paper.
Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson, 2013. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More?
Evidence from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103.4,
pp. 1138-1171.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf, 2010. “Optimal Mandates and the
Welfare Cost of Asymmetric Information: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity
Market.” Econometrica 78.3, pp. 1031-1092.
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba, 2004. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets:
Policyholder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political
Economy 112.1, pp. 183-208.
Friedman, James W., 1971. “A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames.” Review of
Economic Studies 38.1, pp. 1-12.

35

Gine, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your
Butt Is: A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2.4, pp. 213-235.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning, 2007. “New Dynamic Public
Finance: A User’s Guide.” In Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael
Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Volume 21, Cambridge:
MIT Press, pp. 317-388.
Hewitt Associates, 2009. “The Erosion of Retirement Security from Cash-outs: Analysis
and Recommendations.” Available at http://www.aon.com/human-capitalconsulting/thought-leadership/retirement/reports-pubs_retirement_cash_outs.jsp,
accessed April 18, 2011.
Hogg, Robert V., Joseph W. McKean, and Allen T. Craig, 2005. Introduction to
Mathematical Statistics. 6th Edition. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Houser, Daniel, Daniel Schunk, Joachim Winter, and Erte Xiao, 2010. “Temptation and
Commitment in the Laboratory.” Institute for Empirical Research in Economics,
University of Zurich Working Paper No. 488.
Investment Company Institute, 2015. “The U.S. Retirement Market, First Quarter 2015.”
Washington, D.C.: Investment Company Institute.
http://www.ici.org/info/ret_15_q1_data.xls, accessed July 11, 2015.
John, Anett, 2015. “When Commitment Fails: Evidence from a Regular Saver Product in
the Philippines.” Working paper.
Karlan, Dean and Leigh L. Linden, 2014. “Loose Knots: Strong versus Weak
Commitments to Save for Education in Uganda.” NBER Working Paper No.
19863.
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz, 2014. “Under-Savers Anonymous:
Evidence on Self-Help Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment
Device.” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 12-060.
Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, forthcoming. “Self-Control at
Work.” Journal of Political Economy.
Kreps, David M., Paul Milgrom, John Roberts, and Robert Wilson, 1982. “Rational
Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma.” Journal of Economic
Theory 27.2, pp. 245-252.
Laibson, David, 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112.2, pp. 443-478.
Luenberger, David G., 1969. Optimization by Vector Space Methods. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Milkman, Katherine L., Julia A. Minson, and Kevin G. M. Volpp, 2013. “Holding the
Hunger Games Hostage at the Gym: An Evaluation of Temptation Bundling.”
Management Science 60.2, pp. 283-299.
Phelps, E. S. and R. A. Pollak, 1968. “On Second-Best National Saving and GameEquilibrium Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 35.2, pp. 185-199.
Redelmeier, Donald A. and Eldar Shafir, 1995. “Medical Decision Making in Situations
That Offer Multiple Alternatives.” Journal of the American Medical Association
273.4, pp. 302-305.

36

Rice, John A., 1995. Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis. 2nd Edition. Belmont:
Duxbury Press.
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor, 2015. “Incentives, Commitments and
Habit Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at
a Fortune-500 Company.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7.3,
pp. 51-84.
Shafir, Eldar, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky, 1993. “Reason-based Choice.”
Cognition 49.1-2, pp. 11-36.
Simonson, Itamar, 1989. “Choice Based on Reasons: The Case of Attraction and
Compromise Effects.” Journal of Consumer Research 16.2, pp. 158-174.
Sobel, Joel, 1985. “A Theory of Credibility.” Review of Economic Studies 52.4, pp. 557573.
Steyer, Robert, 2011. “DC Plan Leakage Problem Alarming, Solutions Evasive.”
Pensions & Investments, April 4, 2011. Available at
http://www.pionline.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20110404/PRINTSUB/3040
49977&crit=leakage, accessed April 18, 2011.

37

Table 1. Participant Characteristics
This table summarizes participants’ demographic characteristics in the first experiment (n = 495)
and the second experiment (n = 550).

Percent male
Age
≤ 25
26-35
36-45
46-55
56-65
≥ 66
Education
No high school
diploma
High school graduate
Some college
Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
Graduate degree
Annual household income
< $15,000
$15,000 - $34,999
$35,000 - $49,999
$50,000 - $74,999
$75,000 - $99,999
≥ $100,000

Expt. 1
43%

Expt. 2
43%

8%
17%
21%
22%
16%
16%

8%
19%
18%
22%
15%
17%

3%

5%

32%
20%
7%
24%
13%

29%
23%
12%
19%
12%

6%
19%
16%
27%
15%
17%

9%
20%
16%
22%
16%
17%

Marital status
Married
Separated/divorced
Widowed
Never married

Expt. 1

Expt. 2

68%
11%
5%
16%

66%
14%
5%
15%

Job status (overlapping categories)
Working now
63%
Unemployed
8%
Temporary layoff
1%
Disabled
4%
Retired
19%
Homemaker
10%
Race
White/Caucasian
Black/African
American
American Indian or
Alaskan Native
Asian or Pacific
Islander

38

60%
9%
1%
6%
19%
11%

80%
8%

81%
10%

1%

1%

4%

2%

Table 2. Sample Size in Each Experimental Condition: Experiment 1
This table reports the number of participants who were assigned to each experimental condition
in Experiment 1 (February 1, 2010, to February 13, 2011).
Commitment account interest rate
21%
22%
23%
72
66
78
0
79
68
0
64
68

Withdrawal restrictions on commitment
account prior to commitment date
10% early withdrawal penalty
20% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals

Table 3. Percent of Endowment Allocated to Commitment Account: Experiment 1
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean percent of endowment allocated to
the commitment account. There are three observations for every participant: one observation for
each possible endowment amount. Standard errors clustered at the participant level are in
parentheses. The table also gives p-values from tests of equality of means, as indicated.
Withdrawal restrictions on
commitment account prior to
commitment date
10% early withdrawal penalty
20% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals

p-value of equality of means
10% penalty vs. 20% penalty
10% penalty vs. no early w/d
20% penalty vs. no early w/d

Commitment account
interest rate
21%
22%
23%
27.6
38.9
58.2
(2.8)
(3.4)
(3.4)
-44.8
61.1
(3.4)
(3.4)
-56.0
59.9
(4.1)
(3.6)

----

0.220
0.002
0.035

39

0.539
0.719
0.809

p-value of equality
of means
21% vs. 22% 22% vs. 23%
0.011
0.000
--

0.001

--

0.469

Table 4. Days to Commitment Date: Experiment 1
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean days between the initial allocation
decision date and the commitment date. There are up to three observations for every participant:
one observation for each possible endowment amount. If a participant allocates no money to the
commitment account for a given endowment amount, the days to commitment date for that
participant and endowment amount is treated as missing. Standard errors clustered at the
participant level are in parentheses. The table also gives p-values from tests of equality of means,
as indicated.
Withdrawal restrictions on
commitment account prior to
commitment date
10% early withdrawal penalty
20% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals
p-value of equality of means
10% penalty vs. 20% penalty
10% penalty vs. no early w/d
20% penalty vs. no early w/d

Commitment account
interest rate
21%
22%
23%
234.0
209.0
227.6
(12.0)
(13.4)
(12.3)
207.4
202.1
-(12.5)
(13.7)
214.3
186.0
-(14.1)
(12.6)

----

0.931
0.785
0.716

p-value of equality
of means
21% vs. 22% 22% vs. 23%
0.165
0.306
--

0.775

--

0.136

0.167
0.019
0.384

Table 5. Dollar-Weighted Days to Commitment Date: Experiment 1
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean dollar-weighted days to
commitment date, which is the fraction of the endowment initially allocated to the commitment
account multiplied by the number of days separating the initial allocation decision date and the
commitment date. There are three observations for every participant: one observation for each
possible endowment amount. Standard errors clustered at the participant level are in parentheses.
The table also gives p-values from tests of equality of means, as indicated.
Withdrawal restrictions on
commitment account prior to
commitment date
10% early withdrawal penalty
20% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals

p-value of equality of means
10% penalty vs. 20% penalty
10% penalty vs. no early w/d
20% penalty vs. no early w/d

Commitment account
interest rate
21%
22%
23%
64.3
81.8
129.6
(7.3)
(9.1)
(10.6)
-100.5
127.0
(10.9)
(12.3)
-131.8
117.8
(13.9)
(11.2)

----

0.188
0.003
0.078
40

0.872
0.447
0.584

p-value of equality
of means
21% vs. 22% 22% vs. 23%
0.136
0.001
--

0.108

--

0.436

Table 6. Sample Size in Each Experimental Condition: Experiment 2
This table reports the number of participants who were assigned to each experimental condition
in Experiment 2 (February 14, 2011, to September 1, 2011).

Withdrawal restrictions on commitment account prior to
commitment date
Safety valve (withdrawals only in financial emergencies)
10% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals
Two commitment accounts: 10% early withdrawal
penalty and no early withdrawals

Endowment allocation
According to
participant’s
All in liquid
choice
account
85
65
54
46
60
90
70
80

Table 7. Percent of Endowment Allocated to Commitment Account: Experiment 2
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean percent of endowment allocated to a
commitment account. For the condition offering two commitment accounts, mean allocations are
also reported for each individual commitment account. Standard are in parentheses.
Withdrawal restrictions on commitment account
prior to commitment date
Safety valve (withdrawals only in financial
emergencies)
10% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals
Two commitment accounts: 10% early withdrawal penalty and no early
withdrawals
Allocation to 10% early withdrawal penalty account
Allocation to no early withdrawals account

41

% allocated to
commitment account
45.3
(2.7)
45.8
(2.9)
53.7
(2.3)
50.1
(2.7)
16.2
(1.4)
33.9
(2.4)

Table 8. Days to Commitment Date: Experiment 2
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean days between the initial allocation
decision date and the commitment date. If a participant allocates no money to a commitment
account, the days to commitment date for that participant and commitment account is treated as
missing. Standard errors are in parentheses. The table also gives p-values from tests of equality
of means, as indicated.

Withdrawal restrictions on commitment account
prior to commitment date
Safety valve (withdrawals only in financial
emergencies)
10% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals
Two commitment accounts
10% early withdrawal penalty

Days to commitment
date
135.4
(5.4)
135.6
(6.0)
134.7
(4.5)
116.3
(6.5)
148.7
(5.5)

No early withdrawals

p-value of equality
of means vs. no
early withdrawals
only
0.923
0.900
--

0.020
0.050

Table 9. Dollar-Weighted Days to Commitment Date: Experiment 2
For each experimental condition, this table reports the mean dollar-weighted days to
commitment date. When one commitment account is offered, dollar-weighted days to
commitment date is defined as the fraction of the endowment initially allocated to the
commitment account multiplied by the number of days separating the initial allocation date and
the commitment date. When two commitment accounts are offered, dollar-weighted days to
commitment date is obtained by calculating this product for each account and taking the sum.
Standard errors are in parentheses. The table also gives p-values from tests of equality of means,
as indicated.

Withdrawal restrictions on commitment account
prior to commitment date
Safety valve (withdrawals only in financial
emergencies)
10% early withdrawal penalty
No early withdrawals
Two commitment accounts: 10% early
withdrawal penalty and no early withdrawals

42

Dollar-weighted days
to commitment date
62.0
(4.6)
64.4
(5.5)
74.8
(4.4)
71.3
(4.8)

p-value of equality
of means vs. no
early withdrawals
only
0.046
0.137
-0.587

Table 10. Mean Withdrawal Measure for Own versus All Liquid Allocation: Experiment 2
For each participant and for a given number of days since the start of the experiment, we
calculate the ratio of actual balances in experimental accounts to hypothetical balances in
experimental accounts had the participant not made any withdrawals. For each experimental
condition and for the experimental conditions combined, this table reports the mean difference
between the balance ratio at various dates for participants who were randomly assigned to
receive their chosen allocations versus participants who were randomly assigned to receive their
entire endowment in the liquid account. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in
parentheses.
Withdrawal restrictions on
commitment account prior to
commitment date
Safety valve (withdrawals only in
financial emergencies)
10% early withdrawal penalty

Own allocation vs. all in liquid account mean difference
Days since initial deposit into participant accounts
20
60
100
140
180

No early withdrawals

0.070*
(0.034)
-0.038
(0.031)
0.044*
(0.019)

Two commitment accounts
Combined

0.049
(0.033)
0.120*
(0.060)

* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.

43

-0.004
(0.047)

0.002
(0.059)

0.022
(0.066)

-0.027
(0.071)

0.121
(0.071)
0.149**
(0.047)
0.029
(0.046)
0.069**
(0.026)

0.156
(0.082)
0.127*
(0.057)
0.026
(0.053)
0.069*
(0.031)

0.197*
(0.087)
0.092
(0.070)
0.035
(0.057)
0.078*
(0.034)

0.143
(0.090)
0.114
(0.073)
0.064
(0.061)
0.067
(0.036)

Figure
F
1. Illu
ustrative Bu
udget Set
This figu
ure shows a budget
b
set th
hat illustratess Constraintss 1 and 2 of the model. T
The budget sset is
a non-em
mpty compacct subset of th
he ambient budget
b
set annd therefore satisfies Coonstraint 1. Itt
satisfies Constraint
C
2 if   0.5 , but not if   0.1 . The sslope at the eencircled pooint is  1.3 . This
is greaterr than  1.5 (the minimu
um slope thatt is permissiible when   0.5 ), but less than  1.1
(the miniimum slope that is permiissible when
n   0.1 ).

Figure
F
2. Tw
wo-Part Bu
udget Set
ure shows a two-part
t
bud
dget set. Such budget setts consist of:: (i) a budgett curve that hhas
This figu
slopes off  1 and  (1  p) to the left and righ
ht of a kink aat (c1 , c2 ) ; annd (ii) none,, some or alll of
the points of the amb
bient budget set that lie below
b
or to tthe left of thee budget currve.

44

Appendix Fiigure 1. Desscription of the Liquid Account

45

dix Figure 2. Descriptio
on of the 22%
% Interest R
Rate, 10% E
Early With
hdrawal Pen
nalty
Append
Commiitment Accoount

46

Append
dix Figure 3. Example Allocation Page

47

Appendix Figure 4. Sample Weekly Email to Participant
Dear Participant,
This is a breakdown of your current balances:
Freedom Account: $24.25
Goal Account: $53.18
Goal Date: July 20th, 2010
If you wish to withdraw any money from your accounts, please go to your panel pages and click on the
"Savings Game" button: https://mmic.rand.org/panel
If you have any questions about this game or your accounts, please feel free to contact us
at webhelp@rand.org or 866.591.2909
Thanks!
www.rand.org/alp

48

Appen
ndix Figure 5. Withdraawal Interfaace

49

Appendix Figure 6. Balance Ratios by Experimental Condition: Experiment 1
For each experimental condition, these figures show withdrawal patterns over the course of the
experiment. For each participant and for each day, we calculate the sum of the liquid account and
commitment account balances that the participant would have had if no withdrawals had been
requested. This hypothetical total balance takes as given the participant’s initial allocation
between the liquid account and the commitment account, and it uses the allocation decision that
applies to the ex post realization of the endowment amount ($50, $100, or $500). We then
calculate the ratio of the participant’s actual balance to the hypothetical total balance, and we
plot the mean of this ratio against the number of days since the initial deposit into the
participant’s accounts.
10% withdrawal penalty conditions

1
0.8
21% interest
0.6

22% interest

0.4

23% interest

0.2
0
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

22% commitment account interest rate conditions

1
0.8

10% penalty

0.6

20% penalty

0.4

No withdraw

0.2
0
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

23% commitment account interest rate conditions

1
0.8
10% penalty
0.6

20% penalty

0.4

No withdraw

0.2
0
0

50

100
150
200
250
Days since endowment received

50

300

350

Appen
ndix Figure 7. Descriptiion of Two Commitmeent Accountss Offered Simultaneou
usly

51

Appendix Figure 8. Deescription of
o the Safetyy Valve Com
mmitment Account

52

Appendix Figure 9. Withdrawal Patterns for Own versus All Liquid Allocation:
Experiment 2
For each experimental condition, these figures show withdrawal patterns over the course of the
experiment for participants who were randomly assigned to receive their chosen allocations and
for participants who were randomly assigned to receive their entire endowment in the liquid
account. For each participant and for each day, we calculate the sum of the liquid account and
commitment account balances that the participant would have had if no withdrawals had been
requested. We then calculate the ratio of the participant’s actual balance to this hypothetical total
balance, and we plot the mean of this ratio against the number of days since the initial deposit
into the participant’s accounts.
Safety valve

10% penalty

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
1

21

41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
Days since endowment received
Own allocation

1

21

All liquid

41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
Days since endowment received
Own allocation

No early withdrawals

All liquid

Two commitment accounts

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
1

21

41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
Days since endowment received
Own allocation

1

All liquid

21

41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
Days since endowment received
Own allocation

53

All liquid

