NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-SIGNALING AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR:
A CAUSE MARKETING MOBILE FIELD EXPERIMENT
Jean-Pierre Dubé
Xueming Luo
Zheng Fang
Working Paper 21475
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21475
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We are extremely grateful to Stefano Dellavigna and Emir Kamenica for extensive comments and
suggestions. We are also grateful for comments from Michelle Andrews, Ron Borkovsky, Bart Bronnenberg,
Alex Frankel, Xiliang Lin, Sanjog Misra, John List, Rik Pieters and Robert Sanders. We also benefited
from the comments of seminar participants at the 2013 Colloquium on Big Data and Mobile at Temple
University, Columbia University, HEC Paris, the 2015 NBER winter I.O. meetings, the Olin School
of Business, Princeton University, the University of Alberta, the University of Houston, the University
of Chicago, the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the University of Wisconsin at Madison,
and Wharton. The authors obtained IRB approval for the studies (IRB13-1400) from the University
of Chicago Instutitional Review Board. Fang acknowledges research support from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China [Grant 71172030, 71202138,71472130], the Youth Foundation for Humanities
and Social Sciences of the Ministry of Education of China [Grant 12YJC630045, 14YJA630024,14YJC630166],
and Sichuan University [Grant skqy201423,skqy201502]. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jean-Pierre Dubé, Xueming Luo, and Zheng Fang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Self-Signaling and Prosocial Behavior: a Cause Marketing Mobile Field Experiment
Jean-Pierre Dubé, Xueming Luo, and Zheng Fang
NBER Working Paper No. 21475
August 2015
JEL No. C7,C72,C9,C93,D03,D11,D12,D8,D81,M3,M30,M31
ABSTRACT
We empirically test an information economics based theory of social preferences in which ego utility
and self-signaling can potentially crowd out the effect of consumption utility on choices. Two large-scale,
randomized controlled field experiments involving a consumer good and charitable donations are conducted
using a subject pool of actual consumers. We find that bundling relatively large charitable donations
with a consumer good can generate non-monotonic regions of demand. Consumers also self-report
significantly lower ratings of “feeling good about themselves” when a large donation is bundled with
a large price discount for the good. The combined evidence supports the self-signaling theory whereby
price discounts crowd out a consumer’s self-inference of altruism from buying a good bundled with
a charitable donation. Alternative theories of motivation crowding are unable to fit the non-monotonic
moments in the data. A structural model of self-signaling is fit to the data to quantify the economic
magnitude of ego utility and its role in driving consumer decisions.
Jean-Pierre Dubé
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jdube@chicagobooth.edu

Zheng Fang
Sichuan University
29 Wangjiang Road
Chengdu, Sichuan
P.R.C 610064
149281891@qq.com

Xueming Luo
Fox School of Business
Room 511
1801 Liacouras Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19122
luoxm@temple.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
AEARCTR-0000799

1

Introduction

The study of prosocial behavior has spawned a large literature at the intersection of economics and psychology. Standard economic theory predicts that economic (e.g. monetary) incentives should increase
an individual’s willingness to perform an activity. Behavioral economists have puzzled over this conventional wisdom, at least since the controversial work by Titmuss (1971). Titmuss conjectured that paying
blood donors would reduce their incentive to donate blood. Lacking hard evidence, the conjecture was
initially dismissed by economists (Solow (1971); Arrow (1972); Bliss (1972)). Subsequently, a long
literature in behavioral economics has generated a collection of empirical examples where economic
incentives counter-intuitively reduce the supply of prosocial behavior (e.g. see the surveys in Frey and
Jegen (2001) and Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012)). A parallel literature in cognitive psychology has
studied situations in which extrinsic (economic) incentives can crowd out an intinsically motivated individual’s motivation to perform a task, the so-called Hidden Costs of Reward (Deci (1971); Lepper and
Greene (1978)). However, the empirical evidence in the field for the crowding out effect of economic
incentives on prosocial behavior has been mixed.1
The literature on social image and inference (e.g. Bernheim (1994)) offers one potential explanation
for the inconsistent empirical findings of motivation crowding and prosocial behavior. Suppose that peers
observe an individual’s prosocial actions, but not her underlying preferences. An additional reputational
motivation can influence prosocial behavior if the individual’s actions generate informative signals to
peers about her underlying motivation or status (Glazer and Konrad (1996); Benabou and Tirole (2006)).
In this case, monetary rewards might weaken the social signal to peers of an individual’s altruism, reducing the latter’s incentive to behave prosocially for fear of appearing greedy or materialistic.
This paper explores a related reputational motivation driven by self-image, as opposed to social image. Using the analogy of interpersonal agency models, Bodner and Prelec (2002) and Prelec and Prelec
(2010) study intrapersonal agency in a model of simultaneous “dual selves:” a decider who chooses an
action and a judge who interprets the action2 . The decider receives consumption utility from the action
and the judge receives self-diagnostic “ego utility” from the interpretation of the action3 . The model
1 Kamenica

(2012) and Gneezy, Meier, and Biel (2011) summarize the mixed evidence for motivation crowding out.
Mellstrom and Johannesson (2008) fail to detect an overall effect of monetary incentives on blood donation. Lacetera, Macis,
and Slonim (2009) not only find no evidence of crowding out, they also find that monetary incentives increase donation levels,
albeit subject to cannibalization of other blood drives with lower incentives. Similarly, Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2012) fail
to detect crowding out effects from financial incentives in a study of Zambian hairdressers recruited to sell female condoms
for an NGO. In other contexts, Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) find that rewards do crowd out school children’s incentives to
collect money for charity; and Frey and Oberholzer-Gee (1997) find crowding out effects for “not-in-my-backyard” projects
such as locating a toxic waste dump near a municipality. Landry, Lange, List, Price, and Rupp (2010) find that small rewards
crowd out charitable donations from prior donors, but increase donations of new donors. Barasch, Berman, and Small (2014)
find that monetary incentives crowd out an individual’s productivity in persuading others to behave prosocially.
2 The model builds on the notion of brain modularity and dual-process decision-making (see Brocas and Carrillo (2014)
for a survey).
3 An alternative formulation of the dual-selves looks at the temporal conflict between the simultaneous myopic versus
forward-looking selves (Thaler and Shefrin (1981); Fudenberg and Levine (2006)). A separate literature has looked instead at
multi-period settings with a series of conflicting selves (e.g. Benabou and Tirole (2004); Bernheim and Thomadsen (2005)).

1

builds on the psychology of self-perception, which has long recognized that the individual can take the
perspective of an outside observer and learn about herself by reflecting on her own actions (Bem (1972)).
Self-signaling arises when the individual can influence her own self-beliefs through her actions. Benabou and Tirole (2006) explore the formal game theory of such self-signaling, modeling behavior and the
corresponding self-signal as equilibrium outcomes in a game of incomplete information. In equilibrium,
monetary incentives can be counterproductive by crowding out prosocial behavior when the incentive
dampens the self-signal and reduces the ego utility.
We test self-signaling and crowding out by conducting two large-scale, controlled field experiments.
We also measure the potential incompatibility between self-image motivation and extrinsic financial
incentives to behave prosocially.4 Like Gneezy, Gneezy, Riener, and Nelson (2012), we study consumer
demand for a product with a prosocial characteristic. The experiments were conducted in a large Chinese
city in collaboration with one of the world’s largest mobile carriers. We randomly sampled subjects from
a population of mobile subscribers who own a smartphone and live close to a movie theater. Each
subject was randomly assigned to one of several promotional campaigns for a movie ticket, and was
then contacted via SMS with the offer. One set of test cells consisted of “pure discounts” off the regular
price of a ticket. A second set of cells consisted of “pure donations” of a pre-determined magnitude to
a specific charity that would be made in conjunction with each ticket purchased. A third set of test cells
consisted of a combination of a discount and a charitable donation. We observe each subject’s purchase
decision. In the second experiment, we also conducted a follow-up survey with a subset of the subjects
twenty-four hours after the promotional experiments. We asked each subject a series of motivationrelated questions. Since the receipt of the SMS message and the resulting purchase decision were all
performed on an individual subject’s smartphone, any signaling benefit would be private in nature.
The self-signaling theory generates several testable hypotheses. Under “pure discounts,” we expect
ticket demand to be monotonically increasing in the size of the discount since there is no self-signaling
about altruism. The use of donations triggers the self-signaling motive. Discounts can dampen the signal,
or warm-glow feeling, thereby reducing the diagnostic motivation to buy a ticket. If the dampening
crowds out ticket purchases, we expect to observe regions of upward-sloping demand. As expected, in
the absence of a donation, we find that discounts increase demand. When we combine discounts and
donations, we find non-monotonicities that are consistent with the self-signaling theory. For relatively
small donations, discounts increase demand. However, for even moderate-sized donations, we see a nonmonotonic effect of discounts on ticket sales, which is consistent with a dampening of the self-signal. Our
survey corroborates the self-signaling theory. At moderately high donation levels, subjects’ self-reported
purchase motivation to “feel good about themselves” declines with the level of the discount. Since
the crowding out effect of discounts arises with large, not small discounts, we can rule out the “mere
incidence of payment” effect whereby the crowding out arises at small (underpowered) reward levels
4 Our

work is similar to Pessemier, Bemmaor, and Hanssens (1977) who document survey evidence that monetary incentives generally reduce subjects’ stated willingness to donate organs; although they do not attribute their findings to a specific
psychological mechanism.

2

(Gneezy and Rustichini (2000); Frey and Jegen (2001)). We can also rule out a contextual inference
whereby the consumer uses the promotion to learn about the movie quality and not to learn about herself
(Benabou and Tirole (2003); Kamenica (2008)). Holding the total promotion budget fixed, crowding out
arises from the allocation of the budget across discounts and donations, not from the total size of the
budget.
We also use our experimentally-generated data to estimate the structural form of our model of demand, which nests the self-signaling equilibrium. This component of the paper contributes to the growing
literature estimating parameter estimates from a completely specified model using field experiment data
(Card, DellaVigna, and Malmendier (2011)). The estimator we use is robust to the potential multiplicity
of equilibria that can emerge. Similar to DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012), we use the structural estimates of consumer preferences to describe and quantify the underlying motivation. We find
that the average consumption utility from donations is small and negative. In contrast, consumers place
a statistically and economically significant positive weight on the perception of a high marginal utility
from donations. At face value, the average consumer gets little consumption benefit from the charitable
donation, but does value the self-perception of being altruistic. This finding is qualitatively similar to
List (2006) who finds that, in the field, individuals are motivated by reputation and not by social preferences. Interestingly, consumers place significant positive weight on their perception of price sensitivity,
suggesting they prefer not to appear motivated by low prices which is similar to the distaste for appearing
greedy in Benabou and Tirole (2003).
Our work is closely related to the empirical literature studying self-deceptive behavior (Quattrone
and Tversky (1984); Shafir and Tversky (1992); Mijovic-Prelec, Shin, Chabris, and Kosslyn (1994b);
Dhar and Wertenbroch (2012); Gneezy, Gneezy, Riener, and Nelson (2012); Savary, Goldsmith, and
Dhar (2014)). We contribute to this literature by testing self-signaling in the field and measuring its
impact, through crowding out, on actual prosocial behavior.
Our work is also related to the empirical literature on social-signaling and prosocial behavior. List,
Berrens, Bohara, and Kerkvliet (2004) find that social isolation moderates subjects’ stated preferences
over donations to a non-profit enterprise. Field experiments by Ariely, Bracha, and Meier (2009) and
Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2012) find that prosocial behavior increases dramatically when individual
effort is displayed publicly, versus a control condition where effort remains private. In these studies,
monetary incentives have a neutral effect in the public setting, but increase prosocial behavior in the
private setting. Similarly, Berman, Levine, Barasch, and Small (2015) find that bragging about one’s
prosocial behavior increases peer perceptions when bragging provides novel information, but decreases
peer’s perceptions when the prosocial behavior is already publicly known. Our work contributes to this
literature by providing field evidence of self-signaling and ego utility, a reputational motive for prosocial
behavior that does not require social considerations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we briefly discuss the theory
and practice of cause marketing. Section 3 develops the model of self-signaling and the corresponding
consumer demand, along with our key tests. Section 4 discusses the structure of the field experiments
3

and the data. The estimator for the structural form of the model is discussed in section 6. Our empirical
results are summarized in section 5. We conclude in section 7.

2

Cause Marketing

Our field experiments consist of cause marketing campaigns. A cause marketing campaign is “characterized by an offer from the firm to contribute a specified amount to a designated cause when customers
engage in revenue-providing exchanges that satisfy organizational and individual objectives” (Varadarajan and Menon (1988)). Our cause marketing campaigns involve promotional offers for a movie ticket
whereby the seller donates a pre-determined portion of the ticket price to a pre-determined charity. We
also experiment with campaigns offering a discount off the regular price of a movie ticket as well as
campaigns with both a donation and a discount.
In practice, cause marketing has become an increasingly popular marketing tactic in recent years,
with total US spending increasing each year since at least 2005 and reaching $1.78 billion in 2009.5
Conventional wisdom about cause marketing campaigns holds that consumer willingness-to-pay is increasing weakly in the donation size (e.g. Arora and Henderson (2007); Haruvy and Leszczyc (2009);
Elfenbein and McManus (2010); Koschate-Fischer, Stefan, and Hoyer (2012)). Industry experts share
this view, advising firms that more sponsorship raises consumer support. Cause marketing consultant
Paul Jones explains that “Cause marketing works because people have an affinity for the cause or the
cause’s mission and want to support it.6 ” The underlying logic is that experts believe consumer response
to cause marketing reflects altruism.
Our results are at odds with this conventional wisdom. We find that response to a cause marketing
campaign is driven by the self-perception of altruism as opposed to genuine value for the cause itself.
Our results indicate that willingness-to-pay does not unambiguously increase with the donation size.
Rather, the combination of donations and discounts leads to regions of non-monotonicity in demand. In
particular, for large discount levels, we find that larger donations may counter-intuitively reduce ticket
demand. Based on these findings, a firm designing a cause marketing campaign should limit its use of
non-complementary discount promotion tactics.
Our results are also at odds with the conventional wisdom of “integrated marketing communications”
(e.g. Kotler and Keller (2011)), which generally views different marketing media as complementary
and synergistic to one-another. Our findings suggest that discounts may be counter-productive when
combined with donations.

5 IEG

Sponsorship Report, January 7, 2014, http://www.sponsorship.com/iegsr/2014/01/07/Sponsorship-Spending-Growth-Slows-In-North-

America.aspx?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=tweet&utm_campaign=iegsrTweet#.UtBkbmRDscJ.
6 “Spending

Dollars to Raise Pennies?” http://www.causemarketing.biz/2007/03/spending-dollars-to-raise-pennies/

4

3

A Model of Self-Signaling

3.1

Model

In this section, we develop a formal model of self-signaling, We adapt the models of Bodner and Prelec
(2002) and Benabou and Tirole (2006) to our cause marketing campaign for movie tickets. In the model,
a consumer receives a promotional offer (a, p) for a movie that includes a prosocial characteristic – a
pre-determined donation amount to a charity – and a discount off the regular price. The consumer’s consumption utility consists of the direct benefit from the movie ticket net of the price and, when applicable,
the direct benefit from a charitable donation level. The direct benefit from a charitable donation may
reflect genuine altruism and/or the joy of giving itself.7 In addition, the consumer has a prior belief about
her preferences before receiving the promotional offer. The consumer derives diagnostic “ego utility”
based on her posterior self-beliefs after making her purchase decision in response to the promotional
offer. The self-diagnostic component of utility captures the dual role of the self as an external observer
who observes (or recollects) the purchase decision, but does not observe (or recollect) the underlying
motivation (Bodner and Prelec (2002)). We model the self observer as a rational Bayesian learner who
updates her self-beliefs based on the observed purchase behavior.8 In the cause marketing setting, we assume that self-image reflects the perceived level of altruism (pure and/or impure) and the perceived level
of price-sensitivity. During the cause marketing campaign, the consumer makes the utility-maximizing
ticket purchase decision, which combines her consumption and diagnostic benefits.
Let V denote the consumer’s value of the movie. Let p > 0 denote the ticket price and let a ≥ 0
denote the monetary amount of the charitable donation bundled with a ticket. A consumer makes a
discrete purchase decision y ∈ {0, 1} where 1 denotes purchase and 0 denotes non-purchase.
The consumer’s conditional indirect utility from buying and not buying are

U=




(V + γa + α p + ε1 ) + R (a, p, Λ, 1) , y = 1





R (a, p, Λ, 0) + ε
0

(1)

,y = 0


where Θ = (V, α, γ) are consumption utility parameters, Λ = λγ , λα are ego utility parameters and ε1
and ε0 are a random utility shocks from buying and not buying a ticket respectively. The first utility
component, (V + γa + α p + ε1 ), denotes the net consumption utility of the offer. The second term,
R (a, p, Λ, y) = λγ E (γ|a, p, y) + λα E (α|a, p, y)

(2)

denotes the consumer’s ego utility (or diagnostic utility). One could think of this term as the self-esteem
7 While our analysis will not attempt to distinguish between such pure and impure sources of altruism, Benabou and Tirole

(2006) show how both may be captured by this specification.
8 Bodner and Prelec (2002) discuss alternative, non-Bayesian learning and belief structures that we do not consider herein.

5

or “warm glow” feeling from the donation. The coefficients λγ and λα are the diagnostic utility weights
on the consumer’s posterior beliefs about γ and α respectively. The posterior expectations E (γ|a, p, y)
and E (α|a, p, y) are conditional on the observed features of the marketing campaign, (a, p) , and the
consumer’s own observed action, y.9
Bodner and Prelec (2002) interpret the objective function (1) as a modular decision-making process.
One component selects an action while the other component draws inferences from the action. It is not
the objective of this paper to test or defend this dual-process paradigm. The “dual-process” approach to
decision-making builds on a large and well-established literature that models the individual with conflicting objectives (see Brocas and Carrillo (2014) for a comprehensive literature survey)10 . An alternative
formulation might view the decision-maker as an inter-temporal sequence of selves, with the earlier
selves adjusting behavior to manipulate the beliefs of the future selves (e.g. Benabou and Tirole (2004);
Bernheim and Thomadsen (2005)). Our empirical analysis does not attempt to distinguish between the
former modular view and the latter intrapersonal dynamic view.
The consumer purchases the ticket if
V + γa + α p + ∆ (a, p, Λ) + ε > 0

(3)

where ε = ε1 − ε0 . The term ∆ (a, p, Λ) = R (a, p, Λ, 1) − R (a, p, Λ, 0) captures the returns to ego utility
from buying the ticket offer (a, p) versus not buying the ticket.
To complete the model, we denote the consumer’s prior self beliefs before responding to the campaign
as F (Θ, ε) . We follow the convention in the demand estimation literature and let ε ∼ N (0, 1), giving the
classic random coefficients probit model of choice. The unconditional (expected) probability that the
consumer purchases movie ticket offer (a, p) is:
R

Pr (y = 1|a, p) = Φ (V + γa + α p + ∆ (a, p, Λ)) dF (Θ)

(4)

where Φ (•) is the CDF of a standard Normal distribution.
A complication in the calculation of the choice probability (4) is that it nests the ego returns to buying
the ticket, ∆ (a, p, Λ). We assume the consumer uses Bayes’ rule to update her self-beliefs. For a given
offer (a, p), the consumer’s posterior self beliefs must satisfy:


E Θ j |a, p, y =

R
Θ Φ(V +γa+α p+∆(a,p,Λ))dF(Θ)

R j

,

 Φ(V +γa+α p+∆(a,p,Λ))dF(Θ)

y=1
(5)


R


 RΘ j [1−Φ(V +γa+α p+∆(a,p,Λ))]dF(Θ) , y = 0
[1−Φ(V +γa+α p+∆(a,p,Λ))]dF(Θ)
9 See

Köszegi (2006) and Mobius, Niederle, and Niehaus (2014) for related models in which decisions are driven, in part,
by ego utility.
10 A seemingly paradoxical aspect of the theory is that the individual possesses two conflicting beliefs. The neuroscience
literature has provided compelling empirical evidence where a single individual response conveys conflicting beliefs (e.g.
Mijovic-Prelec, Shin, Chabris, and Kosslyn (1994a)).

6

where j ∈ {V, γ, α} . For estimation, we will specify a parametric distribution F (Θ) so that we can solve
the system of posterior beliefs 5 numerically. In section 6.3 below, we use the structural parameter
estimates from section 6.2 to explore the potential for a multiplicity of equilibrium beliefs to correspond
to a given promotional offer (a, p).
Crowding out arises when the loss in ego utility overwhelms any consumption utility gains from a
marketing promotion. Consider two offers (a0 , p0 ) and (a0 , p1 ) . As we lower the price to p1 , consumption utility increases by the amount α (p1 − p0 ). However, the price discount also changes the returns
to ego utility by the amount ∆ (a0 , p1 , Λ) − ∆ (a0 , p0 , Λ) . Demand decreases overall if α (p1 − p0 ) <
∆ (a0 , p1 , Λ) − ∆ (a0 , p0 , Λ) . In section 6.3 below, we use the structural parameter estimates from section
6.2 to explore crowding out behavior in cases where the ego utility change exceeds the consumption
utility change.

3.2

Alternative Explanations

Past work has discussed alternative mechanisms that could also lead to a crowding out of motivation
and, hence, of prosocial behavior. Frey and Jegen (2001) derive motivation crowding from the “mere
incidence of payment.” Suppose an individual’s intrinsic motivation is suppressed when monetary incentives are introduced. That is, the extrinsic motivation replaces the intrinsic motivation. An individual’s
willingness to supply prosocial behavior would be discontinuous in the level of monetary incentives at
the origin. As a result, a low-powered incentive could crowd out prosocial behavior if the corresponding extrinsic motivation is weaker than the intrinsic motivation. Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) provide
empirical evidence of such crowding out from small, low-powered rewards. They also find that a considerable amount needs to be paid before subjects supply the same level of prosocial behavior as in the base
case where they work for free.11 This discontinuous shift could also be consistent with a self-perception
theory like the one we investigate. To construct a test between a “mere incidence of payment” theory and
self-signaling, we exploit the fact that under self-signaling, crowding out need not arise as a discontinuity
at very small reward levels per se. Rather, we may observe non-monotonicity in the effect of a reward
whereby small rewards increase demand and larger rewards reduce demand. A direct test can also be
constructed by surveying consumers about their warm-glow feeling under different promotional settings.
Benabou and Tirole (2003) derive motivation crowding from a theory of “contextual inference,”
whereby the consumer learns about the task itself rather than about herself. In our experiments, a consumer may interpret a promotion as an ex ante signal about the underlying quality of the movie, with
an aggressive promotion signaling low quality. This type of ex ante learning is in fact closer in spirit
to the context effects studied in Kamenica (2008), as opposed to motivation crowding. Such ex ante
learning about the product before purchasing differs from most of the past empirical work on product
uncertainty where consumers learn ex post through their consumption experiences after the purchase
(Erdem and Keane (1996); Ackerberg (2003); Crawford and Shum (2005)). To control for contextual
11 Kamenica

(2012) summarizes other experimental evidence that small rewards can be counterproductive.

7

inference, we assume the consumer’s quality inference is based on the total amount the firm spends on
the promotion (discount plus donation). We then construct test cells that manipulate the allocation of
the promotion budget to discount and donation, holding the total amount fixed. We also include a cell
with an extremely large “pure discount” that exceeds the promotional budget of any of our campaigns
that combine discounts and donations. We do not expect the large discount to crowd out demand under
self-signaling. A direct test can also be constructed by surveying consumers on their perception of the
movie in different promotional settings. In theory, we would need to write down a model describing
the full equilibrium between firms and consumers. The quality signal inferred by consumers would then
reflect their beliefs about the firm’s incentives to offer discounts and donations. This is however beyond
the scope of the experiments we conduct.
Consumers could also form a contextual inference about the charity itself. This alternative is more
difficult to rule out with purchase behavior since donation levels can also dampen the self-signal. A
more direct test can be constructed by surveying consumers on their perception of the charity in different
promotional settings.

4

Data

To test the self-signaling theory, we conducted two randomized field experiments. In the first experiment,
we focused on testing the conventional result whereby crowding out arises for small rewards, the “mere
incidence of payment.” In our second experiment, we explore larger donation and discount sizes to
explore our proposed theory based on signal-dampening, which can generate crowding out at larger
reward levels.

4.1

Study 1

This field experiment was conducted with a corporate partner that is one of the largest wireless service
providers in the world. The wireless provider selected the off-season period for this promotion to avoid
a blockbuster effect in the movie voucher. Most blockbusters had been released immediately before and
just after Christmas of 2013. The regular price of a 2D movie during our sample period is 60 RMB.
Our experimental context consisted of a mobile SMS offer for a general admission voucher for any
2D movie showing between January 15, 2014 and January 31, 2014. The offer was pushed to subjects’
smartphones on January 15, 2014 and the offer expired on January 16, 2014. Recipients purchased movie
tickets by clicking a link embedded in the SMS ad. If a user purchased a ticket, the cost was immediately
charged to her monthly phone bill. Both the promotional offer and the purchase decision were conducted
on an individual subject’s phone, creating a private signaling benefit.
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of several promotional conditions.12 In the baseline, control
12 We

used the three-step approach of Deng and Graz (2002) to construct our sample. First, we used the RANUNI function
in SAS to assign a unique random uniform number to each user. Second, we sorted all random numbers in sequence. Third,

8

condition, the mobile ad SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to any of the 2D showings
in January with your mobile phone, the purchase link below is valid until January 16...” In the pure
discount condition, the SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to any of the 2D showings
in January with your mobile phone at a [3, 6, 15, 30, and 36 RMB] discount, the link below is valid
until January 16...” Subjects in this condition were randomly assigned to one of the 5 discount levels.
In our pure donation condition, the SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to any of the
2D showings in January with your mobile phone, [wireless provider’s name] will donate [3, 6, 15, 30,
and 36 RMB] per each sold ticket to poor elderly people, the purchase link below is valid until January
16...” Subjects in this condition were randomly assigned to one of the 5 donation levels. Finally, in our
combined discount and donation condition, the SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to
any of the 2D showings in January with your mobile phone at a [3, 6, 15, 30, and 36 RMB] discount,
[wireless provider’s name] will donate [3, 6, 15, 30, and 36 RMB] per each sold ticket to poor elderly
people, the purchase link below is valid until January 16...” Subjects in this condition were randomly
assigned to one of the following ten offers (discount,donation): (3,3), (3,6), (3,15), (3,30), (6,3), (6,6),
(6,15), (15,3), (15,6), (30,3).
To construct our experimental sample, we begin with the 15 million subscribers in a large city. From
this population, we focus on those mobile subscribers living within 2 kilometers of one of the theaters
playing the movie. By conditioning on proximity to the theater, we expected to reduce noise associated
with heterogeneity in taste based on geographic proximity to a theater. Given the urban location of the
theaters, we therefore target our analysis to subscribers with an urban home address. We also conditioned
on the sub-population of subscribers that had purchased a movie ticket using their smartphone during the
previous 6 months. This condition ensured that the subscriber had a smartphone (i.e. that could be used
to purchase a movie ticket) and that the subscriber had potential interest in a mobile purchase offer. From
this overall target population of 1 million, we randomly sampled 10,500 mobile subscribers to whom the
wireless provider pushed one of our promotional SMS messages.
Our final experimental sample consists of a 25-cell, between-subjects design. Table 1 summarizes
the experimental design and the sample sizes in each cell. In total, 273 of our 10,500 subscribers who
received one of our SMS messages purchased a movie ticket through their smartphone. This 2.6%
purchase rate is quite high for a mobile promotion in comparison with the 0.3% to 0.6% click-through
response rates for internet targeting (Cho and Cheon 2004).

4.2

Study 2

This field experiment was conducted with the same corporate partner as Study 1. We coordinated the
experiment with the Chinese release of the movie X-Men: Days of Future Past, on May 23, 2014 in
IMAX theaters. This movie was selected since the blockbuster potential would guarantee a reasonably
we we extracted a sample from the sorted population. This three-step algorithm was integrated into the wireless provider’s IT
system.

9

high baseline rate of interest in tickets, giving us sufficient statistical power. The movie was released
only in a 3D version, with a regular ticket price of 100 RMB.
Our experimental context consisted of a mobile SMS offer for a general 3D movie admission voucher
that could be redeemed for any showing of the X-Men movie at any future date. The offer was pushed
through to subjects’ smartphones on May 21,2014 and the offer expired on May 22, 2014. The average
respondent purchased a ticket 6.9 hours after receiving the offer, conditional on purchase. Recipients
purchased movie tickets by clicking through a link embedded in the SMS ad. If a user purchased a ticket,
the cost was immediately charged to her monthly phone bill. Both the promotional offer and the purchase
decision are conducted on an individual subject’s phone, creating a purely private signaling benefit.
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of several promotional conditions. In the baseline control
condition, the mobile ad SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to any of X-Men: Days
of Future Past’s 3D showings, follow this link...” In the pure discount condition, the SMS read: “To buy
a voucher for general admission to any of X-Men: Days of Future Past’s 3D showings at a [20, 35, 50,
60, 75 RMB] discount, follow this link...” Subjects in this condition were randomly assigned to one of
the 5 discount levels. In our pure donation condition, the SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general
admission to any of X-Men: Days of Future Past’s 3D showings, [wireless provider’s name] will donate
[5, 10, 15 RMB] per each ticket sold to poor elderly people, follow this link...” Subjects in this condition
were randomly assigned to one of the 3 donation levels. Finally, in our combined discount and donation
condition, the SMS read: “To buy a voucher for general admission to any of X-Men: Days of Future
Past’s 3D showings at a [20, 35, 50, 60 RMB] discount, [wireless provider’s name] will donate [5, 10,
15 RMB] per each sold ticket to poor elderly people, follow this link...” Subjects in this condition were
randomly assigned to one of the 4 discount levels and one of the 3 donation levels.
To construct our experimental sample, we followed the same template as in Study 1. Using the same
target population of 1 million, we randomly sampled 30,300 mobile subscribers to whom the wireless
provider pushed one of our promotional SMS messages. These subjects did not overlap with those from
Study 1.
Our final experimental sample consists of a 5 (discount: 0, 20, 35, 50, 60 RMB) × 4 (donation:
0, 5, 10, 15 RMB per ticket sold) between-subjects design. We also included an additional condition
with a 75 RMB discount and no donation. The comparison of this condition to a cell with a 60 RMB
discount and 15 RMB donation allows us to test for a contextual inference effect. In total, we have 21
groups in this experiment. We over-sampled certain cells to ensure sufficient statistical power to test for
non-monotonicity associated with crowding out. Table 2 summarizes the experimental design and the
sample sizes in each cell.
Although Chinese regulation prevents us from accessing the mobile subscribers’ demographic information, we were able to obtain the following mobile usage behavior. For each subject, we observe the
average revenue per month (ARPU), the average number of voice minutes used per month (MOU), the
average number of short message service (SMS) messages sent and received per month, and the average
general packet radio service (GPRS) per month to measure the volume of data usage. Table 3 summarizes
10

this usage behavior.
Table 3 also shows that 694 of our 30,300 subscribers who received one of our SMS messages purchased a movie ticket through their smartphone. This 2.29% purchase rate is consistent with the results
of the first study.
Finally, on May 23, 2014, the day after the SMS expired, we conducted a follow-up telephone survey.
For each of 12 of our 21 experimental cells, we randomly sub-sampled 40 of our subjects who purchased
a ticket and 40 of our subjects who did not purchase a ticket. Each of the “not purchased” subjects was
presented with the survey in Figure 3, consisting of 8 questions. An analogous survey was presented to
“purchased” subjects, as in Figure 4. Response rates are summarized in Table 4. Response rates varied
from 23 to 35 across the cells.

5

Experimental Results

In this section, we test elements of our self-signaling model using the raw experimental data. In this way
we can document evidence in favor of the self-signaling theory without relying too heavily on stylized
modeling assumptions from section 3.

5.1

Experimental Data for Study 1

Study 1 explores the impact of small rewards on consumer motivation to support charity through their
ticket purchase. We tabulate our experimental data in Table 5. Recall that the regular price for this type
of movie voucher is 75 RMB. Surprisingly, no subjects buy in our base case with no promotional offer;
although given the discrete nature of our data, we cannot rule out a purchase probability of as high as
0.007% at the 5% significance level.13 We observe positive and significant effects from “pure discounts”
on demand for discounts of 15 RMB or larger. Demand increases by nearly 3 percentage points when the
discount is increased from 15 RMB to 30 RMB (p<.02); although we do not find a significant difference
in demand between a discount of 30 RMB and 36 RMB. We also observe a positive and significant effect
from “pure donations” of at least 30 RMB. When we combine discounts and donations, all of our point
estimates are monotonically increasing in the level of discounts. For instance, at a donation level of 3
RMB, increasing the discount from 3 RMB to 30 RMB increases demand by over two percentage points
(p<.02). However, at higher donation levels, the marginal effect of a discount does appear to decrease.
At a discount level of 30 RMB, we see demand decrease by almost two percentage points when the
donation increased from 0 RMB to 3 RMB (p<0.06). This is mild evidence of signal dampening. But,
the decline is not very precise and, at a 5% significance level, we cannot rule out a demand increase of
half a percentage point. Interestingly, when the discount is low (3 RMB off the regular price) we find
a monotonically increasing effect of the charitable donation level on demand. Doubling the donation
13 We

use the “cii” function in STATA.

11

from 15 to 30 RMB more than doubles demand, in contrast with the finding of a flat effect of charitable
donation size documented in Karlan and List (2007).
In Study 1, we see no evidence of the mere incidence of payments effect. In some of our campaigns,
small discounts as low as 3 RMB increase demand. Comparing no donation (i.e. pure discounts) to
a donation level of 3 RMB, small discounts appear to work better in the latter than the former case.
However, it is the larger (higher-powered) discounts (15 and 30 RMB) that appear less effective when
combined with a 3 RMB donation.

5.2

Experimental Data for Study 2

We tabulate our experimental data in Table 6. Recall that the regular price for this type of movie voucher
is 100 RMB. No subjects buy in our base case with with the regular price level and no donation offer;
although given the discrete nature of our data, we cannot rule out a purchase probability of as high as
0.526% at the 5% significance level. The average differences in purchase rates are increasing in donation
and discount levels respectively; although some of the increases are insignificant at conventional levels.
Increasing the donation from 0 RMB to 5 RMB increases the purchase probability by 0.429% (p<0.05);14
from 5 RMB to 10 RMB increases the purchase probability by 0.143% (p<.35); and from 10 RMB to 15
RMB increases the purchase probability by 0.571% (p<0.13). Raising the discount from 0 RMB to 20
RMB increases the purchase probability by 0.714% (p<0.02); from 20 RMB to 35 RMB increases the
purchase probability by 2.57% (p<0.01); from 35 RMB to 50 RMB increases the purchase probability
by 2.23% (p<0.02); from 50 RMB to 60 RMB increases the purchase probability by 4.29% (p<0.36);
and from 60 RMB to 75 RMB increases the purchase probability by 2.86% (p<0.42).
We plot the purchase frequencies for each promotional condition in Figure 1. Results are presented
by donation level. All of our discount levels generate a positive and statistically significant lift in purchase probability relative to the baseline case of no discount. However, it is not always the case that a
larger discount increases demand. Consider the promotion conditions with a donation level of 10 RMB.
Increasing the discount from 0 RMB to 20 RMB increases the purchase probability by 1.42 percentage
points (p<0.01). Similarly, increasing the discount from 20 RMB to 35 RMB increases the purchase
probability by 0.7 percentage points (p<0.12); although here we cannot rule out “no change” at the 5%
significance level. However, if we increase the discount from 35 RMB to 50 RMB, the purchase probability falls 0.9 percentage points (p<0.01). If we consider a donation level of 15 RMB, increasing the
discount from 35 RMB to 50 RMB reduces the purchase probability by 0.7 percentage points (p<0.025).
This non-monotonicity in the effect of price on demand is consistent with our theory of self-signaling.
The line plot in Figure 2 makes it easier to compare relative magnitudes of the promotional conditions. The plot illustrates the negative complementarity between the two promotion formats, discounts
and donations, on purchase behavior. In addition to the non-monotonicity in the price effect, we also
see how price discounts moderate the effectiveness of a charitable donation. For low discount levels of
14 We

use the “prtest” routine in STATA to compare differences in sample proportions.

12

0 RMB or 20 RMB, a small charitable donation (5 RMB versus 0 RMB) increases the purchase probability. However, once the discount is 35 RMB or higher, the rank order of donation effects flips – higher
donations decrease the purchase probability. This negative moderating effect of discount levels on the
marginal effect of a small donation is also consistent with our theory of self-signaling.
Figure 2 also shows that the crowding out of demand is not simply a “mere incidence of payment”
effect. For high donation levels, small discounts in fact increase demand and the discount only becomes
counter-productive at larger levels of 50% off or more.
A potential concern is that the crowding out reflects contextual inference about the quality of the
movie itself. A large promotion could convey negative information about the quality of the movie. To
rule this out, we note that prosocial motivation is only triggered in the presence of a donation. In contrast,
contextual learning can arise even under pure discounts. So we can test between the two theories by
taking specific pure discount scenarios in Table 6 and comparing them to combinations of discounts
and donations that generate the same-sized promotional budget. Given that demand is more sensitive to
discounts than to donations, we would expect contextual inference to be stronger when the promotional
budget is entirely allocated to a discount. Consider the comparison of a promotional budget of 35 RMB
with a budget of 60 RMB. If we compare a pure discount of 35 RMB to a pure discount of 60 RMB,
demand increases by 2.7 percentage points (p<.01). If we compare instead a pure discount of 35 RMB
to a combination of a discount of 50 RMB and a donation of 10 RMB, we observe crowding out as
demand falls 1.5 percentage points (p<.01). In fact, a pure discount of 75 RMB has a positive effect on
demand whereas crowding out can arise with smaller overall promotion budgets that combine discounts
and donations.
In our setting, there is no obvious way to construct a direct test of self-signaling that manipulates
whether or not a consumer has a reputational motivation (e.g. List (2006)). Instead, we use the survey.
Recall that survey respondents were sampled from the set of subjects used in the ticket promotion experiment the previous day. For most of the questions, we find little statistical differences in responses across
test cells. However, we do find differences in responses to question 3 (iv) where we asked respondents
to rate on an 11-point scale the extent to which they agree that a purchaser of a ticket in a given test
condition “...wanted to feel good about yourself by donating to the charity.” This question was intended
to capture the self-signaling (i.e. warm-glow feeling) from the purchase. Figure 5 plots the purchase
behavior in each of our experimental cells. For those cells with survey respondents, we also plot the
corresponding mean self-reported warm glow level. Consistent with our theory, we see the warm glow
changing very little across discount conditions when donation levels are low. But, large discounts reduce
the warm glow a lot when donations are relatively high. The decline in warm glow is significant. The
mean warm glow rating falls from 9.85 (15 RMB donation, 35 RMB discount) to 5.41 (15 RMB donation, 60 RMB discount). The F-stat between these two cells is 132.38, so we easily reject the null of
equal means.15 As further evidence of self-signaling, as opposed to social signaling, an average of 1.7
15 Re-running

the same test using an ordered logit to capture the discreteness of our outcome variable, we still easily reject
the null of equal mean effects with a Chi-Square test statistic of 36.01.

13

tickets were sold conditional on purchase, indicating that many respondents purchased a single ticket.
In appendix B, we report results from some of the other survey questions. For instance, we asked
subjects to rate the statement “the discount was big enough to make it worthwhile for your to buy a
movie ticket.” Figure 10 shows that self-reported price sensitivity increases with the size of the discount.
However, consistent with our signaling theory, the magnitude of the ratings and the magnitude of the increase in ratings as the discount increases is smaller for higher donation levels. That is, higher donations
weaken the role of discounts on purchase behavior.
We can also test contextual inference about the quality of the movie. Subjects were asked to rate
the statement “You wanted to watch the movie ...” on an 11-point scale. Unlike the self-reported warmglow and price-sensitivity levels, the movie preference in Figure 11 is flat across price conditions with an
average response of 8.76. However, the mean rating does fall slightly as the charitable donation increases.
The mean rating falls from 10.1 (5 RMB donation, 20 RMB discount) to 8.4 (15 RMB donation, 20 RMB
discount), with an F-stat of 24.89. A limitation of this question is that it might simply reflect the mean
movie taste, V, for inframarginal consumers as opposed to the mean perception of the movie quality. We
construct an analogous test for contextual inference about the charity. Subjects were asked to rate the
statement: “You valued the charity and wanted to support it” on an 11-point scale. Figure 12 shows the
same flat pattern across promotional conditions, with an average rating of 9.28.
The survey also indicates that the subjects considered the charity itself to be legitimate and worthy.
Over 80 percent of respondents gave a response of at least 8 out of 11, and all of the responses were
above 5. The results also indicate that subjects took the survey itself seriously and deliberated over their
responses. In contrast with the rating of the charity, when asked “Will you continue donating money to
this charity in the future?” the average score was 7.99, with only 44% of subjects giving scores of 7 or
less, with some as low as 1. Mean responses are reported in Figure 13. We also asked subjects to rate the
statement “Does this SMS deal seem too good to be true for you?” All the responses were over 7, but
there was almost no difference in responses across cells (mean ranged from 9.6 to 10.4). This evidence
is consistent with subjects’ not inferring a negative quality signal about the movie in response to a larger
discount and/or donation combination. Similarly, subjects did score the statement “Do you think this
purchase is an impulse buy?” quite low, with a mean of less than 5 across all cells, including those with
discounts of 50% or more off the regular price.

6
6.1

Model Estimation
An MPEC Estimator

To quantify the implications of self-signaling, we develop an estimator in this section to estimate the
underlying structural form of the model from section 3 using our experimental data setting. Let h =
1, ..., H denote individual subjects in the experiment. Each subject is randomly assigned to one of t =
1, ..., T promotion conditions, (at , pt ) . Each subject then makes a choice yh ∈ {0, 1}. We assume rational
14

expectations in the sense that all subjects have the same prior self beliefs and these beliefs coincide with
the true population distribution of tastes. Recall that the expected probability that consumer h who is
assigned to promotion condition t purchases a movie ticket is:
Pr yh = 1|at , pt



R

= Φ (V + γat + α pt + ∆ (at , pt , Λ)) dF (Θ) .

(6)


Θ1 , ω
For our baseline specification, we use a discrete approximation, F (Θ) =
, giving the folΘ2 , 1 − ω
lowing choice probability:
Pr yh = 1|at , pt




= ∑2k=1 Φ V k + γ k at + α k pt + ∆ (at , pt , Λ) ω k .

We now discuss an estimator of the structural parameters of the model in section 3. The potential
multiplicity of self-signaling equilibria for the model raises the well-known coherency problem with
maximum likelihood estimation (Tamer (2003)). We use the constrained optimization approach proposed
in Su and Judd (2012) to obtain consistent, maximum likelihood estimates.
To simplify the model, let Γ = (Θ, Λ) denote all the structural parameters. Our MPEC estimator
maximizes the following objective function:

 
 
 


` (Γ, δ ) = ∑ yh ln Pr yh = 1|at , pt ; Γ, δt + 1 − yh ln 1 − Pr yh = 1|at , pt ; Γ, δt

(7)

h

subject to the constraints
δn1t =

∑k Θkn Φ(V k +γat +α pt +∆(at ,pt ,Λ))ω k
∑k Φ(V k +γat +α pt +∆(at ,pt ,Λ))ω k

δn2t =

∑k Θkn [1−Φ(V k +γat +α pt +∆(at ,pt ,Λ))]ω k
∑k [1−Φ(V k +γat +α pt +∆(at ,pt ,Λ))]ω k

, t = 1, .., T

(8)

where




Pr yh = 1|pt , at ; Γ, δt = ∑ Φ V k + γat + α pt + ∆ (at , pt , Λ) ω k
k

and

∆ (at , pt , Λ) = λγ δγ1t − δγ2t + λα (δα1t − δα2t ) .

We also experiment with a Normal distribution of heterogeneity, F (Θ) = N Θ̄, ΣΘ . Details on the
formulation of the corresponding MPEC estimator are available from the authors upon request.
The constraints, (8), ensure that our estimated ticket purchase probabilities are exactly consistent with
the self-signaling equilibrium implied by Bayes’ rule, where δt are the equilibrium beliefs corresponding
to a given promotion state (at , pt ). This formulation yields an objective function that is smooth in the
equilibrium beliefs, δt . In contrast, a nested fixed-point approach that re-computes the equilibrium beliefs
15

exactly at each iteration of the parameter search over Γ would produce an objective function that is
potentially discontinuous in the structural parameters. Another advantage of the MPEC approach is
that we do not need to solve repeatedly for all the equilibria for each step of the parameter search. Su
(2014) demonstrates that the objective function (7) is equivalent to integrating the objective function
over a probability distribution for the countable set of potential equilibria to the model and where the
probability is deterministically equal to one for the equilibrium with the highest likelihood. If we also
assume that the same equilibrium is always played in a given promotion state, (at , pt ) then our MPEC
estimates of Γ are equivalent to the maximum likelihood estimates.
The identification of most of the model parameters follows from the usual econometric theory for
discrete choice models estimated with cross-sectional data. Bajari, Fox, and Ryan (2007) establish the
nonparametric identification of the random coefficients distribution, Σ, for discrete choice models with
linear indirect utility. The diagnostic weights, λγ and λα , are then identified parametrically from the
observed non-monotonic moments in our purchase data. These moments would not be fit by conventional
choice models.

6.2

Structural Estimates

Our three key models consist of the baseline probit, the random coefficients probit, and the random
coefficients probit with self-signaling. Table 7 reports the structural parameter estimates of the three
models, including three variants of the self-signaling specification. Our self-signaling specifications
consists of: (1) self-signaling on the taste for donations, γ; (2) self-signaling on the taste for donations,
γ, and the price sensitivity, α; and (3) self-signaling on the taste for donations, γ, and the taste for
movies, V. In each of the random coefficients and self-signaling specifications, we use two mass points
to approximate the distribution of heterogeneity.
The empirical results indicate that adding heterogeneity improves fit substantially, as seen by comparing columns one and two. The mixing probability in column two is 0.98, but is nevertheless significantly
different from 1. A standard likelihood ratio test to compare the model with one versus two mass points is
not well-defined since the restricted model (standard probit) sets the mixing probability to ω = 1, which
is on the boundary. However, we can see a substantial improvement in the Akaike Information Criterion
(final row of Table 7), which includes a penalty for a model with more parameters.
The probit and random coefficients probit models are straw men since we know a priori that neither
can predict the non-monotonic effect of prices in the data. As expected, the self-signaling models in
columns three to five fit the data better than the random coefficients probit. The best-fitting model has
self-signaling on both donation taste and price sensitivity. The diagnostic weights, λγ and λα are both
statistically significant. We easily reject the random coefficients probit model against the alternative
model with self-signaling on both donations and prices using the likelihood ration test at conventional
significance levels (LR = 23.27). We also reject the self-signaling on donations only (λα = 0) against
the alternative model with self-signaling on both donations and prices (LR = 9.15). Comparing the non16

nested specifications with self-signaling on donations and price versus self-signaling on donations and
movies, we select the former specification using the Akaike Information Criterion.
Our best-fitting model with self-signaling on γ and α is able to fit the non-monotonic moments in
our data in spite of having only two additional parameters than the baseline random coefficients probit.
We show this fit in Figure 6. In the first column of panels, we show in red the observed average choice
behavior in each of the experimental cells, where each row corresponds to the different donation levels.
In the second column, we show in blue the corresponding predicted choice behavior from the random
coefficients probit. In the third column, we show in magenta the predicted choice behavior from the
random coefficients probit with self-signaling on γ only. In the bottom two panels, this model predicts
flatter demand as we lower the price level in comparison with the baseline random coefficients probit.
But it does not fit the non-monotonicity. In the fourth column, we show in black the predicted choice
behavior from the random coefficients probit with self-signaling on γ and on α. In the bottom two
panels, we see how the self-signaling model is able to fit the non-monotonic relationship between price
and choice rates when the donation levels are relatively high. Finally, in the fifth column, we show in
green the predicted choice behavior from the random coefficients probit with self-signaling on γ and on
V . This model is not able to fit the non-monotonicity in observed choice behavior.
Some of our self-signaling specifications fail to capture the non-monotonicity in demand. First note
that in all of our self-signaling specifications, we find a very large segment that is less price-sensitive
(higher α) than the smaller segment, but with lower taste for movies, V, and donations, γ. For the
specification with self-signaling on γ only, the parameter values imply that it is very hard to send a strong
positive signal about γ since only the smaller segment (comp 2) has a positive, albeit small, marginal
consumption utility for γ. Choices in this specification are mostly driven by consumption utility and
not by ego utility. So as prices fall, the larger segment is motivated to buy a ticket, which worsens the
posterior inference on γ. But, the change in signal is not large enough to deter buyers. Furthermore, larger
donation levels actually deter the larger segment from buying, which means that larger donation levels
actually improve the self-signal on γ in this case. The net effect is that raising the donation and lowering
the price has a relatively flat effect on demand (as in Figure 6), but does not create a non-monotonicity.
Allowing for self-signaling on both γ and V does not improve fit since γ and V are positively correlated
across the two segments. Hence, there is little improvement in the ability to manipulate the signal.
In contrast, allowing for self-signaling on both γ and α improves fit since γ and α are negatively
correlated across the segments. Consider high donation levels of a = 15. As we lower the price, we draw
in more of the smaller segment consumers, which means the posterior signal on γ improves whereas the
posterior on α worsens. At low enough prices, the latter effect dominates and demand actually falls.
For the remainder of our analysis, we will focus on the best-fitting specification with discrete heterogeneity and self-signaling on γ and α. The structural coefficient estimates, Γ, in the fourth column
of Table 7 provide substantive implications about prosocial behavior in our ticket-buying context. The
heterogeneity distribution mixes over two mass points of tastes and while one point has 98% of the
probability mass, the amount of mass on the remaining segment is statistically different from zero. If
17

we interpret each mass point as a consumer “type,” then both types of consumers have negative price
sensitivity, α. So, as one might expect, demand slopes downwards in the absence of self-signaling. The
sensitivity to donations, γ, is positive but statistically insignificant for both types of consumers. Interestingly, the larger segment (98%) has a negative and statistically significant taste for movies. More
interesting are the large and statistically significant positive diagnostic weights, λγ and λα . Taken at face
value, consumers prefer the self-image of getting consumption utility from donations, λα > 0. They also
value the self-image of being relatively price-insensitive, λα > 0. These findings are consistent with the
formulation in Benabou and Tirole (2006) whereby consumers want to appear to value charity while not
appearing to be driven by “greed” (in this case low prices).
Although not reported herein, we also estimated the self-signaling models using a Normal distribution
of taste heterogeneity. Using the Akaike Information Criterion to assess relative model fit, we found that
the Normal distribution did not fit the data nearly as well as our finite mixture specifications reported
above. This is perhaps not surprising since the non-monotonicity in demand plays an important role in
identifying the heterogeneity. The symmetry and thin-tailed features of a Normal distribution may limit
its ability to fit our data.

6.3

Crowding Out and Multiplicity

In this section, we illustrate how prices and donations moderate individual choice behavior under selfsignaling. We also illustrate the potential multiplicity of equilibria. Our analysis focuses on the estimated
model parameters from the specification with self-signaling on γ and α, our best-fitting model from the
previous section.
In our model, the demand correspondence is an equilibrium outcome of the self-signaling game. We
derive demand by numerically computing the equilibrium beliefs and choice behavior over a grid of
27, 217 pairs of donation and price levels: a ∈ [1, 16] and p ∈ [20, 100] . For each grid point, we compute
an equilibrium for each of 1, 000 independent random starting values. A concern is that certain solution
paths might be difficult to locate numerically. The smoothness and regularity of the model rules out equilibria that are isolated or contain continua of equilibria or branching points (see for instance Borkovsky,
Doraszelski, and Kryukov (2008)).16 The equilibrium demand correspondences plotted in Figure 7 are
consistent with the regularity of the model. The lack of gaps in the plotted solution paths makes it unlikely that we are failing to locate entire equilibrium paths since this would require us systematically to
find points on one path as opposed to another17 .
Figure 7 also illustrates how crowding out in the choice behavior can arise. The choice probability is
always decreasing in the price level when a = 0. Furthermore, at full price, p = 100, charitable donations
increase demand. However, when a > 0, we observe several upward-sloping regions of demand where
16 The

smoothness of the model is established through the derivation of the gradients in Appendix A. Regularity is established for almost all solutions through Sard’s Theorem and the fact that the model is continuously differentiable.
17 We are grateful to Ron Borkovsky for his advice on the properties of the equilibrium correspondence of this model.

18

the choice probability is increasing in the price level. For instance, suppose we compare the campaigns
(a1 , p1 ) = (15, 70) and (a2 , p2 ) = (15, 60) which moves us along a region of the demand correspondence
that is uniquely defined at each price. The price reduction from campaign one to campaign two is counterproductive. Lowering the price raises the consumption utility since the movie is cheaper in the second
campaign. But, the corresponding expected choice probability nevertheless falls from 0.027 to 0.0153.
In this example, the decline in ego utility overwhelms the gain in consumption utility. The equilibrium
self beliefs for the two campaigns are
{E (γ|15, 70, 1) = 0.077, E (γ|15, 70, 0) = 0.0799, E (α|15, 70, 1) = −0.0143, E (α|15, 70, 0) = −0.0393}
and
{E (γ|15, 60, 1) = 4.6151, E (γ|15, 60, 0) = 0.0077, E (α|15, 60, 1) = −1.6105, E (α|15, 60, 0) = −0.0143}
for campaigns one and two respectively. Given our estimated diagnostic weights λγ = 9.5845 and
λα = 28.7377, the ego returns decline from ∆ (15, 70) = 0.0268 to ∆ (15, 60) = −1.7098. For the average
consumer who has expected price sensitivity of E (α) = −0.0386, the 10RMB discount only raises her
consumption utility by 0.386 and, hence, her total utility declines after the discount. Her consumption
utility only rises by The source of this decline is the multi-dimensional heterogeneity in consumer tastes.
The price decline draws in a more much more price-sensitive consumer to buy a ticket, which dampens
the overall self-signal. Analogous forms of muddled information have been studied in the recent theoretical literature on multi-dimensional screening (e.g. Benabou and Tirole (2006); Frankel and Kartik
(2014)).
Theoretically, one could find crowding out even if the self-signaling was only on γ. Although not
reported herein, we do not find any evidence for crowding out in demand using our empirical estimates
for the specification with self-signaling only on γ.
Figure 7 also reveals the potential for multiple equilibria. For some promotion campaigns (e.g. a = 10
and a = 15), we find that some price levels generate three different sets of equilibrium beliefs and, hence,
three equilibrium share levels. This multiplicity confirms the importance of our MPEC estimator which
was set up to select the equilibrium with the highest likelihood corresponding to a given set of structural
parameters and a given observed promotional offer. For instance, when p = 25.5 RMB and a = 16, we
find 3 equilibrium share levels: 0.039, 0.034 and 0.0178.
6.3.1

The non-fungibility of Promotion Money

The structural estimates also point towards an interesting non-fungibility of promotional funds. By
revealed preference, we would typically expect a discount to be preferred to an equal-sized donation
since the consumer could always donate the total amount of the discount to charity. However, once
we account for ego utility, there may be promotional states in which an incremental donation might
19

be preferred to an equal-sized incremental discount. We explore this issue by looking at the optimal
promotional campaign design under different firm objectives: profit maximization and charitable funds
maximization.
The multiplicity of equilibria complicates our counterfactual analysis of promotion campaigns. Insample, our MPEC estimator selects the equilibrium with the highest likelihood. But, out-of-sample, we
do not observe consumer choices. So we experiment with three different equilibrium selection rules18 .
Let D (a, p) denote the set of equilibrium posterior beliefs corresponding to a given price level p and
donation level a. Our first selection rule is intended to capture the spirit of our MPEC estimator which
selected the equilibrium in-sample with the highest-likelihood. Since we do not observe choices out-ofsample, we simulate them from our model. The selection rule is as follows:

δ (a, p) = argmax `ˆ(Γ, δ |a, p)

(9)

δ ∈D(a,p)

where
`ˆ(Γ, δ |a, p)

 h,r

h,r log (1 − Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ ))
= R1 ∑Rr=1 ∑H
h=1 y log (Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ )) + 1 − y
−→ Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ ) log (Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ )) + (1 − Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ )) log (1 − Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ ))

R→∞

and the out-of-sample choices are drawn as follows: yh,r ∼ Bernoulli(Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ ) .
Our second selection rule consists of choosing the most profitable equilibrium from the perspective
of the seller:
δ (a, p) = argmax {p × Pr (y = 1|a, p; δ )} .

(10)

δ ∈D(a,p)

Our third selection rule consists of choosing the equilibrium with the highest surplus from the perspective
of the consumer:
δ (a, p) = argmax E {max (U)}

(11)

δ ∈D(a,p)

where U is defined as in 1.
On our grid of 27, 217 pairs of prices and donation levels, the profit and consumer surplus criteria
select the same equilibrium in 98.4% of the cases. The consumer surplus and likelihood criteria select
the same equilibrium in 100% of the cases. Hereafter, we use the likelihood selection criterion. For those
points on the grid that coincide with our observed price and donations levels in-sample, the likelihood
criterion selects the same equilibrium as the MPEC estimate in 100% of the cases.

18 The

nearest-neighbor approach in Aguirregabiria (2011) is not well-suited to our setting since the nature of our counterfactuals does not provide an obvious “factual” equilibrium to use as a base case.

20

Suppose the firm’s objective consists of optimizing expected revenues:
(p∗ , a∗ ) = argmax {p × Pr (y = 1|a, p)} .

(12)

p,a

If we restrict donations to be zero, a = 0, then revenues are maximized at p∗ = 20.5 RMB. However,
when we allow a > 0, then revenues are maximized at p∗ = 36.25 RMB and a∗ = 1. Interestingly,
these results suggest that donations are not incompatible with revenue goals since a firm can increase its
profits by using a small donation and raising its price. We can see this result in Figure 8, which plots the
expected equilibrium revenue per customer for several alternative promotional campaigns. Recall from
Figure 7 that for a low donation level like a = 1, the dampening of the self-signal does not start to crowd
out demand until prices fall below 30 RMB, allowing the firm to benefit from a small donation.
Suppose instead the firm’s objective consists of optimizing the total expected charitable funds raised
through ticket sales:
(p∗ , a∗ ) = argmax {a × Pr (y = 1|a, p)} .
(13)
p,a

Figure 9 plots the expected equilibrium charitable funds per customer under several campaign scenarios.
Once again we see the effects of crowding out. At higher price levels, a price reduction can increase
the expected charitable funds collected. However, large decreases in price can start to become counterproductive and crowd out demand. For large donation levels like a = 15, there is a discontinuous jump
in the charitable revenues due to the backward-bending solution path we traced out in Figure 7. As a
result, the charitable funds-maximizing prosocial campaign sets the price at p∗ = 20 RMB and donations
at a∗ = 16. Therefore, the combination of a large donation and large discount is effective at raising funds
for the charitable campaign.
These counterfactuals illustrate some of the economic implications of self-signaling for the design of
a cause marketing campaign. For a firm that seeks to raise money for charity, large discounts and large
donations can be very effective. However, for a firm trying to generate revenues, a small donation can
improve revenues when bundled with higher prices.

7

Conclusions

In a large-scale, cause marketing field experiment, we find that the combination of promotional discounts
and charitable donations can reduce demand for the underlying product. Our evidence supports a theory
of self-signaling whereby consumers are partially motivated to buy the product to derive a warm-glow
feeling from supporting the cause. The crowding out of demand arises when price discounts dampen the
self-signal of altruistic motivation. The results provide field evidence of ego utility as a determinant of
consumer choices.
We quantify the self-signaling both with an attitudinal survey and with a structural model fit to purchase data. At face value, our structural estimates imply that the average consumer derives utility from
21

the self-perception of valuing charity more than from the actual act of charitable giving. Our findings
also contribute to the broader literature on social preferences and the important role of beliefs in understanding consumer preferences in prosocial contexts. In particular, under self-signaling, discounts and
donations are not inherently complementary and, over some regions, discounts can offset the demandshifting effects of a donation. Furthermore, counterfactual experiments reveal an incompatibility in the
use of discounts and donations when a firm pursues revenue goals as opposed to charitable goals.
Our results pertain to demand for movie tickets, which may be perceived as hedonic goods. It is
unclear whether our evidence for self-signaling would generalize to other contexts with more utilitarian
goods or neutral goods (Savary, Goldsmith, and Dhar (2014)).
Our study is limited to the immediate effect of self-signaling. An interesting direction for future
research would be to explore whether consumers who experience a higher warm-glow feeling today
are more likely to engage in a future prosocial behavior. This type of state-dependence might arise
if consumers accumulate a prosocial self-image capital stock (Benabou and Tirole (2011)) or if they
literally impute their own preferences from past actions (Ariely and Norton (2007)). Gneezy, Imas,
Brown, Nelson, and Norton (2012) provide lab evidence that increasing the costs of the self-signal not
only increases its diagnostic value, it also increases the likelihood of repeated prosocial behavior. It
is possible that a high warm-glow feeling in a cause marketing campaign similar to the one we study
increases subsequent prosocial behavior by consumers.
It would also be interesting to study whether consumers value the opportunity to self-signal or, ultimately, prefer to avoid being placed in self-signaling situations. Our respondents had no way to avoid
being assigned to the campaign. However, if given the chance, it would be interesting to see whether consumers would opt-out of receiving offers like the ones we study to avoid the pressure of being confronted
with a self-signaling opportunity (DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012)).
Finally, our research does not address whether consumers learn about the firm’s social preferences
based on the cause marketing campaign. Using our parameter estimates, a firm would use a small donation to generate revenues and a large donation to stimulate charitable funds. It would be interesting to
analyze the equilibrium implications of consumers having preferences for the firm’s social preferences.
This scenario would entail a social-signaling game in which the firm uses its campaign to signal its
altruism to consumers.

22

References
ACKERBERG , D. A. (2003): “Advertising, Learning, and Consumer Choice in Experience Good Markets: An Empirical Examination,” International Economic Review, 44(3), 1007–1040.
AGUIRREGABIRIA , V. (2011): “A method for implementing counterfactual experiments in models with
multiple equilibria,” Economics Letters, 114, 190–194.
A RIELY, D., A. B RACHA , AND S. M EIER (2009): “Doing good or doing well? Image motivation and
monetary incentives in behaving prosocially,” American Economic Review, 99, 544–555.
A RIELY, D., AND M. I. N ORTON (2007): “How actions create not just reveal preferences,” Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12, 13–16.
A RORA , N., AND T. H ENDERSON (2007): “Embedded Premium Promotion: Why It Works and How to
Make It More Effective,” Marketing Science, 26, 514–531.
A RROW, K. J. (1972): “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1, 343–362.
A SHRAF, N., O. BANDIERA , AND K. JACK (2012): “No margin, no mission? A field experiment on
incentives for pro-social tasks,” HBS Working Paper.
BAJARI , P., J. T. F OX , AND S. P. RYAN (2007): “Linear Regression Estimation of Discrete Choice Models with Nonparametric Distributions of Random Coefficients,” American Economic Review, 97(2),
459–463.
BARASCH , A., J. Z. B ERMAN , AND D. A. S MALL (2014): “Incentivized Persuaders are Less Effective:
Evidence from Fundraising Experiments,” Working Paper.
B EM , D. J. (1972): Advances in Experimental Social Psychologychap. Self Perception Theory, pp. 1–62.
Academic Press.
B ENABOU , R., AND J. T IROLE (2003): “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 489–520.
(2004): “Willpower and Personal Rules,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 848–886.
(2006): “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Review, 96, 1652–1678.
(2011): “Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126, 805–855.
B ERMAN , J. Z., E. E. L EVINE , A. BARASCH , AND D. A. S MALL (2015): “The Braggart’s Dilemma:
On the Social Rewards and Penalties of Advertising Prosocial Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 52, 90–104.
B ERNHEIM , B. D. (1994): “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 841–877.
23

B ERNHEIM , D.,
271–304.

AND

R. T HOMADSEN (2005): “Memory and Anticipation,” Economic Journal, 115,

B LISS , C. J. (1972): “Review of R. M. Titmuss ’The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social
Policy’,” Journal of Public Economics, 1, 162–165.
B ODNER , R., AND D. P RELEC (2002): Collected Essays in Psychology and Economicschap. Selfsignaling and diagnostic utility in everyday decision making. Oxford University Press.
B ORKOVSKY, R. N., U. D ORASZELSKI , AND Y. K RYUKOV (2008): “A User’s Guide to Solving Dynamic Stochastic Games Using the Homotopy Method,” Harvard Institute of Economic Research,
Discussion Paper Number 2155.
B OWLES , S., AND S. P OLANIA -R EYES (2012): “Economic Incentives and Social Preferences: Substitutes or Complements?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 368–425.
B ROCAS , I., AND J. D. C ARRILLO (2014): “Dual-process theories of decision-making: A selective
survey,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 41, 45–54.
C ARD , D., S. D ELLAV IGNA , AND U. M ALMENDIER (2011): “The Role of Theory in Field Experiments,” Journal of Economics Perspectives, 25, 39–62.
C RAWFORD , G. S., AND M. S HUM (2005): “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical Demand,”
Econometrica, 73(4), 1137–1173.
D ECI , E. L. (1971): “Effects of Externally Mediated Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 18, 105–115.
D ELLAV IGNA , S., J. A. L IST, AND U. M ALMENDIER (2012): “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure
in Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1–56.
D ENG , C., AND J. G RAZ (2002): “Generating Randomization Schedules Using SAS Programming,” Proceedings of the 27th Annual SAS Users Group International Conference,
http://www2.sas.com/proceedings/sugi27/p267-27.pdf, 267–27.
D HAR , R., AND K. W ERTENBROCH (2012): “Self-Signaling and the Costs and Benefits of Temptation
in Consumer Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 49, 15–25.
E LFENBEIN , D. W., AND B. M C M ANUS (2010): “A Greater Price for a Greater Good? Evidence That
Consumers Pay More for Charity-Linked Products,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2, 28–60.
E RDEM , T., AND M. P. K EANE (1996): “Decision-Making Under Uncertainty: Capturing Dynamic
Brand Choice Processes in Turbulent Consumer Goods Markets,” Marketing Science, 15(1), 1–20.
F RANKEL , A., AND N. K ARTIK (2014): “Muddled Information,” Working Paper.
24

F REY, B. S.,
589–611.

AND

J. J EGEN (2001): “Motivation Crowding Theory,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 15,

F REY, B. S., AND F. O BERHOLZER -G EE (1997): “The Cost of Price Incentives: An Empirical Analysis
of Motivation Crowding-Out,” American Economic Review, 87, 746–755.
F UDENBERG , D., AND D. K. L EVINE (2006): “A Dual Self Model of Impulse Control,” American
Economic Review, 96, 1449–1476.
G LAZER , A., AND K. A. KONRAD (1996): “A Signaling Explanation for Charity,” The American Economic Review, 86, 1019–1028.
G NEEZY, A., U. G NEEZY, G. R IENER , AND L. N ELSON (2012): “Pay-what-you-want, identity, and
self-signaling in markets,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 7236–7240.
G NEEZY, A., A. I MAS , A. B ROWN , L. D. N ELSON , AND M. I. N ORTON (2012): “Paying to Be Nice:
Consistency and Costly Prosocial Behavior,” Management Science, 58, 179–187.
G NEEZY, U., S. M EIER , AND P. R. B IEL (2011): “When and Why Incentives Don’t Work to Modify
Behavior,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 191–210.
G NEEZY, U., AND A. RUSTICHINI (2000): “Pay enough or don’t pay at all,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115, 791–810.
H ARUVY, E., AND P. T. P. L ESZCZYC (2009): “Bidder motives in cause-related auctions,” International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 26, 324–331.
K AMENICA , E. (2008): “Contextual Inference in Markets: On the Informational Content of Product
Lines,” American Economic Review, 98, 2127–2149.
(2012): “Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives,” Annual Review of Economics,
4, 13.1–13.6.
K ARLAN , D., AND J. A. L IST (2007): “Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving? Evidence from a
Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 97, 1774–1793.
KOSCHATE -F ISCHER , N., I. V. S TEFAN , AND W. D. H OYER (2012): “Willingness to Pay for CauseRelated Marketing: The Impact of Donation Amount and Moderating Effects,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 49, 910–927.
KOTLER , P., AND K. K ELLER (2011): Marketing Management. Prentice Hall.
KÖSZEGI , B. (2006): “Ego Utility, Overconfidence, and Task Choice,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 673–707.
L ACETERA , N., M. M ACIS , AND R. S LONIM (2009): “Will There Be Blood? Incentives and Substitution Effects in Pro-social Behavior,” Working Paper.
25

L ANDRY, C. E., A. L ANGE , J. A. L IST, M. K. P RICE , AND N. G. RUPP (2010): “Is a Donor in
Hand Better Than Two in the Bush? Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic
Review, 100, 958–83.
L EPPER , M. R., AND D. G REENE (eds.) (1978): The hidden costs of reward: New perspectives on the
psychology of human motivation. Oxford.
L IST, J. A. (2006): “The Behavioralist Meets the Market: Measuring Social Preferences and Reputation
Effects in Actual Transactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 114, 1–37.
L IST, J. A., R. P. B ERRENS , A. K. B OHARA , AND J. K ERKVLIET (2004): “Examining the Role of
Social Isolation on Stated Preferences,” American Economic Review, 94, 741–752.
M ELLSTROM , C., AND M. J OHANNESSON (2008): “Was Titmuss Right?,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6, 845–863.
M IJOVIC -P RELEC , D., L. S HIN , C. C HABRIS , AND S. KOSSLYN (1994a): “When does ’no’ really
mean ’yes’? A case study in unilateral visual neglect,” Neuropsychologia, 32, 151–158.
M IJOVIC -P RELEC , D., L. M. S HIN , C. F. C HABRIS , AND S. M. KOSSLYN (1994b): “When does "no"
really mean "yes"? A case study in unilateral visual neglect,” Neuropsychologica, 32, 151–158.
M OBIUS , M. M., M. N IEDERLE ,
Paper.

AND

P. N IEHAUS (2014): “Managing Self-Confidence,” Working

P ESSEMIER , E. A., A. C. B EMMAOR , AND D. M. H ANSSENS (1977): “Willingness to Supply Human
Body Parts: Some empriical results,” The Journal of Consumer Research, 4, 131–140.
P RELEC , D. M., AND D. P RELEC (2010): “Self-deception as self-signalling: a model and experimental
evidence,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 365, 227–240.
Q UATTRONE , G., AND A. T VERSKY (1984): “Causal versus diagnostic contingencies: On selfdeception and on the voter’s illusion,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 237–248.
S AVARY, J., K. G OLDSMITH , AND R. D HAR (2014): “Giving Against the Odds: When Tempting AAlternative Increase the Willingness-to-Donate,” Journal of Marketing Research, forthcoming.
S HAFIR , E., AND A. T VERSKY (1992): “Thinking through uncertainty: Nonconsequential reasoning
and choice,” Cognitive Psychology, 24, 449–474.
S OLOW, R. M. (1971): “Blood and Thunder: Review of the Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to
Social Policy by Richard M. Titmuss.,” Yale Law Journal, 80, 1696–1711.
S U , C.-L. (2014): “Estimating Discrete-Choice Games of Incomplete Information: Simple Static Examples,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, forthcoming.

26

S U , C.-L., AND K. L. J UDD (2012): “Constrained Optimization Approaches to Estimation of Structural
Models,” Econometrica, 80(5), 2213–2230.
TAMER , E. (2003): “Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Model with Multiple Equilibria,”
Review of Economic Studies, 70, 147–165.
T HALER , R., AND H. S HEFRIN (1981): “An economic theory of self-control,” Journal of Political
Economy, 39, 392–406.
T ITMUSS , R. (1971): The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social Policy. Allen and Unwin.
VARADARAJAN , P. R., AND A. M ENON (1988): “Cause-Related Marketing: A Coalignment of Marketing Strategy and Corporate Philanthropy,” Journal of Marketing, 52, 58–74.

27

Variable

discount (RMB)

0
3
6
15
30
36

Donation (RMB)
3
6
15
30
500 500 500 500
500 500 500 500
500 500 500
500 500
500

0
500
500
500
500
500
500

36
500

Table 1: Experimental Design and Sample Size for Study 1
Note. Each cell contains the total number of subjects assigned to the corresponding experimental condition.

Variable

discount (RMB)

0
20
35
50
60
75

Donation (RMB)
0
5
10
700 700
700
700 1,000 1,000
700 1,000 3,000
700 1,000 3,000
700 1,000 3,000
700
-

15
700
1,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
-

Table 2: Experimental Design and Sample Size for Study 2
Note. Each cell contains the total number of subjects assigned to the corresponding experimental condition.

Variable
purchase
ARPU
MOU
SMS
GPRS

Obs
30,300
30,300
30,300
30,300
30,300

Mean
0.0229
74.109
633.498
365.028
63885.97

Std.
0.150
51.192
611.451
243.656
202239.2

Min
0
8.07
1
0
34

Max
1
688.98
5647
3099
1.22E+07

Table 3: Summary Statistics
Note. Each cell contains the total number of subjects assigned to the corresponding experimental condition.

28

discount

donation

# respondents

20
20
20
35
35
35
50
50
50
60
60
60

5
10
15
5
10
15
5
10
15
5
10
15

25
29
29
26
25
27
23
27
29
35
27
27

Table 4: Survey Response Rate

Variable

Donation (RMB)
0

discount (RMB)

3

6

15

30

36

0

0.000

0.004

0.006

0.010

0.040**

0.046**

3

0.006

0.016*

0.018*

0.020**

0.044**

-

6

0.008

0.020**

0.022**

0.024**

-

-

15

0.034**

0.032**

0.028**

-

-

-

30

0.062**

0.040**

-

-

-

-

36

0.066**

-

-

-

-

-

Table 5: Experimental Results for Study 1
Note. Each cell contains the purchase frequency across subjects in the specific marketing condition.
** Significant at the 1 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level

Variable

Donation (RMB)
0

Discount (RMB)

5

10

15

0

0.0000

0.0043

0.0057

0.0114*

20

0.0071

0.0170**

0.0200**

0.0240**

35

0.0329**

0.0300**

0.0270**

0.0230**

50

0.0557**

0.0420**

0.0180**

0.0160**

60

0.0600**

0.0480**

0.0170**

0.0140**

75

0.0629**

-

-

-

Table 6: Experimental Results for Study 2
Note. Each cell contains the purchase frequency across subjects in the specific marketing condition.
** Significant at the 1 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level

29

Experimental Results, purchase_mean
0
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
5
0.06

Purchase Probability

0.04
0.02

Donation Level
0

0.00

5

10

10

0.06

15
0.04
0.02
0.00
15
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0

20

35

50

60

75

Discount Level

Figure 1: Purchase rate by promotional condition

Experimental Results, purchase_mean
●

0.06

●

●

●

Purchase Probability

●

0.04
Donation Level
●
●
●

●

0

●

5

●

10

●

15

●
●

0.02

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

0.00

●

0

20

35

50

60

75

Discount Level

Figure 2: Purchase rate by promotional condition

30

They wanted to feel good about themselves by donating to the charity.

问卷设计(Survey Design) for NOT purchased customers
1、您好，这里是****，可以耽误你 5 分钟的时间，做个满意度调查吗？（如果客户同意，

4、您认为，这些用户以后是否会继续参与“看电影做公益”活动，捐更多的钱？
则继续）谢谢！

Do you think those consumers will continue donating money to this charity in the future?

Dear customer, on behalf of (wireless provider), would you please participate in a short (5
minutes) customer satisfaction survey? (if yes, please continue)

5、您觉得，这些用户是否相信本次捐赠活动是真实可信的呢？
Do you think this SMS donation deal seems too good to be true for those consumers?

2、您觉得****的手机支付业务是否方便？
Do you believe (wireless provider)’s mobile payment business is easy to use?

6、您觉得，这些用户是否认为他们就有责任去关心贫困孤独老人？
How strongly do you feel those consumers should care about the poor elderly in need?

3、
****前期推出了“看电影做公益”活动。昨天有用户通过****购买了“X 战警：逆转未来”

7、您觉得，这些用户是否觉得自己是个有爱心的人？

的电影票通兑券，享受 yyy 折优惠，还通过****为贫困孤独老人捐助 zzz 元。您认为，

In general, do you feel those consumers consider themselves caring people?

这些用户参与本次活动、购买电影票的原因最可能是以下哪一种. 我们想了解一下这些

8、您觉得，这些用户本次购买是否是冲动购物？

用户对本次购买的原因，以便改进业务，服务客户：

Do you think this purchase is an impulse buy for those consumers?

As you know, ****(wireless provider) launched a Mobile Movie Ticket business. Through this
app, yesterday consumers purchased tickets for the movie X‐Men: Days of Future Past using
a special offer that donated YYY ¥ per ticket to a charity for poor elderly and also discounted
the regular ticket price by ZZZ.” To improve our business and customer service, please
indicate the extent to which you agree with the following statement about why those
consumers bought tickets:
the same as above except the different discount zzz# and donation yyy# across the treatments.

(1)是因为想看电影，有没有折扣和捐赠，都会购买。
They wanted to watch the movie and would have seen it regardless of the special offer.
(2)是因为折扣很大很划算。
The discount was big enough to make it worthwhile for them to buy a movie ticket.
(3)是因为看重和支持本次捐助活动。
They valued the charity and wanted to support it.
(4)是因为向贫困老人捐钱后，他们对自己的感觉较好。

Figure 3: Survey Questions for non-purchasers

问卷设计(Survey Design) for purchased customers

(4)您本次购买，是因为向贫困老人捐钱后，您对自己的感觉较好。
The consumer wanted to feel good about herself by donating to the charity.

1、您好，这里是****，可以耽误你 5 分钟的时间，做个满意度调查吗？（如果客户同意，
则继续）谢谢！

4、以后，您是否继续参与“看电影做公益”活动，捐更多的钱？
Do you think you will continue donating money to this charity in the future?

Dear customer, this is ****(wireless provider), would you please take a short time 5 min and
participate in our customer satisfaction survey?(if yes, continue)

5、您是否认为本次捐赠活动是真实可信的呢？
This SMS deal seems too good to be true.

2、您觉得****的手机支付业务是否方便？（掩饰性问题）
Do you think that ****(wireless provider)’s mobile payment business is easy to use? (to
cover the real purpose of this survey)

6、您是否认同我们应该关心贫困孤独老人？
How strongly do you feel we ourselves should care about the poor elderly in need?（to rule out

3、
charity responsibility）
(1) ****前期推出了“看电影做公益”活动。昨天您通过****购买了“X 战警：逆转未来”的电
影票通兑券，享受 8 折优惠，还通过****为贫困孤独老人捐助 5 元。我们想了解一下对

7、您是否觉得您是个有爱心的人？
In general, I consider myself a caring person.

您本次购买的原因，以便改进业务，服务客户：

8、你本次购买是否因为冲动购物？

As you know, ****(wireless provider) launched Mobile Movie Ticket Buying business.
Through this app, yesterday you (the consumer) just purchased a ticket for the movie X‐Men:
Days of Future Past using a special offer that donated YYY ¥ per ticket to help poor elderly
charity and also discounted the regular ticket price by ZZZ.” Please indicate to what extent
you agree with the following statement regarding why consumers made the purchase in
order to improve our business and customer service:

Do you think this purchase was an impulse buy?

the same as above except the different discount zzz# and donation yyy# across the treatments.
(1) 您本次购买，是因为想看电影，有没有折扣和捐赠，都会购买。
The consumer wanted to watch the movie and would have seen it regardless of the special
offer.
(2)您本次购买，是因为折扣很大很划算。
The discount was big enough to make it worthwhile for the consumer to buy a ticket to watch
the movie.
(3)您本次购买，是因为您看重和支持本次捐助活动。
The consumer values the charity and wanted to support it.
1

2

Figure 4: Survey Questions for purchasers

31

Figure 5: Survey: Warm Glow Feeling
Notes: The left panel reports the average purchase frequencies for each of the 21 campaigns. The right panel reports the
average rating of the survey question “I wanted to feel good about myself” as a motivation for buying a ticket corresponding
to those campaign cells for which we conducted the survey.

32

Donation, γ

Price, α

Intercept , V

mixing prob, ω

λγ
λα
λV
log-likelihood, `
AIC

Probit

R.C. Probit

Self-Signaling on γ

Self-Signaling on γ and α

Self-Signaling on γ and V

-0.022
(0.0031)
-0.0063
(0.001)
-1.4373
(0.0581)
-3254.09
6514.17

comp 1
comp 2
-0.0827
0.2621
(0.0208) (0.147)
-0.0137
-0.114
(0.004) (0.0432)
-1.2218
8.1799
(0.1644) (3.1617)
0.981
(0.0017)
-3215.08
6444.16

comp 1
comp 2
-0.2887
0.0411
(0.1324) (0.0928)
-0.0163
-0.0945
(0.0022) (0.0204)
-1.1449
6.6262
(0.1152) (1.3899)
0.981
(0.0009)
7.061
(2.8705)
-3208.02
6432.04

comp 1
comp 2
0.0077
4.6818
(0.0051) (0.7609)
-0.0143
-1.6336
(0.0011) (0.2969)
-1.061
35.1249
(0.057)
(7.2856)
0.985
(0.0016)
9.5845
(0.2504)
28.7377
(0.0612)
-3203.45
6424.89

comp 1
-0.2887
(0.116)
-0.0163
(0.0018)
-1.1449
(0.0847)
0.981
(0.0011)
0.0739
(0.3702)

comp 2
0.0411
(0.1111)
-0.0945
(0.0284)
6.6262
(2.035)
-

-

-

0.2965
(0.2292)
-3208.02
6434.04

Table 7: Structural Estimates and Model Fits (finite mixture model of heterogeneity)

33

probit

purch rate

donation: 0 RMB

donation: 0 RMB

purch rate

donation: 0 RMB

signal on γ and V

donation: 0 RMB

donation: 0 RMB

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

0

100

25 40 50 65 80

donation: 5 RMB

100

25 40 50 65 80

donation: 5 RMB

100

0
25 40 50 65 80

donation: 5 RMB

100

25 40 50 65 80

donation: 5 RMB

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

0

100

40 50 65 80

donation: 10 RMB

100

40 50 65 80

donation: 10 RMB

100

0
40 50 65 80

donation: 10 RMB

100

40 50 65 80

donation: 10 RMB

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0
40 50 65 80

100

0
40 50 65 80

donation: 15 RMB

100

0
40 50 65 80

donation: 15 RMB

100

0
40 50 65 80

donation: 15 RMB

100

40 50 65 80

donation: 15 RMB

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0
40 50 65 80
price (RMB)

100

0
40 50 65 80
price (RMB)

100

0
40 50 65 80
price (RMB)

100

100

donation: 15 RMB

0.02

0

100

donation: 10 RMB

0.03

0

100

donation: 5 RMB

0.06

40 50 65 80

purch rate

signal on γ and α

0.08

25 40 50 65 80

purch rate

signal on γ

RC Probit

0
40 50 65 80
price (RMB)

100

40 50 65 80
price (RMB)

100

Figure 6: In-Sample Fit of the Structural Models
Notes: First column has true shares (red). Columns two through six have predicted shares from R.C. Probit (blue), selfsignaling on γ only (magenta), self-signaling on γ and α (black), self-signaling on γ and V (green).

Figure 7: Equilibrium choices under different promotional campaigns

34

Figure 8: Equilibrium revenues under different promotional campaigns

Figure 9: Equilibrium charitable funds under different promotional campaigns

35

A

Appendix: Gradients of the MPEC Estimator

Recall that our MPEC estimator maximizes the log-likelihood function
 



 
 
h
h
h
h
` (Γ, δ ) = ∑ y ln Pr y = 1|pt , at ; Γ, δt + 1 − y ln 1 − Pr y = 1|at , pt ; Γ, δt
h

subject to the constraints


δγ1t −

∑k γ k Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))ω k
∑k Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))ω k





∑k γ k [1−Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))]ω k

 δγ2t − ∑ 1−Φ u Γk ,δ ω k
( t ( t ))]

k[

G (δt ) ≡ 

∑k α k Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))ω k

 δα1t −
∑k Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))ω k




∑ α k [1−Φ(ut (Γk ,δt ))]ω k
δα2t − k 1−Φ u Γk ,δ ω k
∑k [
( t ( t ))]










=0








where


 

Pr yh = 1|pt , at ; Γ, δt = ∑ Φ ut Γk , δt ω k
k

and


ut Γk , δt = V k + γ k at + α k pt + ∆ (at , pt , Λ)
and

∆ (at , pt , Λ) = λγ δγ1t − δγ2t + λα (δα1t − δα2t ) .
Define x jt where j = 1, ..., J. Let j ∈ {α, γ,V }. The gradients of the objective function are
∂ ` (Γ, δ )
∂ θ ij

=

∂ ` (Γ, δ )
∂ ωi

=

∑ yh x jt
h

∑ yh
h

∂ ` (Γ, δ )
∂λj

=

∂ ` (Γ, δ )
∂ δ jkt

=

∑

 

 


 1 − Φ u Γi  − 1 − Φ u ΓK 
Φ ut Γk , δt − Φ ut Γk , δt
t
t


 
− ∑ 1 − yh
k
k
∑s Φ ut Γ , δt ω
∑k 1 − Φ ut Γk , δt ω k
h

yh

h

∑

 

 



φ ut Γk , δt ω i
φ ut Γk , δt ω i
h x


 
−
1
−
y
jt
∑
∑s Φ ut Γk , δt ω k
∑k 1 − Φ ut Γk , δt ω k
h

hτ |τ=t

 

 

k
k
k
k


 ∑s φ ut Γ , δt ω
 ∑s φ ut Γ , δt ω
h


 
δ j1t − δ j2t
−∑ 1−y
δ j1t − δ j2t
k
k
k
∑s Φ ut Γ , δt ω
∑k 1 − Φ ut Γ , δt ω k
h

yhτ λγ (−1)(2−k)

 

 



∑s φ ut Γk , δt ω k
∑s φ ut Γk , δt ω k


− ∑ 1 − yhτ λγ (−1)(2−k)
k
k
k
∑s Φ ut Γ , δt ω
∑s Φ ut Γ , δt ω k
hτ |τ=t

36

The gradients for the constraints are
 

   h
 
 i h
 
 i  

Φ ut Γ i ,δt ω i
θni φ ut Γ i ω i ∑k Φ ut Γ k ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γ k ,δt ω k φ ut Γ i ,δt ω i
 
 
h
 i I{ j=γ} − x jt
 i
∑k Φ ut Γ k ,δt ω k
∑k Φ ut Γ k ,δt ω k

∂ Gn (δt )
∂ θ ij

=−h

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ θ ij

=−h

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂ ωi

=−

h
 

 
ih
 
 i h
 
 ih  

 
i
θni Φ ut Γi ,δt −γ K Φ ut ΓK ,δt
∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k Φ ut Γi ,δt −Φ ut ΓK ,δt
h
 
 i2
k
k
∑k Φ ut Γ ,δt ω

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ ωi

=−

h





ih


 i h


 ih 




i
θni Φ −ut Γi ,δt −γ K Φ −ut ΓK ,δt
∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k Φ −ut Γi ,δt −Φ −ut ΓK ,δt
h


 i2
∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂λj

= − δ j1t − δ j2t

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂λj

= δ j1t − δ j2t

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂ δn1t

= 1 − λn

h
 
 ih
 
 i h
 
 ih
 
 i
∑ θnk φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
h
 
 i2
∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ δn2t

= 1 − λn

 i
 ih
 

 i h


 ih

h
 
∑k θnk φ ut Γik ,δt ω k ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
 i2

h

∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂ δn2t

= λn

 i
 ih
 
 i h
 
 ih
 
h
 
∑ θnk φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
 i2
h
 
k
k
∑k Φ ut Γ ,δt ω

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ δn1t

= λn

 i
 ih
 

 i h


 ih

h
 
∑k θnk φ ut Γik ,δt ω k ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
 i2

h

∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂ δ j1t

= −λ j

 i
 ih
 
 i h
 
 ih
 
h
 
∑ θnk φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
 i2
h
 
∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ δ j2t

= −λ j

 i
 ih
 

 i h


 
 ih

h
∑k θnk φ ut Γik ,δt ω k ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
 i2

h

∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn1 (δt )
∂ δ j2t

= λj

 i
 ih
 
 
 i h
 
 
 ih
h
∑ θnk φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
h
 
 i2
∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k

∂ Gn2 (δt )
∂ δ j1t

= λj

 i
 ih
 



 i h

 
 ih
h
∑k θnk φ ut Γik ,δt ω k ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
h


 i2
k
k
∑k Φ −ut Γ ,δt ω


 

 
 h


 i h


 i  

1−Φ ut Γi ,δt
ωi
θni φ ut Γi ,δt ω i ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k φ ut Γi ,δt ω i

 
h


 i2 I{ j=γ} + x jt
 i2
ωk
∑k 1−Φ ut Γk ,δt
∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

h

 

 ∑ θnk φ ut Γk ,δt

h

 

 ∑k θnk φ ut Γik ,δt

 ih
 
 i h
 
 ih
 
 i
ω k ∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
h
 
 i2
∑k Φ ut Γk ,δt ω k

 ih


 i h


 ih
 
 i
ω k ∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k − ∑k θnk Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k ∑k φ ut Γk ,δt ω k
h


 i2
∑k Φ −ut Γk ,δt ω k

37

, n,j=1,...,J,i=1,...,K

B

Survey Results

Below we include some additional survey results that support our baseline theory of self-signaling.

38

Figure 10: Survey: Price Sensitivity
Notes: The left panel reports the average purchase frequencies for each of the 21 campaigns. The right panel
reports the average rating of the survey question “the discount was big enough to make it worthwhile for your
to buy a movie ticket” as a motivation for buying a ticket corresponding to those campaign cells for which we
conducted the survey.

Figure 11: Survey: want to see the movie
Notes: The left panel reports the average purchase frequencies for each of the 21 campaigns. The right panel
reports the average rating of the survey question “you wanted to watch the movie” as a motivation for buying a
ticket corresponding to those campaign cells for which we conducted the survey.

39

Figure 12: Survey: Value the Charity itself
Notes: The left panel reports the average purchase frequencies for each of the 21 campaigns. The right panel reports the
average rating of the survey question “You valued the charity and wanted to support it” as a motivation for buying a ticket
corresponding to those campaign cells for which we conducted the survey.

Figure 13: Survey: Intend to donate to charity in future
Notes: The left panel reports the average purchase frequencies for each of the 21 campaigns. The right panel reports the
average rating of the survey question “Will you continue donating money to this charity in the future?” corresponding to
those campaign cells for which we conducted the survey.

40

