                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ROLE OF TIME PREFERENCES AND EXPONENTIAL-GROWTH BIAS IN
                           RETIREMENT SAVINGS

                                           Gopi Shah Goda
                                          Matthew R. Levy
                                     Colleen Flaherty Manchester
                                           Aaron Sojourner
                                            Joshua Tasoff

                                         Working Paper 21482
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21482


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2015


We are grateful to Tania Gutsche and Bart Orriens as well as the staff at the American Life Panel for
their assistance with fielding this study. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support provided
by the TIAA-CREF Institute and the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center of the Wharton School at
the University of Pennsylvania. This research was also supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant number RRC08098400-07 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Retirement Research Consortium. Additional support was provided by the National Institute on
Aging of the National Institutes of Health under grant number R01AG020717 and the Social Security
Administration for the UAS data collection. Kirill Demtchouk, Dominika Jaworski, Garrett Thoelen,
and Wenjie Zhang provided exceptional research assistance. The authors also thank John Beshears,
Jeff Brown, Leandro Carvalho, David Laibson, Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia Mitchell, Changcheng
Song, Wesley Yin and seminar participants at USC, RAND, and North Carolina State University for
helpful comments. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not
represent the views of NIH, SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, the NBER, or any other
institution with which the authors are affiliated.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Gopi Shah Goda, Matthew R. Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sojourner, and
Joshua Tasoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Time Preferences and Exponential-Growth Bias in Retirement Savings
Gopi Shah Goda, Matthew R. Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sojourner, and Joshua
Tasoff
NBER Working Paper No. 21482
August 2015
JEL No. H0

                                              ABSTRACT

There is considerable variation in retirement savings within income, age, and educational categories.
Using a broad sample of the U.S. population, we elicit time preference parameters from a quasi-hyperbolic
discounting model, and perceptions of exponential growth. We find that present bias (PB), the tendency
to value utility in the present over the future in a dynamically inconsistent way, and exponential-growth
bias (EGB), the tendency to neglect compounding, are prevalent and distinct latent variables. PB, EGB,
and the long-run discount factor are all highly significant in predicting retirement savings, even while
controlling for measures of IQ and general financial literacy as well as a rich set of demographic controls.
We find that lack of self-awareness of these biases has an additional independent negative impact on
retirement savings. We assess potential threats to a causal interpretation of our results with a hypothetical
choice experiment and several robustness exercises. Finally, we explore potential mechanisms for
our findings. If the relationship we estimate is causal, our estimates suggest that eliminating PB and
EGB would be associated with an increase in retirement savings of 12%, or as high as 70% using estimates
that account for classical measurement error.


Gopi Shah Goda                                        Aaron Sojourner
Stanford University                                   Carlson School of Management
SIEPR                                                 321 19th Ave S, 3-300
366 Galvez St.                                        Minneapolis, MN 55409
Stanford, CA 94305                                    asojourn@umn.edu
and NBER
gopi@stanford.edu                                     Joshua Tasoff
                                                      Claremont Graduate University
Matthew R. Levy                                       Department of Economics
Department of Economics                               160 East Tenth Street
London School of Economics                            Claremont, CA 91711
 and Political Science                                joshua.tasoff@cgu.edu
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
m.r.levy@lse.ac.uk

Colleen Flaherty Manchester
Work and Organizations
University of Minnesota
Room 3-300R
321 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
cmanch@umn.edu
1    Introduction

As of 2015 there is an estimated $14.4 trillion invested in employer-sponsored defined contribution

plans and individual retirement accounts in the United States (Investment Company Institute,

2015). Individuals vary considerably in their retirement wealth levels even after conditioning on

observables such as income, age, and education. The decline of traditional pension plans means

employer-provided individual accounts such as 401(k)s will be a major source of retirement income

for millions of Americans, and variation in individual abilities and attitudes toward saving will

become an increasingly important driver of retirement wealth accumulation, decumulation, and

Americans’ ability to smooth consumption over the lifecycle. Understanding the forces that influ-

ence this tremendous quantity of wealth and its distribution is therefore of central importance for

positive economics and policy analysis.

    Standard intertemporal-choice models predict that time preferences, as measured by the dis-

count rate, and features of the budget constraint, such as liquidity constraints, influence retirement

savings. However, the complexity of the problem increases the likelihood that “behavioral” fac-

tors influence retirement wealth accumulation. Theoretically, at least two psychological biases

predict that people may save insufficiently for retirement. Present bias (PB) is the tendency to

underweight future consumption relative to present consumption in a dynamically inconsistent way

(Strotz, 1956; Laibson, 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999a). A theoretical literature shows that in

lifecycle-consumption models, present bias can lead to lower savings relative to an unbiased person

who shares the same long-run discount factor (Laibson, 1997, 1998; Laibson et al., 1998; Angeletos

et al., 2001; Diamond and Kőszegi, 2003). A person with present-biased preferences may intend to

save more in the future but never do so. Furthermore, present-biased agents may procrastinate on

the decision to enroll in a tax-deferred savings plan, also resulting in lower savings (O’Donoghue

and Rabin, 1999a,b, 2001).

    While PB is a preference parameter, exponential-growth bias (EGB) is a perceptual bias

whereby people underestimate exponential growth due to neglecting compound interest. A person

with EGB will underestimate the returns to savings and the costs of holding debt. Levy and Tasoff

(2015a) show, in a lifecycle-consumption model, that EGB can lead to undersaving for retirement


                                                  1
under certain conditions. A large body of evidence suggests that this bias is widespread and robust

(Wagenaar and Sagaria, 1975; Wagenaar and Timmers, 1979; Keren, 1983; Benzion, Granot and

Yagil, 1992; Eisenstein and Hoch, 2007; McKenzie and Liersch, 2011; Almenberg and Gerdes, 2012).

In addition, a growing body of literature finds that EGB is negatively correlated with total savings

(Stango and Zinman, 2009; Levy and Tasoff, 2015a).

      In this paper, we examine the relationship between retirement savings, time preferences and

EGB in a rich statistical model that includes these behavioral parameters simultaneously as well as

a diverse set of controls to address potential confounds. Our study builds upon literature to date

which has largely focused on retirement outcomes and a single behavioral characteristic, for instance

the propensity to plan (Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003), financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell,

2007), or numeracy (Banks, O’Dea and Oldfield, 2010). PB and EGB have distinct influences on

economic decisions, as they affect different aspects of the individual’s intertemporal-choice problem

(i.e., PB affects preferences, while EGB manifests in the budget constraint). Empirically, however,

their relative importance in predicting retirement wealth is unknown.

      This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, we measure the joint distribution

of time preferences, EGB, financial literacy, and IQ in a broad sample of U.S. households. We

find that PB and EGB are unrelated: the biases are uncorrelated (r = −0.036), suggesting that

the biases are distinct and do not stem from the same deeper latent variable. We estimate the

parameters of a quasi-hyperbolic discount function (Laibson, 1997) and find that while on average

the population is time consistent, a large fraction are present biased. Replicating previous work

(Levy and Tasoff, 2015a), we find that a large fraction of the population exhibits EGB.

      We next establish an empirical link between retirement savings, time preferences, and EGB.

While the theoretical relationship between standard time preference and retirement savings in

discounted utility models is well-understood, and the relationship between retirement savings and

PB specifically has been discussed in theoretical contexts for nearly two decades (Laibson, Repetto

and Tobacman, 1998; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999b), there have been surprisingly few attempts

to research the relationship empirically.1 Our analysis aims to fill this gap. We control for income,
  1
      We discuss exceptions in Section 2.3.




                                                    2
education, risk preferences, financial literacy, and a measure of IQ, as well as a host of other

background characteristics, and find that time preferences and EGB are statistically significant and

economically meaningful determinants of retirement savings. A one standard deviation reduction in

the long-run discount factor is associated with approximately $20,400 less retirement wealth relative

to a mean of $132,926; a one standard deviation increase in PB is associated with approximately

$12,700 less in retirement wealth. A one standard deviation increase in EGB is associated with

$13,400 less retirement savings.

   We also establish a link between self-awareness of these biases and retirement savings. It

has been suggested that self-awareness regarding one’s biases may be as important or even more

important in determining behavior than the direct effect of the bias itself (O’Donoghue and Rabin,

2001; Levy and Tasoff, 2015b). A sophisticated agent who is aware of his or her self-control

problems may be able to implement commitment devices to counteract the bias, while a naif would

not. Likewise, a person with EGB who is aware of his or her inability in solving such problems

could seek help or use tools, whereas an overconfident person will exhibit insufficient demand for

tools and advice. We directly measure sophistication regarding present bias and overconfidence

regarding exponential estimation. We find that overconfidence regarding exponential estimation

has an additional negative effect on retirement savings. Our results suggest that sophistication

decreases the impact of present bias, though the measured interaction is not statistically significant.

As far as we are aware, this is the first study to test for an association between a direct measure of

self-awareness regarding these biases and economic outcomes.

   While these findings together present a plausible case for a causal relationship between retire-

ment savings, time preferences and EGB, they cannot establish air-tight evidence for causality.

Indeed, establishing a causal relationship would seem to be a near-impossible task because behav-

ioral parameters cannot be randomly assigned. We take two approaches to assessing the causal

interpretation of our results. First, we field a hypothetical choice experiment where subjects are

randomly assigned interventions designed to mitigate the effects of PB and EGB, and find evi-

dence that those with higher levels of PB and EGB respond more to the interventions. Under

the assumption that our treatments mitigate the targeted biases, evidence of heterogeneous effects



                                                  3
establishes a causal pathway from EGB and PB to retirement wealth accumulation. Second, we use

available data to assess the plausibility of additional potential threats to a causal interpretation.

We find no evidence for an association between income and the biases, reducing the plausibility

of a reverse causal interpretation. We investigate omitted variable bias by showing that our main

results are robust to a wide variety of additional controls for one’s access to employer saving plans,

expected retirement age, subjective assessments of one’s health and life expectancy, and alternative

measures of IQ and financial literacy. In addition, we find that our results are robust to using

retirement wealth recorded from other surveys, suggesting that they are not likely to be driven by

non-classical measurement error stemming from our survey instrument. Together, these findings

point to a causal relationship between time preferences, EGB and saving for retirement. Under

this interpretation, eliminating both PB and EGB from the sample would lead to a 12 percent

increase in overall retirement savings. The regression coefficients are likely to understate the true

association between retirement savings, time preferences and EGB due to attenuation bias caused

by measurement error. After employing an instrumental variables strategy to correct for classi-

cal measurement error, a causal interpretation of our estimates suggests retirement wealth could

increase by as much as 70 percent if PB and EGB were eliminated.

   Finally, we discuss the potential mechanisms for the effects of our behavioral parameters on

retirement savings. We find evidence that overconfidence about exponential estimation and PB

decrease saving flows into employer-sponsored retirement accounts. Conversely, we find no evidence

that our behavioral parameters operate through the equity allocation in retirement accounts or

enrollment in employer-sponsored retirement plans. We find no evidence that the biases affect the

propensity to plan, but do find that financial literacy is positively associated with planning.

   The next section lays out the conceptual framework and presents related literature. In Section

3 we present the research design. Section 4 contains the main results, while Section 5 reports

the results of our hypothetical choice experiment. We explore additional evidence for a causal

interpretation and potential mechanisms in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.




                                                  4
2     Conceptual Framework and Prior Literature

In our empirical analysis we take a reduced-form approach, estimating relationships with limited

structure between our behavioral parameters of interest and retirement savings. This section pro-

vides the theoretical basis for our statistical models and outlines theoretical predictions between

these parameters and retirement savings established by previous research. We use the model be-

low, not to generate novel implications of PB and EGB, which have been done elsewhere in the

literature, but instead to motivate the empirical analysis. We conclude the section by summarizing

existing theoretical predications and previous empirical findings.


2.1   Conceptual Framework

People are assumed to have quasi-hyperbolic utility functions (Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Laibson,

1997) over a vector of consumption x ∈ RT −t+1 of the form

                                                              T
                                                                      δiτ −t ui (xτ )
                                                              X
                                 Ui,t (x) ≡ ui (xt ) + βi                                             (1)
                                                             τ =t+1


where T is the final period, t is the current period, i is the individual, 1 − βi is the degree of present

bias, and δi is the (exponential) long-run discount factor. The individual may overestimate the βi

used by future selves, as in O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a, 2001). The individual’s current utility

is given by (1) but she incorrectly believes her future utility in period s > t is determined with

β̂i ≥ βi yielding

                                                              T
                                                                      δiτ −t ui (xτ )
                                                              X
                                Ũi,s (x) ≡ ui (xs ) + β̂i                                            (2)
                                                             τ =s+1


The individual uses backwards-induction given her beliefs to solve for her perception-perfect strat-

egy (O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999a).

    In addition to the possibility of having biased time preferences, people may also be biased in

their perceptions of exponential growth, which affects the budget constraint. While PB and EGB

are both referred to as biases here and in the literature, there is an important conceptual distinction



                                                      5
that deserves mention: PB may be considered a preference parameter, while EGB is a perceptual

error. In most contexts the welfare implications of EGB are therefore less ambiguous than those

from PB.

      Using the parametric model of Levy and Tasoff (2015a), let αi represent’s individual i’s accuracy

in her exponential perceptions. Given an interest rate ~r and time horizon T , the person’s perception

function p(~r, t; αi ) is the perception of the period-T value of one dollar invested at time t < T :

                                                      −1
                                                     TY                       −1
                                                                             TX
                                   p(~r, t; αi ) =         (1 + αi rs ) +          (1 − αi )rs            (3)
                                                     s=t                     s=t


When αi = 0, the individual does not compound interest and incorrectly perceives growth to be

linear. When αi = 1, the person correctly perceives growth to be exponential. Values of αi ∈ [0, 1]

generate perceptions that are between linear and exponential growth.

      When maximizing utility over the lifecycle given a vector of income ŷ the person must choose

a vector of consumption ĉ that maximizes (2) subject to expected future behavior and the true

budget constraint written in terms of the period-T value of money,

                                        T
                                        X                           T
                                                                    X
                                              ĉs · p(~r, s; 1) ≤         ys · p(~r, s; 1)                (4)
                                        s=0                         s=0


Since the person misperceives exponential growth, she perceives the budget constraint as:

                                       T
                                       X                            T
                                                                    X
                                            ĉs · p(~r, s; αi ) ≤         ys · p(~r, s; αi )              (5)
                                      s=0                           s=0


The individual is subject to the true budget constraint in (4), and thus she will revise her con-

sumption plans in subsequent periods. Equation (5) reveals two errors. On the right-hand side of

the inequality, the person misperceives the intertemporal prices of consumption. This is the price

effect of EGB, and it can be further decomposed into a perceived income effect and a perceived

substitution effect. On the left hand side, the person misperceives the value of her wealth. This is

the wealth effect of EGB.2
  2
      Endogenizing labor supply decisions would add a further substitution effect to lifetime earnings.




                                                                6
   The theory takes αi as an exogenous primitive. A broader interpretation considers αi as the

output of a production process that inputs numeracy, the ability to use tools, available tools,

effort, attention, and intrinsic ability. This broader interpretation allows αi to vary for the same

person based on education, the availability of tools, and incentives, and is a helpful way to think

about the distributional results in Section 4.1 which presents the joint distribution of αi with other

observables.

   Our interpretation of αi also provides a useful way to think about the joint distribution with

financial literacy. We think of compound-interest perceptions as a component of overall financial

literacy, but in contrast to other financial literacy measures, EGB is formally modeled allowing for

precise point and comparative static predictions of behavior. It is a portable model in the sense that

it can be easily imported to arbitrary economic environments or married to other models of pref-

erences and perceptions. One can estimate a person’s parameter αi and predict their behavior out

of sample in completely different contexts. Thus, even though compound-interest perception may

be considered a component of financial literacy, the model of EGB leads to theoretical predictions

that more aggregate concepts of financial literacy may miss.

   Self-awareness about these biases is predicted to dramatically change behavior in some environ-

ments. When β̂ = β, the person is fully aware of the inconsistency in her time preferences and is

said to be sophisticated; when β̂ > β, she is not fully aware of her bias and is said to be naive. In

some environments, sophisticated individuals could mitigate the behavioral effects of PB by relying

on commitment devices; however, sophisticates do not always do better than naifs (O’Donoghue

and Rabin, 1999a). We discuss this point more in Section 2.2.

   People could also differ in their self-awareness about EGB. The law of iterated expectations

makes it impossible for a person to know that their perceptions are biased in a particular direction,

as this would immediately imply that they should revise their estimates in the opposite direction

of the bias. However, one could be aware of an inability to solve exponential problems while at the

same time not know the direction of the bias (Levy and Tasoff, 2015b). A self-aware person with

EGB could seek out tools and help in order to make better financial decisions, while someone who

is overconfident may not. Empirically, we can investigate how overconfidence relates to economic



                                                  7
outcomes.


2.2   Predictions

Theory predicts an unambiguous positive relationship between δ and retirement savings. In con-

trast, the relationship between β and α with retirement savings is less obvious. The relationship

could be either positive or negative depending on ancillary conditions that are typically unobserved.

Table 1 summarizes the theoretical predictions from the literature and demonstrates the consider-

able ambiguity in the theory literature. Resolution of this ambiguity requires empirical analysis,

which this paper provides.

   Most of the past research regarding present bias analyzes the intuitive relationship that retire-

ment savings should increase in β. The mechanisms differ based on whether people are self-aware

about their bias or not. O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a) show that naive present-biased people

may endlessly procrastinate a costly task that yields future benefit, for example 401(k) enroll-

ment. O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b, 2001) introduce a second mechanism in which a person

with even small amounts of naivete can procrastinate when choice sets are large because, “the

better is the enemy of the good.” A slightly naive present-biased person may forgo choosing a good

enough retirement portfolio immediately in order to to make a better decision in the future, but

then procrastinate. The greater the optimal effort one should expend, the greater the procras-

tination. Laibson (1997, 1998) and Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman (1998) model sophisticated

present-biased agents and show that consumption tracks income and therefore there will be a drop

in consumption at retirement. Sophisticates hold most of their wealth in illiquid investments to

prevent future selves from squandering resources. Diamond and Kőszegi (2003) and Zhang (2013)

endogenize the timing of retirement and show that sophisticated present-biased people may also

save less to prevent their future selves from retiring too early.

   It is also possible that PB can counterintuitively increase saving for both naifs and sophisticates.

Findley and Caliendo (2015) show that when retirement is endogenous naifs may save too much

expecting to retire early. Diamond and Kőszegi (2003) show that sophisticates with endogenous

retirement timing may save more to accommodate an earlier retirement. Similarly, O’Donoghue



                                                   8
Table 1: Review of Theoretical Predictions between Behavioral Parameters and Retirement Savings

  Prediction       Role of Self-     Citations                     Explanation                        Conditions
                   Awareness
  Time Preferences: Long-run discount rate (δ) and Present Bias (β)

  δ    increases   N/A               Samuelson        (1937);      Higher δ implies lower discount-
  savings                            Modigliani and Brum-          ing of future consumption
                                     berg (1954); Frederick et
                                     al. (2002)

  β    increases   Naive             O’Donoghue and Rabin          Procrastination                    Immediate cost, one-
  savings                            (1999a)                                                          time retirement decision

                                     O’Donoghue and Rabin          Large costs of good decisions      Partial naivete, immedi-
                                     (1999b, 2001)                 lead to procrastination            ate cost

                   Sophisticated     Laibson (1997); Laibson       Use illiquid asset as a commit-    Access to a liquid and an
                                     et al. (1998)                 ment technology.                   illiquid asset.

                                     Diamond and Kőszegi           Those with lower β save less to    Choice for retirement
                                     (2003); Zhang (2013)          prevent early retirement.          timing and for savings.

  β    decreases   Naive             Findley   and   Caliendo      Naifs save too much expecting      Choice for retirement
  savings                            (2015)                        to retire young                    timing and for savings.

                   Sophisticated     Diamond and Kőszegi           Those with lower β save more to    Choice for retirement
                                     (2003); Zhang (2013)          accommodate early retirement       timing and for savings
                                     O’Donoghue and Rabin                                             Immediate cost, one-
                                     (1999a)                       Preproperation                     time retirement decision

  Exponential-Growth Bias (α)

  α    increases   Overconfident     Stango    and    Zinman       Underestimate future value of
  savings                            (2009)                        savings; more severe for longer
                                                                   time horizons

                                     Goda et al. (2012)            Price effect of EGB: decom-        EIS > 1
                                                                   posed into a perceived income
                                                                   effect and perceived substitu-
                                                                   tion effect

                                     Levy and Tasoff (2015a)       Price effect of EGB; Wealth ef-    EIS > 1
                                                                   fect of EGB: overestimate the
                                                                   present value of future income

  α    decreases   Overconfident     Goda et al. (2012)            Price effect of EGB                EIS < 1
  savings

                                     Levy and Tasoff (2015a)       Price effect of EGB; Wealth ef-    EIS < 1 and income re-
                                                                   fect of EGB                        ceived sufficiently early.

                                     Levy and Tasoff (2015d)       EGB can cause overestimation       Interest rates vary suffi-
                                                                   of returns, reversing wealth ef-   ciently over time.
                                                                   fect

  α does not af-   Aware of error,   Levy and Tasoff (2015b)       People who misestimate expo-       Existence      of   well-
  fect savings     but unaware of                                  nential growth can outsource fi-   functioning market for
                   bias                                            nancial decisions                  financial services.




                                                               9
and Rabin (1999a) show that sophisticates may exhibit preproperation, locking themselves into

savings commitments immediately due to pessimism about their future behavior.

      Similar theoretical ambiguity surrounds α. Stango and Zinman (2009) explain how underes-

timating the future value of savings could result in lower savings and this effect is magnified for

longer time horizons. Goda et al. (2012) and Levy and Tasoff (2015a) explain that the price effect

of EGB depends on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS). When the EIS > 1, EGB

leads to lower savings. In addition, the wealth effect of EGB will also lead to lower savings. But

the opposite relationship is also possible. When the EIS < 1 and income is mostly received early in

the lifecycle (i.e. the wealth effect of EGB is small), EGB can increase savings.3 To further com-

plicate the issue, when returns are time-varying, a person with EGB can overestimate the return

since the person perceives the mean return to be closer to the arithmetic mean than the correct

geometric mean. Thus with time-varying returns the predictions can potentially be reversed (Levy

and Tasoff, 2015d). Finally, it is also possible for there to be no association between α and saving.

If a biased person is aware that she cannot do the computations (while remaining unaware of the

direction of her bias), she can hire someone or purchase tools to help her make better financial

decisions. Ultimately, the effect of these biases on retirement savings is an empirical question for

which theory, with limited information about context, cannot give unambiguous answers.


2.3      Previous Empirical Findings

There is surprisingly little research that has measured these behavioral parameters in broad cross-

sections of the population. To our knowledge, the only other paper to have directly elicited time

preferences in a broad cross-section of the U.S. is Heutel et al. (2014). Eisenhauer and Ventura

(2006), Dohmen et al. (2012), and Enzler et al. (2014) measure time preferences in representative

Italian, German, and Swiss samples. The only papers to have measured the marginal distribution

of EGB are Stango and Zinman (2009) and Levy and Tasoff (2015a). No papers have measured

their joint distribution, nor the joint distributions with IQ or financial literacy.

      The extant literature on time preferences and retirement savings has measured the relationship
  3
      For a typical earnings profile, however, the wealth effect will dominate.




                                                            10
in indirect ways. Early studies fit models of consumption and wealth accumulation to panel data

to infer time preferences (Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001; Angeletos, Laibson, Repetto,

Tobacman and Weinberg, 2001). More recent studies have used proxy measures of time prefer-

ences. van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2012) used smoking and heavy drinking as a proxy for time

preference and found no association with net worth. Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2003) use a time

preference elicitation measure that potentially identifies the long-run discount factor but does not

identify PB.4 More recently, Brown and Previtero (2014) take an ecological approach to measur-

ing procrastination. They use administrative data to show that those who sign up on the last

day of their health care open enrollment period contribute less to their retirement savings plans,

and are more likely to stick to default allocations. Our study is most similar to recent work by

Eisenhauer and Ventura (2006) and Heutel et al. (2014) who measure time preferences in a similar

way to us, with broad samples in Italy and the U.S. Eisenhauer and Ventura (2006) find that PB

preferences and a dichotomous variable of whether or not the person has contributed to a pension

are significantly related; however the only control in the regression is income. Heutel et al. (2014)

correlate their measures of time preference with the dichotomous variable of having any retirement

savings. They do not find a relationship between retirement savings and PB, although they do find

a significant correlation with the long-run discount factor δ.

       There are no other studies that directly associate EGB with retirement savings. Stango and

Zinman (2009) use the responses to a series of questions in the Survey of Consumer Finances in

which participants estimate APR from a repayment schedule. They find a significant correlation

between this payment bias and short-term debt, share of savings in equity, savings rate, net worth,

and use of financial advice. Levy and Tasoff (2015a) directly measure EGB and find that it is

significantly associated with total savings, but do not have data on retirement saving or time

preferences. Goda et al. (2014) and Song (2012) conduct field experiments designed to counteract

EGB and find that informational interventions are effective at increasing retirement saving. Levy

and Tasoff (2015c) conduct a theoretically motivated lab experiment in which subjects have a
   4
    Their elicitation involves a hypothetical scenario in which a person is presumed to be 50 and then lives to 80,
there is no inflation and all medical expenses are covered. The person must choose how to allocate their entire wealth
between ages 50–64, 65–79, and a bequest.




                                                         11
consumption-savings task, and validate the lifecycle predictions of the model of EGB. None of

these experiments establish a link between the bias and savings behavior.

        There is a sizable literature that has measured the association of other related observables

with retirement savings. Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2003) find that the propensity to plan is

predictive of retirement savings. Ameriks, Caplin, Leahy and Tyler (2007) construct a measure of

self-control and find that it predicts net worth but not retirement assets. The literature on the

relationship between financial literacy and retirement savings finds significant associations between

financial literacy and retirement planning (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007; van Rooij, Lusardi and

Alessie, 2012). Using four different measures of financial literacy in the American Life Panel (with

one of the measures including 70 items), Hung, Parker and Yoong (2009) replicate this association.

They also find that these measures correlate with having ever saved for retirement but not with

one’s 401(k) balance.5 van Rooij et al. (2012) additionally find that financial literacy is correlated

with net worth and Banks et al. (2010) find that numeracy is highly predictive of net worth while

controlling for other cognitive measures.

        To summarize, there remains a large gap in the literature connecting direct measures of time

preferences and EGB with retirement savings. Relating direct measures to retirement savings is

important for building evidence regarding a causal relationship and is important for measuring the

impact of these biases.



3        Study Design and Data

Data collection took place online and comprised two surveys that were administered several weeks

apart. The two-wave design allowed us to separate measurement of retirement and other financial

outcomes from the treatments in our hypothetical choice experiment as well as to mitigate concerns

of single-source bias in measuring the relationship between our key parameters of interest and

retirement wealth. A complete list of content covered in each survey is provided in Table A.1.

        We administered our survey to two distinct samples: 1) the RAND American Life Panel (ALP),

and 2) the Understanding America Study (UAS) administered by University of Southern California.
    5
        Only one of the four measures is found to be significant at the p < 0.1 level.


                                                             12
The ALP is a sample of approximately 5,000 adults, while UAS consists of approximately 2,000

adults. To achieve representativeness, both ALP and UAS invite subjects to join the sample

through random sampling techniques and provide a laptop or tablet as well as internet services to

individuals invited to join who do not have such access. In both samples, subjects are regularly

invited to take online surveys and are typically paid a fixed amount based on the length of the

survey.6

       We collected our data in multiple cohorts between August 2014 and June 2015.7 Overall, we

invited 4,700 individuals to participate; 2,601 completed Survey 1, and 2,393 completed Survey 2

(response rate of 51% based on Survey 2). Among the respondents, we restrict our main analysis

sample to the 2,317 individuals with usable responses for our variables of interest. We use this

sample to evaluate the distribution of EGB and time preferences as well as the relationship with

retirement savings and other financial outcomes. Appendix Table B.1 shows select demographic

and economic variables obtained for non-respondents and our estimation sample. Respondents were

on average older than non-respondents, but not richer after controlling for age.


3.1      Parameter Elicitations

3.1.1      Exponential-Growth Bias Elicitation

To elicit the α described in Section 2, we asked participants five real-stakes questions about the

value of different assets that involve compound interest calculations. The full text of the questions

can be found in Figures A.1–A.5 in Appendix A. In contrast to past survey measures of financial

literacy our participants earned payments based on the accuracy of their responses to these five

questions. Most respondents could earn up to $3 per question, for a maximum of $15.8 One out of

20 participants were randomly assigned to a high-stakes group where the earnings were multiplied

by 5 and provided up to $15 for each question answered, for a maximum total of $75.

       Subjects were neither encouraged nor prohibited from getting help or using calculators. The

instructions stated, “You may use whatever approaches you would like to answer these questions.”
   6
     The rate is approximately $20 per 30 minutes.
   7
     This was done for budgeting purposes due to uncertainty on response rates and performance of subjects on
real-stakes questions. See Table A.2 for information on the timing and response rate of each cohort.
   8
     Participants earned $3 if their response was within 10% of the correct answer, $2 within 25%, and $1 within 50%.


                                                         13
This way we identify subjects’ perceptions of exponential growth in the same unrestricted environ-

ment in which most people make their important financial decisions. Furthermore, by providing

financial stakes, these questions may be more likely to induce individuals to rely on the resources

they would typically use to make economic decisions.9

       We use the method in Levy and Tasoff (2015a) to identify αi . Let subject i’s responses on

question j ∈ {1, ..., 5} be denoted by yij , and the correct response be given by cj . Let ~a(α) :
          |J |
R → R+ be a function that generates the answers consistent with a given level of α on the five

questions. Thus ~a(1) is a vector containing the five correct answers. To measure subject-i’s degree

of EGB, we calculate the value of αi which minimizes the mean squared error of the model against

their actual answers, with each question normalized by the correct answer:

                                                     5
                                                                              !2
                                                   1X   yij − aj (α)
                                   Alpha = arg min                                                               (6)
                                                α 5
                                                    j=1
                                                            aj (1)


       We also measure subjects’ self-awareness of their EGB. After completing the five compound-

interest questions, we asked subjects to choose between their performance earnings or an automatic

specified payment using a multiple-price list. We define overconfidence as the difference between

a subjects’ minimum acceptable payment and their performance earnings, as a fraction of possible

earnings: (certain payment − perf ormance earnings)/(max earnings). This measure takes on

the value of 0 when a person’s evaluation of their performance earnings is equal to their true

performance earnings. The measure takes on the value of 1 when a person values her performance

earnings maximally but true performance earnings are zero, and -1 when a person values her

performance earnings at 0 when the true performance earnings are maximal.10

       Table 2 displays summary statistics for the key variables of interest in the study, including

Alpha. Recall that a value of 1 indicates accurate perception of exponential growth, while a value

of 0 indicates individuals perceive the growth to be linear. The sample mean of Alpha is 0.57,

with a standard deviation of 0.49. Self-awareness of one’s misunderstanding of exponential growth
   9
     We use reports of tool use and help from others as well as the amount of financial incentives as part of our
instrumental variables strategy to address measurement error in α; see Table 9.
  10
     Risk aversion will cause a person to value the certain money over the risky performance earnings. This will bias
down a person’s elicited overconfidence; thus our measure is a lower bound. In our empirical analysis of retirement
savings, we control for risk preferences.


                                                         14
                     Table 2: Behavioral Parameters and Survey Constructs
                                            mean     sd    min    max
                      Alpha                 0.571 0.489 0.000 3.000
                      Beta                  1.028 0.208 0.468 2.135
                      Delta                 0.708 0.172 0.461 0.985
                      Imputed Beta          0.140 0.347 0.000 1.000
                      Imputed Delta         0.097 0.296 0.000 1.000
                      Fin Lit               2.570 0.699 0.000 3.000
                      IQ Measure            2.412 1.521 0.000 5.000
                      Missing Fin Lit       0.001 0.029 0.000 1.000
                      Missing IQ Measure 0.003 0.055 0.000 1.000
                      Sophisticated         0.486 0.500 0.000 1.000
                      Overconfidence        0.308 0.380 -1.000 1.000
                      Observations           2317
                   Notes: Imputed Beta and Delta refer to observations reaching a
                   corner in the staircase elicitation task. Fin Lit refers to number of
                   questions correct (out of 3). IQ Measure refers to number of questions
                   correct (out of 5).



is low: the mean value of overconfidence is 0.31, indicating that individuals are overconfident on

average. This evidence is consistent with laboratory findings (Levy and Tasoff, 2015b).


3.1.2   Time Preference Elicitation

We adapt the time-staircase procedure from Falk, Becker, Dohmen, Huffman and Sunde (2014) to

identify three time preference parameters (β, δ, β̂) as described in Section 2. The staircases have

the form:

Present-Future Staircase: Would you rather receive $100 today or $[X] in 12 months?

Future-Future Staircase: Would you rather receive $120 in 12 months or $[Y] in 24 months?

Prediction Staircase: Suppose that 12 months from now, you are going to be given the choice
    between the following: receiving a payment on that day (that is, 12 months from today) or a
    payment 12 months later (that is, 24 months from today) . . . Do you think you would rather
    choose to receive $110 on that day or $[Z] 12 months later?


   In our survey instrument, the future value X was always greater than 100, Y was always greater

than 120, and Z was always greater than 110. If the subject indicated they prefer the money sooner

(later), the second dollar amount increases (decreases) on the next question. For each staircase,

                                                    15
subjects answer five questions, gradually narrowing the interval that contains the indifference point.

Since the questions are binary and have parallel structure, they are easily understood and can be

answered very quickly. In order to remove potential bias from individuals mechanically repeating

answers, we randomize the order of the Present-Future, Future-Future, and Prediction Staircases

and utilize different base values for the different sets of questions (i.e., the Present-Future Staircase

always begins with $100 today, the Future-Future Staircase with $120 in 12 months, and the

Prediction Staircase with $110 on the day 12 months from now). While this staircase method did

not involve real stakes, Falk et al. (2014) show that behavior between a no-stakes and real-stakes

version is highly correlated.1112

       We identify βi , δi , and β̂i because each staircase identifies an indifference point within a fairly

small interval.13 From the Future-Future Staircase, Delta = 120/Ycutoff . We impute the cutoff

as the midpoint of the interval.14 Likewise we do the same midpoint imputation for the other

staircases. From the Present-Future Staircase Betai = 100/(Deltai Xcutoff ), and from the Prediction
          [ i = 110/(Deltai Zcutoff ). We use Beta
Staircase Beta                                [ i to construct a measure of self-awareness of

one’s time-inconsistent tendencies. We construct a binary measure of sophistication that equals 1
                   [ i ≤ Betai and 0 otherwise.15
if an individual’s Beta

       The summary statistics for the time preference parameters are displayed in Table 2. The

average value of Beta is 1.03, which corresponds to approximately time-consistent preferences on

average; however, there is substantial variation (standard deviation of 0.21). In terms of self-
  11
     The authors find a correlation between the staircase measures and incentivized experimental measures of 0.5241.
This is impressively high given that the correlation is close to the test-retest correlation of 0.6637 for the incentivized
experiment.
  12
     Recently real-effort tasks have been used to measure time preference (Augenblick, Niederle and Sprenger, 2015),
however there is yet no evidence that these measures correlate with other economic behaviors, while there is quite
a large literature that suggests that the monetary elicitations do (see Section 2.3 for a summary). Augenblick,
Niederle and Sprenger (2015) find that real-effort and monetary elicitations do not correlate with each other. We
also conducted a real-effort time-preference elicitation as well but use the monetary elicitation in our main analysis
given some likely confounds to our effort elicitation. See Appendix A for a brief description.
  13
     We cannot identify the indifference point for those who select the upper bound of the time staircase. In this
case, we use the upper bound value plus the difference between that value and the second-to-last value to determine
the indifference point. We include a dummy variable for those with these imputed values in the analysis. Beta is
imputed for 14% of our sample, while Delta is imputed for 9.7% of our sample.
  14
     Inputting the midpoint bounds the magnitude of the error to be quite small. The magnitude of the error on δ,
for example, is bounded to be below about 0.015.
  15                                                     [ i directly in the regression because Beta
     We use an indicator variable instead of including Beta                                         [ i is near collinear
with Betai with a correlation of r = 0.61.




                                                            16
awareness of present-biased preferences, 49% of the sample is sophisticated. The average value of

our annual Delta is 0.71; again, there is substantial variation (standard deviation of 0.17). By way

of comparison, Heutel et al. (2014) calculate an average monthly value of Delta as 0.846 and an

average value of Beta as 0.936 using a slightly different elicitation procedure.


3.2      Financial Literacy and Cognitive Ability Measures

Recent research has devoted much attention to measuring and describing the relationship between

financial literacy, numeracy, and financial decisions (e.g. van Rooij et al., 2012; Banks et al., 2010;

Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014). While we consider α as a component of financial literacy, we depart

from past research by focusing on this behavioral parameter that is specific, yet portable to many

economic decisions. Notwithstanding, it is useful to determine to what extent our measure of EGB

is related to existing measures of financial literacy as well as cognitive ability.

       For financial literacy, we include the 3-item battery of financial literacy questions developed

by Lusardi and Mitchell (2011) and widely-used since then (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014). Because

this 3-item financial literacy assessment does not include a question that isolates understanding of

compound interest, it is useful to determine to what extent Alpha is related to this highly-used

metric as well as whether EGB uniquely predicts financial decisions over and above general financial

literacy.

       Similarly, we evaluate whether EGB is distinct from general cognitive ability by using a measure

developed by selecting a subset of items from the public-domain assessment tool International

Cognitive Ability Resource (ICAR) (Condon and Revelle, 2014).16 The original ICAR test includes

a total of 60 items grouped into four dimensions: verbal reasoning, letter and number series, matrix

reasoning, and three-dimensional rotation. From the validated 16-item subset of ICAR, we selected

5 questions to measure cognitive reasoning that represent the four dimensions and that also vary

in the percent of respondents who answered correctly in past research (ranging from 17% to 73%
  16
    This tool is designed to increase the measurement of cognitive ability by being a free and flexible tool for
researchers. Privately owned tools, such as the Raven’s Standard Progression Matrix (RSPM) test, are cost-prohibitive
and cumbersome to incorporate into large-scale data collection. RSPM is currently owned by Pearson and use requires
subjects to enter a private-domain portal; items cannot be directly incorporated into existing surveys.




                                                         17
correct).17

       Table 2 reports summary statistics for these financial literacy and cognitive ability proxies. The

average number correct on the 3-item financial literacy battery is 2.57 out of 3; 68% answered all

3 questions correctly, a rate much higher than the 34% found by Lusardi and Mitchell (2014).18

The average number correct on the cognitive ability test was 2.41 out of 5; only 8.9% answered all

5 questions correctly.


3.3      Household Financial and Background Information

Our main wealth accumulation measure of interest is retirement savings. We also collect data

on several other financial outcomes for the household, including non-retirement savings, housing

(equity and mortgages), asset allocation (retirement and non-retirement assets), debts (secured and

unsecured), net worth, payday loan utilization, bankruptcy filings, and current access to employer-

provided retirement plans (offering, enrollment and contributions). We evaluate the relationship

between these outcomes and our EGB and time preference measures.

       Table 3 reports the summary statistics for these financial outcomes.19 Average retirement sav-

ings is $132,926 with a standard deviation of $276,052; 31% of the sample has no retirement savings.

The mean and median retirement savings in our sample conditional on having any retirement sav-

ings is $191,298 and $59,500, respectively. These moments match well with recent data from the

Survey of Consumer Finances, which reports 49.2% of Americans having any retirement savings,

and a conditional mean and median of $201,300 and $59,000 in 2013 (Bricker et al., 2014).

       Average non-retirement savings is much lower with a mean of $51,665 and standard deviation

of $155,025. For measures of debt, the largest debt holding is mortgage debt , followed by secured

and unsecured debt .20 Average net worth is $330,771, with substantial variation (sd=$941,044).
  17
     We used the same number of ICAR questions as as we did to elicit our estimate of EGB in order to keep the
measurement error to a similar magnitude.
  18
     This higher percentage correct could be due to the fact that many individuals in the ALP sample have been
asked this same battery of questions in previous surveys. In robustness checks, we also use individuals’ scores from
the first time they faced these questions in the ALP, which lowers the average score to 2.39.
  19
     We winsorize retirement savings, non-retirement savings, and outstanding mortgage for the top 1%, and net
worth for the bottom and top 0.5%.
  20
     Our measures of both secured and unsecured debt come from categorical responses, and we use the midpoints of
each category in order to impute a continuous value. The categories are: less than 1,000; between 1,000 and 10,000;
between 10,000 and 50,000; between 50,000 and 100,000; between 100,000 and 250,000; and 250,000 or more.


                                                        18
About 7.7% of the sample used short-term loans (such as payday loans) in the last five years and

5.6% declared bankruptcy in the past 5 years.

      Table 3: Retirement Savings, Non-Retirement Savings, Debt and Financial Outcomes
                                               mean        sd      min       max
          Retirement Savings                  132,926 276,052       0      1700000
          Has Any Retirement Savings            .695     .461       0          1
          Non-Retirement Savings               51,665 155,025       0      1100000
          Outstanding Mortgage                 56,160   94,624      0      460,000
          Other Secured Debt                   16,478   37,347     500     250,000
          Unsecured Debt                       13,334   28,425     500     250,000
          Net Worth                           330,771 941,044 -245,500 9639000
          Short-Term Loan (last 5 years)       .0768     .266       0          1
          Declared Bankruptcy (last 5 years)   .0561      .23       0          1
          Observations                          2317
           Notes: Retirement Savings, Non-Retirement Savings, Outstanding Mortgages Winsorized
           for top 1%. Net Worth Winsorized for top 0.5%. Other Secured Debt and Unsecured
           Debt represent midpoints from categorical responses.


   Because variation in the aforementioned financial outcomes may be due to variation in household

attributes other than time preference and EGB, we use a rich set of controls in the analysis. Table

4 reports the summary statistics for many of these measures. We conduct a real-stakes elicitation

of risk preferences using individuals’ choice over lotteries. Individuals could earn payments based

on whether a coin flip ends in heads or tails. They choose from 6 options, from equal payments for

heads or tails (Category 1) up to $15 for heads and $0 for tails (Category 6). The proportion of the

sample in each risk category is included in Table 4. We also collect information through our survey

on annual income (own and spouse’s) and financial decision making (expected age for claiming

retirement benefits, and whether the respondent is the financial decision maker in the household).

Finally, the ALP and UAS also include a rich set of background information on each respondent,

including gender, age, marital status, number of household members, state of residence, ethnicity,

work status, highest education, and occupation category. The average age is 51.5 years, 60% of the

sample is married, and 55% of the sample is female. We include the variables listed in Table 4 as

controls in our regression analysis.




                                                     19
                        Table 4: Demographic Controls
                                   mean         sd             min        max
Age                               51.474     15.156          18.000     96.000
Female                             0.551      0.498           0.000      1.000
Family Income                    66600.279 55841.256          0.000    2.00e+05
Education
  HS or Less                          0.189      0.391       0.000       1.000
  Some College                        0.239      0.427       0.000       1.000
  Assoc Degree                        0.122      0.328       0.000       1.000
  BA/BS Degree                        0.267      0.443       0.000       1.000
  Post BA/BS                          0.183      0.387       0.000       1.000
Marital Status
  Married/Partnered                   0.600      0.490       0.000       1.000
  Separated                           0.023      0.150       0.000       1.000
  Divorced                            0.144      0.351       0.000       1.000
  Widowed                             0.049      0.216       0.000       1.000
  Never Married                       0.184      0.387       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000
Add’l HH Members                      0.997      1.098       0.000       3.000
Num of Children                       0.725      1.179       0.000       9.000
Hispanic/Latino                       0.130      0.337       0.000       1.000
Race
  White/Caucasian                     0.791      0.407       0.000       1.000
  Black/African American              0.112      0.316       0.000       1.000
  American Indian                     0.011      0.103       0.000       1.000
  Asian                               0.031      0.174       0.000       1.000
  Other                               0.054      0.227       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.000      0.021       0.000       1.000
Risk Aversion
  Category 1                          0.339      0.474       0.000       1.000
  Category 2                          0.166      0.372       0.000       1.000
  Category 3                          0.164      0.371       0.000       1.000
  Category 4                          0.077      0.267       0.000       1.000
  Category 5                          0.042      0.201       0.000       1.000
  Category 6                          0.208      0.406       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.003      0.055       0.000       1.000
Observations                          2317
Notes: Family Income shown Winsorized for top 5%. Higher risk aversion categories
represent decreasing risk aversion.




                                         20
4         Results

4.1        Relationship between EGB, PB, and other individual characteristics

In this section, to facilitate description, we categorize individuals into four EGB types: Linear,

Below Exponential, Accurate, and Above Exponential. The types partition the range of Alpha,

based on the incentive ranges used in our elicitation task. Accurate types perform well on the

five α-elicitation items, earn full incentive payments, have values of Alpha in [0.9523, 1.045) and

comprise 22% of the sample. Linear types severely underestimate exponential growth. They

have values of Alpha in [0, 0.01), which would earn them $0 in the α-elicitation. Twenty-nine

percent of the sample falls in this category. Below Exponential types have values of Alpha between

Linear and Accurate, and earn intermediate payments. They underestimate exponential growth

to an intermediate degree and make up 41% of the sample. Above Exponential types overestimate

exponential growth with values of Alpha ≥ 1.045 and comprise 8% of the sample.21 We also divide

individuals into either present biased (Beta< 1) or not present biased (Beta≥1). Fifty-five percent

of our sample falls into the present bias category.

         Measurement of both EGB and PB in the same sample permits estimation of the joint distribu-

tion of both biases. Just 10% of individuals are both accurate with respect to exponential growth

and not present biased. The other 90% display one or both types of bias. Figure 1 presents the

share of people falling into each of the 8 EGB×PB categories. The correlation between Alpha and

Beta is -0.036 (p = 0.08) suggesting that the biases are independent and not strongly correlated

(Appendix Table B.2).

         We explore how Alpha, Beta, Delta, overconfidence and sophistication relate to conventional

demographic characteristics and our measures of financial literacy and IQ by regressing our survey

constructs on these items. Table 5 displays the results for selected demographic characteristics.

We also present evidence on correlates of our measure of financial literacy (excluding the financial

literacy measure itself from the list of regressors) in the last column of Table 5.

         Overall, we find little explanatory power from standard demographics for our survey constructs,
    21
    The distribution of Alpha is quite similar to the only other representative sample measure found in Levy and
Tasoff (2015a) who find a mean of 0.53 and a median of 0.60.



                                                      21
                   Table 5: Predictors of Alpha, Beta, Delta, Overconfidence, Sophistication and Financial Literacy Measures
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                         Alpha         Beta        Delta      Beta × Delta       Overconf.      Sophis.     Fin Lit
                            IQ Measure (Std.)          0.094∗∗∗     -0.013∗∗     0.017∗∗∗       0.010∗∗∗         -0.048∗∗∗       -0.019     0.197∗∗∗
                                                        (0.012)      (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.019)
                            Fin Lit (Std.)                0.000     0.015∗∗∗       -0.004        0.007∗             -0.016        0.017
                                                        (0.013)      (0.006)      (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.010)      (0.013)
                            Some Coll                     0.055       -0.022       -0.003         -0.014            -0.039        0.018       0.154∗∗
                                                        (0.034)      (0.015)      (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.027)      (0.033)       (0.064)
                            Assoc Degree                  0.008       -0.026        0.016          0.005            -0.025        0.036      0.221∗∗∗
                                                        (0.038)      (0.017)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.031)      (0.039)       (0.074)
                            BA/BS Degree               0.073∗∗        -0.017       0.014           0.007          -0.061∗∗       -0.031     0.262∗∗∗
                                                        (0.034)      (0.015)      (0.011)        (0.011)           (0.027)      (0.035)       (0.063)
                            Post BA/BS                    0.053        0.007     0.028∗∗        0.038∗∗∗         -0.092∗∗∗       -0.023     0.291∗∗∗
                                                        (0.040)      (0.017)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.029)      (0.040)       (0.066)
                            Female=1                     -0.028        0.004       -0.010         -0.011            -0.004       -0.016     -0.157∗∗∗




22
                                                        (0.021)      (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.007)           (0.017)      (0.022)       (0.037)
                            Black/Afr American           -0.050        0.004       -0.000         -0.003          0.122∗∗∗        0.008     -0.427∗∗∗
                                                        (0.036)      (0.017)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.029)      (0.037)       (0.075)
                            American Indian              -0.101       -0.003       -0.031         -0.041             0.037       -0.084        -0.316
                                                        (0.095)      (0.049)      (0.025)        (0.026)           (0.086)      (0.105)       (0.192)
                            Asian                        -0.014      -0.043∗        0.027         -0.002            -0.006       -0.024        0.105
                                                        (0.061)      (0.022)      (0.018)        (0.019)           (0.050)      (0.063)       (0.083)
                            Other Race                   0.030        -0.030       0.020          -0.002            -0.018        0.016      -0.298∗∗
                                                        (0.050)      (0.023)      (0.015)        (0.015)           (0.041)      (0.054)       (0.118)
                            Hispanic/Latino            -0.069∗      0.052∗∗∗     -0.028∗∗         0.003           0.093∗∗∗        0.014     -0.313∗∗∗
                                                        (0.041)      (0.019)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.031)      (0.042)       (0.081)

                            Adj R2                       .0638        .0944        .295             .294            .0894        .0514        .302
                            N                            2,317        2,317        2,317           2,317            2,317        2,317        2,317

     Notes: Controls also include indicator variables for marital status, number of household members, number of children, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year
     age groups, and 17 income categories. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
                     Figure 1: Joint Distribution of Present Bias and EG Bias
                                              percent
                                                         18.6

                                                 13.2
                                                                             9.5

                                                                                       3.8
                      Present Bias
                                       Not
                                                         22.1

                                                 15.4
                                                                             12.7


                                                                                       4.7


                                     Biased
                                                Linear   Below             Accurate   Above
                                                                 EG Bias




though there are some exceptions. For instance, we find statistically significant relationships be-

tween Hispanic/Latino and Alpha, overconfidence, and time preferences. We also find a significant

relationship between higher levels of education and Alpha, Delta, and overconfidence. By contrast,

our measure of financial literacy is strongly correlated with our IQ measure as well as education,

gender, race, and ethnicity.

   The results in Column (1) suggest that a one standard deviation increase in our measure of IQ

is associated with a 0.094 (p < 0.01) increase in Alpha. While Alpha is not significantly correlated

with a standard measure of financial literacy, the linear specification misses the nonlinearity in the

relationship between the two. In the appendix, Figure B.1 presents predicted IQ scores by EGB

category from a regression of our IQ measure on EGB category indicators and all other controls.

After conditioning on the controls, individuals in the Accurate EGB category have the highest

average predicted IQ scores, those with Linear EGB have the lowest, and those with moderate

levels of EGB (either above or below exponential growth) have average levels. While our measure

of financial literacy appears unrelated to Alpha in Table 5, in Figure B.2 the relationship has a

nonlinearity similar to that shown with IQ but with magnitudes about one-fourth the size. These

weak and non-monotonic associations warrant analysis of EGB independent of other observables

such as financial literacy or cognitive ability.


                                                                23
       In conclusion, this first look at the joint distribution of EGB and time preferences, along with

measures of self-awareness and conventional characteristics reveals new insights. First, Alpha and

Beta appear to be largely independent rather than correlated. Second, with some exceptions, we

measure weak or small relationships with conventional characteristics. This finding suggests that

these measures identify latent behavioral parameters that cannot be explained using demographic

and conventional measures.


4.2      Retirement savings

Consistent with much of the theoretical literature, we hypothesize that retirement savings are in-

creasing in Alpha, Beta, and Delta. We would like to estimate the causal effects of these parameters.

Ideally, we would randomly shock individuals’ values of these characteristics before they enter the

labor market, wait while they make consumption and saving decisions over the lifecycle, and mea-

sure retirement saving levels. Of course, this is not feasible. Instead, to isolate the associations of

interest, we condition on a rich set of control variables. We assess causal interpretations in more

detail in Section 6.

       Our main specification regresses outcomes on Alpha, ln(Beta), ln(Delta), and a rich set of

demographic and economic controls.22 In Table 6, Column (1), we begin with a set of controls that

are plausibly exogenous to the behavioral parameters: indicator variables for age in 10-year bins,

gender, marital status, size of household, number of children, racial group, Hispanic ethnicity, risk-

aversion categories, state of residence, and missing values. The coefficient on Alpha, $54,782, can be

interpreted as an estimate of how much more retirement savings those with accurate perceptions

of exponential growth (Alpha=1) have over those who misperceive exponential growth as linear

(Alpha=0). The results imply that a one standard deviation difference in Alpha (0.489) is associated

with an $26,800 difference in retirement savings. The $130,336 estimated coefficient on ln(Beta)

implies that a difference of one standard deviation of ln(Beta) (0.181) is associated with a $23,600

difference in retirement savings. Finally, the coefficient of $184,766 on ln(Delta) implies that a one

standard deviation increase in long-run patience (0.252) is associated with a $46,600 difference in
  22
   We use log-transformed values of Beta and Delta because our survey questions directly identify Delta and Beta
× Delta, rather than each separately. Using ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) in the regression analysis nests ln(Beta × Delta).


                                                         24
               Table 6: Relationship between Alpha, Beta, Delta and Retirement Wealth
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
              Alpha                 54,782∗∗∗ 30,320∗∗∗             27,325∗∗∗ 18,216∗∗
                                    (11,823)   (10,514)             (10,561)   (8,717)
              ln(Beta)             130,336 ∗∗∗ 68,653 ∗∗∗           69,908 ∗∗∗ 45,966∗
                                    (28,579)   (25,752)             (26,089) (24,737)
              ln(Delta)            184,766 ∗∗∗ 83,198 ∗∗∗ 64,511 ∗∗ 80,923∗∗∗ 49,408∗
                                    (30,945)   (28,241) (25,071) (27,981) (26,113)
              Fin Lit (Std.)                                2,903     1,822     -822
                                                           (4,443)   (4,509)   (6,310)
              IQ Measure (Std.)                           11,394∗∗   8,995∗     5,571
                                                           (5,082)   (5,086)   (4,690)
              Demog Controls           Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
              Add’l Controls           No         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes

              Mean of Dep Var              132,926         132,926        132,926        132,926        97,313
              Adj R2                        0.177           0.367          0.365          0.367         0.375
              N                             2,317           2,317          2,317          2,317         2,317

Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Demographic controls include indicator variables for female, marital
status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, and 10-year
age groups. Additional controls include indicator variables for highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age
groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.



retirement savings. All coefficients are statistically significant at levels p < 0.01.

    Next, to help address large sources of omitted-variable bias in Column (1), Column (2) reports

the results after adding control variables that strongly determine the level of retirement savings

and which we expect, in part, are driven by EGB or time preferences: education level, retirement

status, indicators for household income in 17 bins and all age-income interactions. Unsurprisingly,

the adjusted-R2 rises considerably when we add these controls, to 0.367. The coefficients on Alpha,

ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) each fall by around half and all remain highly significant statistically and

economically. Given the sample’s mean outcome of $132,926 in retirement savings, the estimated

$30,320 coefficient on Alpha implies that the difference between those with accurate perceptions

of exponential growth and those with linear perceptions is about 23% of the outcome mean. A

standard deviation difference in Alpha, ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) is associated with differences of

11%, 9%, and 16% of retirement savings, respectively.

    In Column (3), we include standardized financial literacy and our standardized IQ measure,



                                                              25
but for comparability with past studies exclude Alpha and ln(Beta). The estimated coefficient

on financial literacy is $2,903 and represents the average difference in retirement wealth for those

with a one standard deviation difference in financial literacy. The coefficient is small and not

statistically significant. The coefficient on our standardized IQ measure, $11,394, is statistically

significant (p = 0.025) and suggests a one standard deviation increase in IQ is associated with

$11,394 in additional retirement savings.

   Specification (4) produces our main result by including Alpha, ln(Beta), ln(Delta) along with

our standardized financial literacy and IQ measures and the full set of controls. The estimated

coefficients on our behavioral parameters change little from the specification in Columns (2) which

exclude financial literacy and IQ. These coefficients imply that a one standard deviation difference

in Alpha, ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) are associated with $13,400, $12,700, and $20,400 differences in

retirement savings, repsectively. All coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level. A one

standard deviation difference in the IQ measure is associated with an $8,995 (p < 0.10) difference

in retirement saving, and financial literacy is statistically insignificant. In sum, direct measures

of time preference and EGB have independent power to empirically explain retirement savings

conditional on measures of general cognitive skill, financial literacy, and a rich set of controls.

   We show robustness to alternative specifications of our behavioral parameters and dependent

variable in Appendix Table C.1. Our results are robust to including Beta and Delta linearly and

including higher-order terms. We find no evidence that there is an interaction effect between Alpha

and ln(Beta). When we use our baseline specification to predict having any retirement savings, we

find that ln(Delta) is statistically significant but no evidence that Alpha or ln(Beta) predict this

outcome. All three behavioral parameters predict retirement savings conditional on having wealth,

and ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) are both statistically significant predictors of ln(Retirement Wealth).

   Our baseline specification assumes that the effect of Alpha, ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) on retirement

wealth is homogenous after controlling for demographics and economic covariates. We examine

heterogeneity across several margins in Section 4.5. Here, however, we focus on heterogeneity

across age. Because accumulated retirement wealth is a stock variable which reflects the entire

history of past saving decisions, it is reasonable to expect that the behavioral factors will have a



                                                  26
greater effect on the savings of those approaching retirement. We therefore run a variant of the

specification in Column (4) of Table 6, but interact Alpha, ln(Beta), ln(Delta), Fin Lit, and IQ

with a quadratic in age.

                               The average marginal effects of each of these factors for ages 30–65 is shown, along with 95%

confidence intervals, in Figure 2. All five factors display an upward-sloping trajectory. That is, the

cumulative effect of impatience or EGB is increasing with age. None of the factors are significant

for 30–40 year-olds, but we estimate very large and highly significant effects for people over 50.

Thus specification (4) may understate the effects for people nearing retirement. In contrast, we do

not find a significant relationship at any age between financial literacy or IQ and retirement wealth

after controlling for EGB and PB, although a similar increasing pattern exists for these variables..

Figure 2: Heterogeneous Effects of Alpha, ln(Beta), ln(Delta), Financial Literacy and IQ Measure
on Retirement Wealth By Age

                                    Alpha                                              ln(Beta)                                           ln(Delta)                                           Fin Lit (Std.)                                     IQ Measure (Std.)
  50000 100000 150000 200000




                                                     50000 100000 150000 200000




                                                                                                        50000 100000 150000 200000




                                                                                                                                                            50000 100000 150000 200000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50000 100000 150000 200000
  0




                                                     0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
  −50000




                                                     −50000




                                                                                                        −50000




                                                                                                                                                            −50000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −50000



                               30   40     50   60                                30   40     50   60                                30   40      50   60                                30     40     50      60                                30   40     50   60
                                         Age                                                Age                                                 Age                                                  Age                                                   Age




Notes: Average marginal effects on Winsorized retirement wealth. All parameters are interacted with a quadratic in age in a
common regression equation. Demographic controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household
members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, and 10-year age groups. Additional
controls include indicator variables for highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income
category interactions. 95% confidence intervals shown.



                               Some selection into the ALP and UAS samples, and response to our survey, means our analytic

sample differs slightly from a nationally-representative population. Specification (5) uses weighted

least-squares (WLS) to attempt to adjust for demographic differences between our analytic sample

and the national population, applying weights provided by the ALP and UAS for this purpose. The

weighted sample appears younger, 46.8 instead of 51.5 average years of age. The estimated rela-


                                                                                                                                               27
tionships between time preferences and EGB with retirement savings using WLS are all somewhat

smaller, though only a little smaller as a proportion of average wealth, which makes sense given

the evidence in Figure 2 as this analysis gives less weight to individuals in or close to retirement

and more weight to those who have had less time to accumulate retirement savings. We focus our

analysis on the unweighted sample and provide analogous results using weighted least-squares in

Appendix D.


4.3    Other Financial Outcomes

Next, we look beyond retirement savings to study the relationship between Alpha, ln(Beta), and

ln(Delta) and other items on the household balance sheet. We regress non-retirement savings,

outstanding mortgage, measures of secured and unsecured debt, net worth, and recent use of payday

loans or bankruptcy filings on Alpha, ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) and our other baseline controls using

the specification in Column (4) in Table 6 and report the results in Table 7.

   Column (1) presents the relationship between our parameters and non-retirement savings. As

predicted by theory, time preferences matter in savings accumulation more generally. A one stan-

dard deviation difference in ln(Beta) (ln(Delta)) is associated with $12,600 ($14,200) in additional

non-retirement saving. We do not find evidence of a significant relationship between EGB and non-

retirement saving. This lack of evidence is not surprising, as wealth held in non-retirement accounts

tends to be for more immediate needs and EGB is less important for shorter savings horizons. IQ

has a statistically significant but quantitatively small relationship. We do not find evidence that

financial literacy is associated with differences in non-retirement savings when controlling for other

factors.

   Time-preference parameters have strong relationships with outstanding mortgage debt levels

in the expected direction as seen in Column (2). Those who are more time-consistent borrow

less (p < 0.10). A one standard deviation higher level of ln(Beta) is associated with -$3,600 less

mortgage debt, corresponding to 6% of the mean level. We do not find evidence of a significant

relationship between mortgage levels and ln(Delta), EGB or our IQ measure. Our model indicates

that a person with a standard deviation higher financial literacy has $5,062 more in mortgage



                                                 28
                                  Table 7: Relationship between Alpha, Beta, Delta and Wealth, Debt, and Net Worth
                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)
                                           Non-Ret Savings        Mortgage       Sec Debt      Unsec Debt       Net Worth       Payday Loan        Bankruptcy
                  Alpha                           865               4,514            -401         904              36,885           -.0187            -.0112
                                                (5,916)            (3,781)        (1,700)       (1,318)           (32,613)         (.0119)           (.0104)
                  ln(Beta)                    69,734∗∗∗           -20,107∗            392        5,641          302,799∗∗           .0353            .00471
                                               (17,875)           (10,319)        (3,966)       (4,005)          (122,536)         (.0421)           (.0351)
                  ln(Delta)                   56,191∗∗∗            -16,139          3,903         640           355,536∗∗∗          -.0126            -.0275
                                               (15,643)            (9,819)        (3,900)       (3,090)           (99,447)         (.0299)           (.0264)
                  Fin Lit (Std.)                 -1,007           5,062∗∗∗           -457       -1,271∗             583             -.0041           .00508
                                                (2,774)            (1,824)          (837)        (760)            (19,398)        (.00867)          (.00673)




29
                  IQ Measure (Std.)             6,499∗              -38.2          -1,322         -877             -1,802          -.00913           -.00645
                                                (3,578)            (2,270)          (981)        (765)            (25,128)        (.00703)          (.00653)
                  Controls                        Yes                Yes             Yes          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

                  Mean of Dep Var                51,665             56,160        16,478          13,334          330,771            .0768             .0561
                  Adj R2                         0.209              0.232         0.017           0.096            0.252             0.093             0.016
                  N                              2,317              2,317         2,317           2,317            2,317             2,317             2,317

     Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in table. All wealth outcomes are Winsorized. Secured and unsecured debt represent midpoint of categorical response.
     Payday loan and bankruptcy outcomes equal one if respondent used payday loan or declared bankruptcy in last five years. Controls include indicator variables for
     female, marital status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of
     education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
debt (p<0.01), a somewhat counterintuitive finding.23 We do not find evidence that any of the

parameters have a significant relationship with measures of other secured debt (Column (3)). We

find that those with one standard deviation higher financial literacy report $1,271 less unsecured

debt (p < 0.10) but do not find significant relationships with other parameters (Column (4)).24

       Net worth is the sum of retirement savings, non-retirement saving and housing equity, less

secured and unsecured debt. Consistent with the previous results, Column (5) shows that time

preferences have a strong relationship with net worth. A one standard deviation difference in

ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) is associated with $54,800 (p<0.05) and $89,600 (p<0.01) higher net worth.

The association with Alpha is present mainly for retirement savings, which is only one component

of net worth, and it is not significant here. The estimated coefficients on both IQ and financial

literacy are both small and statistically insignificant.

       Finally, we test for relationships with indicators of whether the individual used a payday loan

or declared bankruptcy in the last five years and report the results in Columns (6) and (7). Despite

our long time window, these are reportedly rare events, with base rates of 7.7 and 5.6 percent.

Given the low power, we find no evidence that our parameters are associated with these outcomes.

       In sum, the model of time preference explains variation in multiple components of the house-

hold balance sheet and is reinforced in net worth. Present bias and long-run patience each have

explanatory power. In contrast, EGB appears to matter for retirement savings but not for other

financial outcomes. General cognitive ability conditional on education, income, time preferences,

EGB and other controls displays some explanatory force for retirement and non-retirement savings.

Conditional on all the other predictors, higher financial literacy is associated with somewhat higher

levels of mortgage debt and lower levels of unsecured debt.
  23
     Given the tax advantages of mortgage debt, and historically low interest rates at the time, it may be reasonable
for financially sophisticated people to hold larger mortgages.
  24
     Because our measures of secured and unsecured debt represent the midpoints of categorical responses, we have
considerably less power to detect associations. However, the relationships we report are robust to representing these
measures with categorical variables using ordered probit/logit regressions or using the intervals to perform interval
regressions.




                                                         30
       Table 8: Relationship between Overconfidence, Sophistication and Retirement Wealth
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
             Alpha                      21,509∗    27,270∗∗     27,273∗∗      21,407∗
                                       (11,051)    (10,603)     (10,601)      (11,060)
             Overconfidence            -23,655  ∗                            -24,059∗∗
                                       (12,143)                               (12,151)
             ln(Beta)                  69,248  ∗∗∗ 75,420  ∗∗∗ 112,653  ∗∗∗ 110,894∗∗∗
                                       (26,427)    (27,393)     (42,619)      (42,633)
             Sophisticated                           -4,748       -4,193        -4,642
                                                   (10,798)     (10,727)      (10,739)
             Sophisticated × ln(Beta)                            -65,964       -67,204
                                                                (50,731)      (50,822)
             ln(Delta)                 78,158∗∗∗ 80,640∗∗∗ 79,861∗∗∗         77,316∗∗∗
                                       (28,035)    (28,015)     (28,001)      (28,026)
             Fin Lit (Std.)              1,398        1,764        1,668        1,336
                                        (4,550)     (4,577)      (4,574)       (4,548)
             IQ Measure (Std.)           8,752∗     9,248∗        9,352∗        8,759∗
                                        (5,132)     (5,144)      (5,151)       (5,151)
             Controls                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

               Mean of Dep Var                       132,926        132,926         132,926          132,926
               Adj R2                                 0.368          0.367           0.367            0.368
               N                                      2,317          2,317           2,317            2,317

Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status,
number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups,
highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the
10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.



4.4     Self-awareness

We next turn to the effect of self-awareness about one’s biases on retirement savings. Self-awareness

has the potential to mitigate the impact of the biases. For instance, a person who is aware of her

EGB could rely on the market to acquire tools or seek advice, and a sophisticated present-biased

person could use commitment devices to control the impulses of her future selves. Sophistication

or partial sophistication also has the potential to backfire through preproperation (O’Donoghue

and Rabin, 1999a) and engaging in futile attempts at self control (Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2009).

Theory therefore predicts that overconfidence in exponential estimation should go in the opposite

direction to the direct effect of Alpha, but the effect of sophistication regarding PB on savings is

ambiguous.


                                                              31
   Table 8 shows the relationship between these variables and retirement savings. Column (1)

adds overconfidence as an independent variable to our baseline specification from Column (4) in

Table 6. Recall that the variable can take on values between [-1,1] with 0 indicating neither

over- nor underconfidence, negative values indicating underconfidence and positive values indicat-

ing overconfidence. The estimated coefficient on overconfidence is -$23,655 (p < 0.10). Those with

one standard deviation higher overconfidence have about $9,000 lower retirement savings, about

7% of the mean level. Including overconfidence in the specification leads the coefficient on Alpha

to decrease by about a fifth, to $21,509, and to become marginally significant (p < 0.10). In

contrast, estimated coefficients on other factors barely change. These results suggest that people

with Alpha=0 may have quite different levels of savings: one who is fully self-aware of making an

error will save $23,655 more than one who believes there is no error. Some caution is warranted in

interpreting this result, however, as EGB and overconfidence are strongly — though not mechan-

ically — positively correlated. We reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients on Alpha and

overconfidence are jointly zero (p = 0.005).

   Columns (2) and (3) show the effect of self-awareness of PB on retirement savings. Recall that
                                                                        [ i ≤ Betai . Column (2)
sophistication is an indicator variable that takes on the value of 1 if Beta

shows that the inclusion of sophistication directly into the model has no meaningful effect directly

on retirement savings nor on the coefficient on ln(Beta). In Column (3) we interact sophistication

with ln(Beta). The coefficient on ln(Beta) increases to $112,653 and the interaction term is negative

but insignificant at -$65,964. That is, the interaction represents a 58% reduction in the effect of

ln(Beta), and is marginally significant when expressed as this ratio (p = 0.061). This evidence

is consistent with the notion that sophistication mitigates the self-control problems caused by

high present bias. The regression is the first to our knowledge that uses an elicited measure of

sophistication to predict savings outcomes. In Column (4), we include the full set of self-awareness

variables — overconfidence, sophistication, and the interaction between sophistication and ln(Beta)

— and find results quantitatively similar to those when each was added independently.




                                                 32
4.5   Heterogeneity in the effects of EGB and time preferences on retirement
      savings

The effects of the behavioral parameters may vary as a function of observable characteristics.

Appendix Table C.2 shows the baseline regression among split samples of the population. We

examine how our estimates differ by income, whether the respondent is the financial head, marital

status, age, gender, education, among those offered employer retirement plans, and among those

enrolled in employer retirement plans. We also report the p-values of tests for equality on the

coefficients for Alpha, ln(Beta), ln(Delta), and all three jointly at the bottom of the table.

   We find evidence that the effects of Alpha, ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) differ among those with

income above and below the median. In particular, the effects are large in magnitude and statisti-

cally significant for those with above-median income, and indistinguishable from zero for those with

below-median income. These differences are likely to be driven by the large differences in retirement

wealth across the two groups. While the coefficients on ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) for financial heads

are larger in magnitude than those for non-financial heads, the coefficient on Alpha is smaller and

none are statistically distinguishable across the two groups.

   We next examine differences by marital status, age, gender, and education. While both average

retirement savings and the coefficients on our parameters of interest are larger for married respon-

dents, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the effects of Alpha, ln(Beta), and ln(Delta) differ

by marital status. The differences we document by age are consistent with those shown in Figure

2, which showed effects that are increasing in age. Only the effects of ln(Beta) differ across gender,

with higher coefficients for men, and the coefficients on Alpha and ln(Delta) are higher for more

highly educated respondents than for those with lower levels of education.

   Finally, we explore the role of institutions in the relationship between our parameters of interest

and retirement savings. In particular, we look for differences in the effects of Alpha, ln(Beta), and

ln(Delta) across those offered and not offered an employer savings plan, and across those enrolled

and not enrolled in their employer savings plan. We do not find evidence that our behavioral

parameters effect people across these groups differently.




                                                 33
4.6      Classical measurement error

While the preceding analysis has taken our measures of the behavioral parameters as given, they are

of course only estimates of the true underlying parameters. The measure of EGB is estimated from

a five-item incentivized task, while the time preference parameters are calculated from responses

to three sets of unincentivized questions. Our methodology enables us to compute exact parameter

values, but it is quite likely that they contain a substantial amount of measurement error. To the

extent that it is classical, the subsequent attenuation bias will reduce our estimated effects. We

therefore seek to address potential measurement error with both an instrumental variables and an

errors-in-variables approach.

       We have several potential instruments for both EGB and time preference parameters. Following

the incentivized EGB questions, we asked subjects to report what tools they used and what help

they received in completing the task.25 People with a greater tendency to use tools or seek out

help may have a higher expressed Alpha. We also use whether respondents were randomized to

receive higher stakes on the incentivized questions. Under the assumption that the use of help

and tools and the stakes on these particular questions only affects retirement savings through EGB

after controlling for economic and demographic observables, using these as instruments for Alpha

will allow us to quantify the bias on our estimate of Alpha stemming from classical measurement

error.

       To address the measurement error in time preferences, we use simple psychological questions

(SPQs) that are designed to ask people about their time preferences using plain language. We have

subjects rank the following statements on a 5-point Likert scale: “I do things when I originally

planned to do them,” “I am willing to give up something that is beneficial today in order to

receive a greater benefit in the future,” and “I tend to postpone tasks even if I know it would

be better to do them right away.”26 By using SPQs one can obtain correlates of the underlying

preference parameters in a frugal and simple manner. Alone, the SPQs cannot be used to give point

estimates of the preference parameters, but when paired with parameter elicitations, as done in
  25
     Specifically, we asked whether they used any of the following tools: pencil-and-paper, a calculator, a spreadsheet,
or other. We also asked if they received help from: a spouse, another family member, a friend, or other.
  26
     The first question was developed for this study. The latter two questions were designed and found to be significant
predictors by Falk et al. (2014).


                                                          34
                        Table 9: Adjustments for Classical Measurement Error
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)                                   (5)
         Alpha                      27,446∗∗∗ 179,132∗∗     21,366∗∗   144,707∗∗                              157,973∗∗
                                     (10,592)   (75,138)    (10,648)    (67,003)                               (72,580)
         ln(Beta × Delta)           77,632  ∗∗∗ 62,270 ∗∗  403,794 ∗∗∗ 396,392∗∗∗                             302,696∗∗
                                     (23,164)   (24,760)    (89,175)    (93,307)                              (119,140)
         Controls                      Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes                                    Yes

         Mean of Dep Var                      132,926        132,926          132,926          132,926         132,926
         F-Stat (Alpha)                                      12.189                             4.640
         F-Stat (ln(Beta × Delta))                                            10.855            7.578
         Over ID p-value                                       0.896           0.960            0.992
         Adj R2                                0.368           0.300           0.310            0.267
         N                                     2,317           2,317          2,317             2,317           2,317

Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Instruments for Alpha include high stakes and tool use. Instruments
for ln(Beta × Delta) include SPQs as described in text. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number
of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest
level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. Column (5) shows estimates
from errors-in-variables regression. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.



this analysis, a statistical relationship between the SPQs and the underlying behavioral parameters

can be estimated. The SPQs can then be used as instruments to control for classical measurement

error in the elicited parameter. This method is a straightforward application of the standard IV

approach to address measurement error but, to our knowledge, has not previously been used to

address measurement error in elicited behavioral parameters.27

       In principle, our three SPQs would be sufficient to instrument separately for short-run and

long-run time preferences (i.e., both ln(Beta) and ln(Delta)). In practice, however, these SPQs

were a weak instrument for ln(Beta) separately and so we use the SPQs as instruments for total

discounting (ln(Beta × Delta)) in this section.28

       Table 9 presents the results of our approach to addressing measurement error in our independent

variables. We first report the results of our baseline OLS regression, using the aggregate time

preference measure ln(Beta × Delta) rather than ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) separately. The results

are very similar to the baseline regression for both EGB and time preferences. In Column (2),

we use only the help and tools indicator variables to instrument for Alpha. We have a strong
  27
       We report summary statistics of our instruments in Appendix Table B.4.
  28
       We report the results of our first stage regressions in Appendix Table C.6.



                                                               35
first stage (F = 12.19), and the coefficient on Alpha increases roughly ten-fold to $179,100. This

amounts to roughly doubling the average retirement savings in our sample when moving from the

linear (Alpha=0) to the unbiased (Alpha=1) type. While considerably larger than our baseline

regression, this coefficient is in fact not significantly different from the finding in Levy and Tasoff

(2015a) which used a 10-item EGB measure and found a coefficient of $93,500 on total savings

(without controlling for time preferences).

   Column (3) of Table 9 instruments for ln(Beta × Delta) with our three simple psychological

questions, but does not instrument for Alpha. Again we have a strong first stage (F = 10.86),

and the coefficient on ln(Beta × Delta) is considerably increased to $403,794. For comparability,

this coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in our time preference measure is

associated with a $101,000 increase in retirement wealth.

   We find a similar result when we simultaneously instrument for both Alpha and ln(Beta ×

Delta) in Column (4). The coefficients are slightly reduced, to $144,707 and $396,392 respectively,

but remain strongly significant and considerably larger than the OLS estimates. While we urge

caution in using these coefficients rather than the more conservative OLS coefficients, we note that

there is great value in using SPQs to control for classical measurement error of elicited behavioral

parameters.

   Finally, we attempt to address measurement error in our parameters with an alternative ap-

proach. We re-contacted a random subsample of 50 subjects, and re-elicited our parameters. This

allows us to estimate the reliability of our measures, and use this estimate to run an errors-in-

variables regression in Column (5) of Table 9. The full table of correlations and reliabilities for

this sample appear in Appendix Table B.3. The results are remarkably similar to the instrumental

variables approach. The coefficient on Alpha increases to $157,973, and is significant at p = 0.0296.

The coefficient on ln(Beta × Delta) is also similar to the IV coefficient at $302,696, and remains

significant at p = 0.011.




                                                  36
5         Hypothetical Choice Experiment

The central challenge in identifying a causal effect of our behavioral parameters on retirement

wealth is that they are not randomly assigned. Fundamental to the data-generating process is the

possibility that parameters may be endogenous to the outcome or correlated with some omitted

variable. In this section, we describe methods and results from an experiment designed to generate

further evidence on whether the observed conditional association between our behavioral parameters

and retirement savings is causal.

         We design an intervention specifically targeted at counteracting EGB and another specifically

targeted at counteracting PB on an individual’s choice of retirement contributions. We randomly

assign the interventions and measure their effects on hypothetical-savings choices. As in prior stud-

ies that look at effects on real economic outcomes (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Thaler and Benartzi,

2004; Chetty et al., 2014; Goda et al., 2014), our interventions affect average behavior in the pre-

dicted direction. Unlike most prior studies, we have individual-level measures of biases and can

test whether the interventions have larger effects among those with more bias than among those

with less bias.29 A bias-counteracting treatment should affect behavior more among those with

bias than it does among those without bias.

         That is, we run a regression of the form:



                                    yi = γ0 + γ1 Xi + γ2 Ti + γ3 Ti Xi + ui                                     (7)

where Ti is a treatment which may have a direct effect on the outcome yi , and an interaction with

the bias Xi . The concern is that E[u|X] 6= E[u], in which case regressing outcomes on Xi among

un-treated subjects will lead to a biased estimate of γ1 . Despite this, (7) in fact does lead to a

consistent estimate of γ3 if E[u|X, T ]=E[u|X]. This condition states that the relationship between

any omitted variables and the observed measure of bias does not differ between the treatment and

control groups.30 Thus we require that the treatments narrowly target the biases, and do not
    29
     A notable exception is Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006) who measure time preferences and interact them with a
commitment-savings treatment.
  30
     Nizalova and Murtazashvili (2014) derive general conditions on the consistency of OLS estimation of such inter-
action terms. We extend their approach by noting that, as the treatment may at most fully compensate for the bias,



                                                        37
operate through interaction with an omitted variable. The fact that we designed the treatments

exactly for this purpose and randomly assigned them gives the condition credibility here.

    For this method to provide evidence on the causal relationship between the behavioral param-

eters and retirement savings it must also be the case that behavior in the hypothetical scenario

is correlated with real retirement-saving decisions. The control condition is therefore designed as

an ecologically “naturalÕÕ environment. Consistent with this claim , hypothetical contributions

in the control condition are strongly positively correlated with actual contributions in employer-

sponsored retirement plans (correlation r = .46, p < 0.001). Furthermore, the effect of the EGB

treatments on hypothetical contributions are similar to those documented in Goda et al. (2014),

where similar treatments were fielded and changes in real contributions were tracked.

    Our outcomes are retirement-savings choices in a hypothetical scenario involving the intro-

duction of a match in an employer-provided retirement plan. The treatments involved varying

how the value of the new, hypothetical employer match was displayed (EGB Treatments) and the

provision of incentives for completing paperwork necessary for making a contribution change (PB

Treatments).


5.1    Design

Similar to Goda, Manchester and Sojourner (2014), we delivered the EGB Treatments through an

embedded online calculator that displayed the value of the employer match.31 The first treatment

condition (Balance) showed a projected account balance at retirement based on a hypothetical

contribution amount, investment return, and retirement age entered by the respondent, while the

second treatment condition (Income) displayed a projected annual income in retirement based on

the same assumptions as the first treatment.32 The control condition only displayed the annual value
the consistently-estimated γ3 may also serve as a lower bound on the magnitude of the direct effect of the bias, γ1 .
That is, because the interventions may not fully shift behavior of biased types to the behavior of unbiased types γ3
is a lower bound on the main effect of the behavioral parameter.
   31
      The value of the employer match was randomized to be $0.50 or $1.00 per dollar contributed by the employee.
Respondents were required to use the calculator tool at least once before continuing with the survey and they could
use it as many times as they liked.
   32
      Calculations were based on the annualized value of hypothetical contribution amounts and were assumed to
be made annually at the end of each year with no inflation and no intermediate withdrawals from the account.
The starting value for the investment return and retirement age was randomized across individuals. Individuals
were provided with default investment returns of either 3%, 5%, or 7% with equal probability. Individuals were


                                                         38
of the employer match based on the hypothetical contribution amount entered by the respondent;

this was also displayed in each treatment condition. Survey 1 also included a hypothetical choice

scenario involving the introduction of a matching component, but all respondents viewed the same

information (i.e., the control condition). Data from Survey 1 serve as part of the control sample.

    Images of the calculator survey page are shown in Figures A.6 through A.8 in Appendix A. In

the framework of Ambuehl et al. (2014), the EGB Treatments may be considered as simply-framed

choice sets relative to the complexly-framed choice set in the control. Goda et al. (2014) reports

results from a field experiment among employees at the University of Minnesota where projections

like these were delivered via mail along with retirement-planning forms and access to an online

calculator was offered via email. There, Income projections increased average individual retirement

contributions to employer-sponsored accounts.

    The PB Treatment dimension provided incentives to complete the stated 60 minutes of paper-

work required for making a contribution change to the hypothetical savings plan as a result of the

new match. The first treatment condition (Incentive) informed respondents that they would receive

a hypothetical $50 payment if they completed the paperwork, while the second treatment condition

(Incentives + Deadline) included this same payment, but imposed a deadline that the respondent

needed to complete the paperwork within one week in order to earn the payment.33 The control

condition provided no additional information on the page. The treatments were administered in

a fully-crossed design over these two dimensions, resulting in a total of 9 experimental groups (8

treatment groups and 1 pure control group).

    We examine the effects of our EGB treatment on the amount that subjects would contribute in

response to the hypothetical employer match and our PB treatment on the timing of completing

the paperwork required to make any change. Our measure of contributions includes all changes

without the burden of completing paperwork.34 Our analysis of the effects of our treatment on post-
also provided with default retirement ages of either 65 or 67 with equal probability. The projected annual income
in retirement was calculated based on applying an age- and gender-specific annuity factor to the aforementioned
projected account balance at retirement (Goda, Manchester and Sojourner, 2014).
  33
     Due to ERISA guidelines that prevent direct incentives for changing contribution amounts, we inform respondents
that on the paperwork they may elect to make no change in their contributions. Images of the PB Treatments are
shown in Figures A.9 through A.11.
  34
     If respondents did not choose to make a change, they were offered another opportunity to make a change, where
the change was “as simple as clicking a button.”



                                                        39
match contributions control for the respondents’ pre-match contributions (before any experimental

manipulation was delivered) and its square. We examine the effects of our PB Treatments on the

timing of completing the necessary paperwork (i.e., today, later this week, after one week, or never).

We use responses from both Survey 1 and Survey 2, which includes a total of 4,081 observations.35


5.2      Results

We investigate both the overall average treatment effect for each intervention, and heterogeneity in

the treatment effect based on underlying behavioral parameters. Magnitudes should be interpreted

with caution given that outcomes are hypothetical.36 In what follows, we focus on the signs of the

key coefficients.

       We first examine the effects of the EGB Treatments and heterogeneous effects by Alpha in

Table 10. The outcome variable that we examine is post-match hypothetical contributions, con-

trolling for one’s pre-match hypothetical contributions.37 Column (1) reports the effects of the

EGB Treatments on post-match hypothetical contributions. We find that the Income treatment,

which presented the value of the employer match as an annual income stream in retirement, had

the largest estimated effect on ideal contributions: individuals in the income treatment increased

their post-match contributions by $685 a year more than the control group. The Balance treatment

also had a positive effect on post-match contributions ($467 relative to the control group), but the

effect is only marginally significant (p = 0.075).38

       The next two columns investigate whether there is evidence that the treatments had a hetero-

geneous effect on those with and without EGB. Column (2) of Table 10 represents Alpha linearly,

and Column (3) uses a quadratic functional form for Alpha. Our hypothesis is that the interaction

between the treatment effects and Alpha is negative, implying that the treatments have a stronger

effect on those with higher levels of EGB. Given the directional prediction of our model, we per-
  35
     Summary statistics for these outcomes are reported in Appendix Table B.5.
  36
     However, behavior in the experiment is highly correlated with actual savings choices. Individuals’ pre-match
hypothetical contributions are strongly positively correlated with their reported actual level of contributions to
employer-sponsored retirement plans (correlation r = .46, p < 0.001).
  37
     We also control for ln(Beta), ln(Delta), the PB Treatments, the randomized match, and our baseline set of
demographic controls.
  38
     The direction of these results is consistent with Goda, Manchester and Sojourner (2014). We also cannot reject
the null that the treatment effect for the Balance and Income treatments are equivalent.


                                                        40
Table 10: Hypothetical Choice Experiment: Effects of EGB Treatments and Heterogeneity in Alpha
on Post-Match Contributions
                                                        (1)     (2)       (3)
               Alpha                                    119    174    1,125∗∗
                                                       (175) (213)      (489)
               Alpha × Alpha                                           -688∗∗
                                                                        (347)
               Balance Projection                      467∗     406       510
                                                       (265) (348)      (367)
               Income Projection                       685∗∗ 946∗∗∗ 1,154∗∗∗
                                                       (292) (361)      (380)
               Balance Projection × Alpha                       107      -487
                                                              (358)     (714)
               Income Projection × Alpha                       -455   -1,651∗∗
                                                              (336)     (733)
               Balance Projection × Alpha × Alpha                         439
                                                                        (463)
               Income Projection × Alpha × Alpha                        856∗
                                                                        (437)
               ln(Beta)                                 777     787       823
                                                       (520) (519)      (523)
               ln(Delta)                                966     968       955
                                                       (680) (679)      (679)
               Controls                                 Yes    Yes       Yes

                      Mean of Dep Var                                      6,040      6,040        6,040
                      p-value for Heterogeneous
                      Treatment Effects
                        Balance                                                       0.383        0.450
                        Income                                                        0.088        0.024
                      Adj R2                                               0.994      0.994        0.994
                      N                                                    4,081      4,081        4,081

Notes: Dependent variable is post-match hypothetical contribution. Controls include indicator variables for survey number, PB
Treatment indicator variables, randomized match and quadratic in pre-match hypothetical contribution. Additional controls
include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state
of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups
× income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.




                                                               41
form a one-sided test of the hypothesis that individuals with accurate understanding of EGB (i.e,

Alpha=1) respond less than those with the most EGB (i.e., Alpha=0) for each of the EGB Treat-

ments and report the corresponding p-values at the bottom of these columns for each of the EGB

Treatments. The interaction reveals an effect of EGB on contributions. In both specifications, we

reject the null hypothesis that the Income treatment had the same effect on biased and unbiased

types. However, we find no evidence that the Balance treatment had heterogeneous treatment

effects by Alpha.

   Table 11 reports the effects of the PB Treatments on both the timing and post-match contribu-

tion amounts. Overall treatment effects are reported in Column (1), while Columns (2)-(3) report

interactions between our treatments and ln(Beta), and p-values analogous to those provided in Ta-

ble 10. Here, we implement the test by evaluating the effects of each treatment at Beta=1, which

represents time-consistent preferences, and Beta = 0.7, which is commonly used in the literature

to represent time-inconsistent preferences.

   We find that the Incentive + Deadline treatment had a large, statistically significant effect on

timing, increasing the likelihood of making a change this week by 8.3 percentage points (p<0.01).

However, the treatment that only involved incentives had a more modest effect of 4.3 percentage

points (p=0.05).

   The results in Columns (2) and (3) provide only weak evidence that the effects of the PB Treat-

ments are operating through differences in PB. While the point estimates are generally higher for

present-biased individuals than for those who are not present biased, the differences are only statis-

tically significant at conventional levels for the Incentive treatment for the quadratic specification.

The fact that the stronger treatment did not produce heterogeneous treatment effects is surprising;

however, it is consistent with the Deadline providing a focal completion time for time-consistent

individuals (Loewenstein and Prelec, 1991).

   To summarize, in order to find evidence for a causal association between a behavioral trait

and an economic outcome, we test theoretically motivated heterogeneous treatment effects in a

naturalistic environment related to the economic outcome under consideration. To our knowledge,

this approach used for this purpose is novel.



                                                  42
Table 11: Hypothetical Choice Experiment: Effects of PB Treatments and Heterogeneity in Beta
on Paperwork Timing
                                                        (1)      (2)      (3)
             ln(Beta)                                 .115 ∗∗   .12∗∗   .124∗∗
                                                     (.0458)  (.0523)  (.0604)
             ln(Beta) × ln(Beta)                                        -.0433
                                                                        (.122)
             Incentive                               .0428∗   .0437∗     .0182
                                                      (.023)   (.023)  (.0242)
             Inc+Deadline                           .0829∗∗∗ .0822∗∗∗ .0833∗∗∗
                                                      (.022)  (.0221)  (.0227)
             Incentive × ln(Beta)                              -.0875  -.262∗∗∗
                                                              (.0886)     (.1)
             Inc+Deadline × ln(Beta)                            .0489    .0621
                                                              (.0931)    (.11)
             Incentive × ln(Beta) × ln(Beta)                           .859∗∗∗
                                                                        (.212)
             Inc+Deadline × ln(Beta) × ln(Beta)                         -.0595
                                                                        (.247)
             Alpha                                    -.0202   -.0206   -.0204
                                                     (.0153)  (.0153)  (.0153)
             ln(Delta)                               .0687  ∗ .0688  ∗  .0688∗
                                                     (.0389)  (.0389)  (.0388)
             Controls                                   Yes      Yes      Yes

                   Mean of Dep Var                                         .79           .79           .79
                   p-value for Heterogeneous
                   Treatment Effects
                     Incentive                                                         0.162         0.000
                     Inc+Deadline                                                      0.300         0.317
                   Adj R2                                                0.077         0.077         0.079
                   N                                                     4,081         4,081         4,081

Notes: Dependent variable is indicator variable for making a change within one week. Controls include indicator variables for
survey number, EGB Treatment indicator variables, randomized match and quadratic in pre-match hypothetical contribution.
Additional controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of children,
race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories,
and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.




                                                               43
6     Causality and Alternative Explanations

In this section, we explore some of the remaining threats to causal identification, to the extent

possible given data limitations. In particular, we: show the robustness of our results to alternative

sets of controls to understand the role of omitted-variable bias; discuss the possibility that our

results are driven by reverse causality between wealth and our parameters of interest; and investigate

bias from non-classical measurement error in the elicitation of our key behavioral parameters and

our main retirement wealth outcome.


6.1   Omitted-variable bias

Our main regression specifications already include a rich and flexible set of demographic and be-

havioral controls. However, there are additional factors which could conceivably affect retirement

savings and which could be correlated with our parameters. In addition, alternative ways to

measure financial literacy and IQ could impact the measured relationship between our behavioral

parameters and retirement savings. We use both other survey items we collected and draw upon

linked responses to prior surveys fielded by other researchers and answered by some of the same

respondents.

    We first explore the robustness of our results to additional control variables that may explain

variation in retirement savings and may be correlated with our parameters of interest in Appendix

Table C.3. In Columns (1)–(4), we add additional controls for occupation, employer-provided re-

tirement plan characteristics (match, non-matching contributions), and expected retirement age.

The coefficients on our main parameters are not significantly affected by the inclusion of these ad-

ditional variables and remain strongly significant. A particular concern is that our time-preference

elicitation uses preferences over the timing of receipt of money, and so may be confounded by

liquidity constraints. In Column (5) we add several controls for liquidity constraints (secured and

unsecured debt, home ownership, and housing equity) that were collected in our survey and find

no significant effect on the coefficients of our main parameters. We were additionally able to match

roughly half of our subjects to FICO scores and subjective health measures asked previously in

the online panel, and include these along with the other variables in Columns (6)–(7). Once again


                                                 44
the coefficients are largely unaffected, but the standard errors increase given the sharply reduced

sample. It is thus unlikely that liquidity constraints, variation in health, or job characteristics are

driving our results.

       We also explore the robustness of our results to alternative measures of financial literacy and

IQ in Appendix Table C.4.39 We use two alternative measures of financial literacy: a standardized

score on the same three questions in our financial literacy inventory the first time the subject

answered it in the online panel, and a broader 5-item financial literacy measure from other surveys

in the online panel.40 While we do not lose sample size with the first alternative, our sample size

reduces considerably when we use the broader measure. We also replace our measure of IQ by using

IQ measures from previous specialized surveys. Our coefficient estimates are very consistent across

specifications, though we lose a great deal of power with the reductions in sample size in Columns

(3) and (4).


6.2      Reverse causality

While Section 5 yields consistent estimation internally, it is possible that there remains a problem

of reverse causality outside the experiment.

       If high wealth accumulation led to better understanding of exponential growth or higher levels

of Alpha, we would expect to see a strong association between Alpha and income given the high

correlation between income and wealth. However, we do not find such evidence. Appendix Figure

B.3 shows the predicted effects of each of 17 income categories on Alpha in a regression that

includes our other baseline controls and shows a flat relationship between Alpha and these income

categories. Moreover, replacing the income categories with a continuous income measure results

in a small and statistically insignificant association between income and Alpha (p=0.39). Finally,

when we stratify our sample by income in Table C.2, we continue to find that Alpha has a strong

and important effect on retirement wealth among those with more similar levels of income.

       Moreover, while we find a significant effect of Alpha on retirement wealth, it is notable that in
  39
    Summary statistics of the variables used in this section are reported in Appendix Table B.7.
  40
    This broader measure includes questions on mortgages and the relationship between interest rates and bond
prices.




                                                     45
Table 7 we did not find a significant effect of Alpha on net worth (unlike the time preferences). This

is what we would expect, given that EGB requires a long planning horizon to have any substantial

impact, and retirement savings are likely to be more long-term than other savings goals. If high

Alpha were caused by wealth, however, then one would expect the same relationship with net worth

as with retirement savings.

   While reverse causality between retirement wealth and Alpha is a plausible source of bias in

our findings, most economic research takes preferences such as β and δ as exogenous primitives.

However, if retirement wealth were a determinant of long- or short-run discount factors, we would

expect to see a strong relationship between ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) with income as discussed above.

However, Appendix Figures B.4 and B.5 show a flat relationship between income and ln(Beta) and

ln(Delta). Moreover, the measured correlations between ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) and income are

close to zero and statistically insignificant (r = 0.02, p = 0.31 for ln(Beta) and r = 0.03, p = 0.16

for ln(Delta)).


6.3   Non-classical measurement error

While we address the issue of classical measurement error in Section 4.6, it is also possible that

there is non-classical measurement error which could affect our identification. In particular, if our

measured parameters are correlated with measurement error in retirement wealth, then we would

have a biased estimate of the relationship. For example, it is conceivable that subjects reporting

higher wealth levels would then be “primed” to perform better on our elicitation tasks.

   There are several reasons why non-classical measurement error is unlikely to be explaining our

results. First, our study design already segregates EGB and time preference elicitations into differ-

ent surveys, reducing the possibility that one set of questions contaminates responses to another.

Second, we repeat the analysis using alternative measures of retirement wealth collected from sepa-

rate surveys that have no preference elicitations. In particular, we use a separate retirement wealth

measure collected for a subsample of our subjects in the ALP Financial Crisis Surveys between

2014–2015. We report this alternative regression in Appendix Table C.5. While our estimation

sample is halved, the coefficients on Alpha, ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) remain statistically significant



                                                 46
and in fact increase in magnitude. This evidence suggests that spillovers due to our study design

are unlikely to explain our findings.


6.4      Potential mechanisms

In this section, we explore potential channels through which EGB and PB may influence retirement

wealth accumulation. As described in Section 2, there are many possible channels. For instance,

differences in retirement savings for present-biased versus time-inconsistent individuals could be the

result of lack of adequate retirement planning, which has been shown to influence retirement wealth

(Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003), or delayed enrollment in retirement savings plans. Differences

in retirement savings between those with accurate and biased perceptions of exponential growth

could be due to lower levels of contributions or differences in asset allocation.

      Table 12 reports the results of regressing various potential outcomes on our bias parameters.41

We also include measures of self-awareness (i.e., overconfidence regarding EGB, sophistication, and

its interaction with ln(Beta)) as they are likely to affect consumers’ planning decisions and demand

for commitment devices and advice. All columns include our common set of controls, including IQ

and financial literacy. We also report the mean levels of the dependent variables in the table.

      The first column of Table 12 is a linear regression of the extent to which subjects agree with

the statement “I have thought about planning financially for retirement” (1 = Hardly at all, 4 =

A lot). Our parameters do not appear to predict this outcome, although it is likely that the tests

are underpowered.42 In contrast, financial literacy is strongly positively associated with retirement

planning attitudes, consistent with past research.

      Columns (2) and (3) examine respondents’ use of employer-sponsored retirement accounts. We

restrict the sample in these columns to those subjects whose employer offers such a plan. In Column

(2), we estimate a linear probability model of whether subjects are enrolled in their employer’s

plan or not. We find no evidence that our measures, including financial literacy and IQ, predict

enrollment. One reason this may be the case is if employers implement automatic enrollments and

defaults that result in very little association between one’s own biases and enrollment decisions.
 41
      We report the summary statistics of these outcomes in Appendix Table B.6.
 42
      The outcome comes from a previous wave of the ALP, and we were only able to match 693 subjects.


                                                       47
                                                                     Table 12: Potential Mechanisms
                                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)                               (5)
                                                                Ret Plan Enrolled Cont Amt Inv in Equity                           Housing Share
                            Alpha                                  .0962       -.0368       -23.2     .0279                            -.0133
                                                                 (.0893)       (.033)      (429)    (.0213)                           (.0141)
                            Overconfidence                         -.023       -.0191    -1,298∗∗     .0211                             .0108
                                                                  (.118)      (.0401)       (580)   (.0318)                           (.0182)
                            ln(Beta)                                .359        -.115    3,746∗∗∗    .00486                           -.148∗∗
                                                                  (.434)       (.124)     (1,414)    (.102)                           (.0646)
                            Sophisticated                        .00249         .0189        -302    .00535                           -.00047
                                                                 (.0823)       (.028)      (510)    (.0205)                           (.0135)
                            Sophisticated × ln(Beta)               .0688      -.00762      -1,457      -.02                              .015
                                                                  (.512)       (.169)     (1,969)    (.129)                           (.0797)




48
                            ln(Delta)                              .0745        .0638    4,031∗∗∗     .0428                          -.0997∗∗∗
                                                                   (.21)       (.071)     (1,063)    (.053)                           (.0346)
                            Fin Lit (Std.)                        .108∗∗        .0215        -243   .0311∗∗                             -.012
                                                                 (.0527)      (.0202)      (265)    (.0148)                            (.009)
                            IQ Measure (Std.)                     -.0086       .00891         318     .0163                            -.0099
                                                                 (.0458)       (.015)      (212)    (.0114)                          (.00782)
                            Controls                                Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes                               Yes

                            Mean of Dep Var                         3.16          .766           4,379              .813                  .661
                            Adj R2                                 0.208         0.062           0.179             0.159                 0.320
                            N                                       693          1,146           1,144             1,610                 1,544

     Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in column heading. See text for more details. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of
     household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories,
     and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
Indeed, a large percentage of those offered plans are enrolled (77 percent).

       Column (3) displays the results when current annual contributions to employer-sponsored re-

tirement accounts is the outcome. We find that time preferences significantly predict current con-

tributions: a one standard deviation increase in ln(Beta) increases current contributions by $667,

while a one standard deviation increase in ln(Delta) increases current contributions by $975. While

Alpha does not predict contributions, overconfidence (which is negatively correlated with Alpha)

is a strong predictor: a one standard deviation increase in overconfidence decreases contributions

by $570.

       Finally, we explore whether biased and unbiased individuals invest their assets differently. In

Column (4), we regress an indicator for whether the subject has any retirement savings invested

in equities. We find no evidence that our behavioral parameters affect this outcome, although

financial literacy is significantly positive.43 Column (5) restricts the sample to homeowners, and

uses housing equity as a share of net assets as the outcome. Present-biased agents are predicted to

have more of their savings in illiquid assets such as housing, either because they are sophisticated

and demand a greater share of illiquid assets as in Angeletos et al. (2001) or because they are naive

and simply spend down their liquid savings. We indeed find that both ln(Beta) and ln(Delta) have

a negative and statistically significant relationship with the share of assets in housing (p = 0.022

for ln(Beta) and p = 0.004 for ln(Delta)). These results imply that more impatient consumers are

indeed using illiquid housing wealth as a vehicle for saving more than patient consumers, which

could result in lower levels of retirement wealth accumulation.

       Overall, we find evidence that Alpha operates primarily through reduced contributions among

those who are overconfident in their ability to understand exponential growth. High short- and

long-term discount rates reduce contributions into retirement accounts, and increase the amount

invested in illiquid assets, thus resulting in lower levels of retirement wealth accumulation.
  43
    This finding is consistent with van Rooij et al. (2012), who find that consumers with better financial literacy
achieve higher market returns.




                                                        49
7    Conclusion

The analysis in this paper reveals a robust association between retirement savings, time preferences,

and EGB. We measure the joint distributions of these behavioral parameters, along with self-

awareness of these parameters, financial literacy, and an IQ measure in a broad sample and find

that these measures are largely distinct from each other. The behavioral parameters each have

independent significant and economically meaningful effects on retirement savings after controlling

for a rich set of observable characteristics.

    We bolster this analysis with two additional strategies to provide rigorous indirect evidence:

first, we design a hypothetical choice experiment that delivers treatments designed to mitigate

the biases, and, second, we use available data to assess potential threats to a causal interpreta-

tion, including omitted variable bias, non-classical measurement error, and reverse causality. The

hypothetical-choice experiment shows that randomly-assigned treatments designed to counteract

EGB affected those with greater EGB more strongly than those with less EGB, providing evidence

consistent with a causal relationship. Evidence for heterogeneous treatment effects for the PB

Treatments were weaker. Our analysis of potential threats to causal interpretation reveals consis-

tent support for the behavioral parameters affecting retirement savings. Evaluation of potential

mechanisms points to contribution decisions, rather than asset allocation, as the primary pathway

through which the influence occurs.

    To give a sense of the economic magnitude of the estimated relationships and to assess the overall

implications for retirement savings, we can make a back-of-the-envelope prediction of retirement

savings if EGB and PB were entirely counteracted, under the assumption that both are causally

related to retirement savings. Using our OLS baseline model as a lower bound and our IV model

(that corrects for potential measurement error in bias parameters) as an upper bound, shifting all

those who underestimate exponential growth to accurate understanding, and all those we measure

as present biased to be time consistent, would increase retirement savings by approximately 12–

70%. While the upper bound may seem large, there is substantial room for growth given that over

30 percent of our sample has no retirement savings.

    This research has several implications for the behavioral parameters of interest and financial


                                                 50
outcomes. First, it refines our understanding of the importance of financial literacy in determining

such outcomes. We show that EGB, which is a well-defined component of financial literacy, is

highly influential for part of the household balance sheet, namely saving decisions with a long time

horizon, such as retirement savings. Alternatively, other aspects of financial literacy captured by

standard survey measures do not appear related to retirement savings, but are instead related to

mortgage size, debt, planning behavior and investment in equities.

   Second, we clarify theoretical predictions surrounding EGB and PB. Namely, our empirical

findings suggest that, on average, the income and wealth effects of EGB dominate the substitution

effect in determining retirement saving decisions. Furthermore, our findings highlight the impor-

tance of overconfidence about EGB in explaining why retirement savings contributions are low

for many Americans. By finding that long-run and short-run time preferences similarly influence

economic decisions, our results are inconsistent with theoretical predictions that PB can lead to

higher savings. Additionally, we find support for impatient individuals investing a greater fraction

of their wealth in illiquid assets, specifically housing equity, as a vehicle for saving.

   Finally, our study shows that the measured behavioral parameters are distinct and unlikely to

stem from the same underlying factor. While this has important implications for theory, it also

is potentially important for policy and suggests that a single policy tool is unlikely to address

any misallocations these biases may cause. While defaults and other alternatives have successfully

increased average contributions in many contexts, and retirement income projections may move

people toward better decisions when well-implemented, there is no evidence that these fully coun-

teract the effects of EGB and PB on retirement-saving decisions. Furthermore, interventions aimed

at increasing self-awareness have not been tested in this context. More evidence regarding the

ability of interventions to target biases related to retirement-saving decisions is needed and remains

an important direction for future research.




                                                   51
References
Almenberg, Johan and Christer Gerdes, “Exponential Growth Bias and Financial Literacy,” Applied
  Economics Letters, 2012, 19, 1693–1696.
Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi, “Financial Education, Finan-
  cial Competence, and Consumer Welfare,” NBER Working Paper 20618, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2014.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy, “Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity to Plan,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2003, 118 (3), 1007–1047.
  , , , and Tom Tyler, “Measuring Self-Control Problems,” American Economic Review, June 2007,
  97 (3), 966–972.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
  Weinberg, “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (3), 47–68.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence From a Com-
  mitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 635–672.
Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger, “Working Over Time: Dynamic Inconsis-
  tency in Real Effort Tasks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, Forthcoming.
Banks, James, Cormac O’Dea, and Zoë Oldfield, “Cognitive Function, Numeracy, and Retirement
  Saving Trajectories,” Economic Journal, November 2010, 120, F381–F410.
Benzion, Uri, Alon Granot, and Joseph Yagil, “The Valuation of the Exponential Function and
  Implications for Derived Interest Rates,” Economic Letters, 1992, 38, 299–303.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg, “What Accounts for the Variation
  in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4).
Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John
  Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle, “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from
  2010 to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin 4, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2014.
Brown, Jeffrey and Alessandro Previtero, “Procrastination, Present-Biased Preferences, and Financial
  Behaviors,” August 2014. Working Paper.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen, “Active vs.
  Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1141–1219.
Condon, David M. and William Revelle, “The international cognitive ability resource: Development
  and initial validation of a public-domain measure,” Intelligence, 2014, 43, 52 – 64.
Diamond, Peter and Botond Kőszegi, “Quasi-hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 2003, 87 (9), 1839–1872.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “Interpreting Time Horizon
  Effects in Inter-Temporal Choice,” February 2012. CESifo Working Paper No. 3750.
Eisenhauer, Joseph G. and Luigi Ventura, “The prevalence of hyperbolic discounting: some European
  evidence,” Applied Economics, 2006, 38, 1223–1234.
Eisenstein, Eric M. and Stephen J. Hoch, “Intuitive Compounding: Framing, Temporal Perspective,
  and Expertise,” Working Paper, Cornell University 2007.
Enzler, Heidi Bruderer, Andreas Diekmann, and Reto Meyer, “Subjective Discount Rates in the
  General Population and Their Predictive Power for Energy Saving Behavior,” Energy Policy, 2014, 65,
  524–540.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “An
  Experimentally-Validated Survey Module of Economic Preferences,” February 2014. Working Paper.
Findley, T. Scott and Frank N. Caliendo, “Time Inconsistency and Retirement Choice,” February
  2015. CESifo Working Paper No. 5208.


                                                 52
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, “Time Discounting and Time Pref-
  erence: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2002, 40 (2), 351–401.
Goda, Gopi Shah, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, and Aaron Sojourner, “What Will My Account
  Really Be Worth? An Experiment on Exponential Growth Bias and Retirement Saving,” NBER Working
  Paper 17927, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.
  ,    , and     , “What Will My Account Really Be Worth? Experimental Evidence on How Retirement
  Income Projections Affect Saving,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 119, 80–92.
Heidhues, Paul and Botond Kőszegi, “Futile Attempts at Self-Control,” Journal of the European Eco-
  nomic Association, April–May 2009, 7 (2–3), 423–434.
Heutel, Garth, David Bradford, Charles Courtemanche, Patrick McAlvanah, and Christopher
  Ruhm, “Time Preferences and Consumer Behavior,” July 2014. NBER Working Paper 20320.
Hung, Angela A., Andrew M. Parker, and Joanne K. Yoong, “Defining and Measuring Financial
  Literacy,” September 2009. RAND Labor and Population Working Paper Series.
Investment Company Institute, “The U.S. Retirement Market, Fourth Quarter 2014,” http://www.
  ici.org/info/ret_14_q4_data.xls March 2015.
Keren, Gideon, “Cultural Differences in the Misperception of Exponential Growth,” Perception and Psy-
  chophysics, 1983, 34 (3), 289–293.
Laibson, David, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 62
  (2), 443–477.
  , “Life-cycle Consumption and Hyperbolic Discount Functions,” European Economic Review, 1998, 42 (3),
  861–871.
  , Adrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “Self-Control and Saving for Retirement,” Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 1998, 1, 91–196.
Levy, Matthew R. and Joshua Tasoff, “Exponential Growth Bias and Lifecycle Consumption,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2015, Forthcoming.
    and , “Exponential-Growth Bias and Overconfidence,” March 2015. Working Paper.
    and , “Framing Interest: Misperceptions of Consumption and Savings,” May 2015. Working Paper.
   and , “Misunderestimation: Exponential-Growth Bias and Time-Varying Returns,” July 2015. Working
  Paper.
Loewenstein, George and Drazen Prelec, “Negative Time Preference,” American Economic Review,
  1991, 81 (2), 347–352.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell, “Financial Literacy and Retirement Preparedness: Evidence
  and Implications for Financial Education,” Business Economics, 2007, 42 (1), 35–44.
   and Olivia S. Mitchell, “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do Women Fare?,” American Economic
  Review, 2011, 98 (2), 413–417.
    and , “The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, March 2014, 52 (1), 5–44.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
  and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1525.
McKenzie, Craig R.M. and Michael J. Liersch, “Misunderstanding Savings Growth: Implications for
  Retirement Savings Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2011, 48, S1–S13.
Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg, “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
  Interpretation of Cross Section Data,” in K.K. Kurihara, ed., Post Keynesian Economics, New Brunswick,
  NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1954.
Nizalova, Olena Y. and Irina Murtazashvili, “Exogenous Treatment and Endogenous Factors: Van-
  ishing of Omitted Variable Bias on the Interaction Term,” Journal of Econometric Methods, September
  2014.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic Review, March
  1999, 89 (1), 103–124.



                                                  53
   and , “Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement,” in Henry Aaron, ed., Behavioral Dimensions of
  Retirement Economics, Brookings Institution Press & Russell Sage Foundation, 1999, pp. 125–156.
   and , “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 121–160.
Phelps, Edmund S and Robert A Pollak, “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium
  Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 1968, 35 (2), 185–199.
Samuelson, Paul, “A Note on Measurement of Utility,” Review of Economic Studies, 1937, 116 (40),
  155–61.
Solon, Gary, Steven Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge, “What Are We Weighting For?,” Journal of
  Human Resources, 2015, 50 (2), 301–316.
Song, Changcheng, “Financial Illiteracy and Pension Contributions: A Field Experiment on Compound
  Interest in China,” January 2012. Working Paper.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance,” Journal of
  Finance, December 2009, 64 (6), 2807–2849.
Strotz, Robert H., “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 1956, 23, 165–180.
Thaler, Richard and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase
  Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1), S164–S187.
van Rooij, Maarten C.J., Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob J.M. Alessie, “Financial Literacy, Retire-
  ment Planning and Household Wealth,” Economic Journal, May 2012, 122, 449–478.
Wagenaar, Willem A. and Han Timmers, “The Pond-and-Duckweed Problem: Three Experiments on
  the Misperception of Exponential Growth,” Acta Psychologica, 1979, 43, 239–251.
   and Sabato D. Sagaria, “Misperception of Exponential Growth,” Perception and Psychophysics, 1975,
  18 (6), 416–422.
Westat, “Data Set Aggregation,” Appendix B, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services December
  2006.
Zhang, Lin, “Saving and retirement behavior under quasi-hyperbolic discounting,” Journal of Economics,
  2013, 109 (57–71).




                                                 54
Appendix A               Survey Design
Table A.1 describes the content of each module contained in the two surveys, which were admin-
istered several weeks apart.44 We collected data from four cohorts (cohort 1, 2, and 3 from the
RAND ALP sample, and 4 from the UAS sample) based on date invited to complete Survey 1.
Each cohort subsample was selected at random from the respective survey sample. The number of
invitations, completions, and usable responses are described in Table A.2. We extended the sample
beyond the ALP because we were able to secure additional funding that was conditional on use of
the UAS sample.
    We attempted a real-effort time-preference elicitation in addition to our monetary time-preference
elicitation. However, the fundamental assumption necessary for identification — that people would
be available to do real-effort tasks over the course of three consecutive weeks — largely failed de-
spite requiring this for participation. The free responses indicate that people’s choices for engaging
in tasks over time was primarily influenced by how busy they were over the subsequent three weeks.
We iterated a total of six combination lab and Amazon MTurk pilot experiments to achieve an im-
plementable survey design, but despite this serious attempt “calendar effects” still confounded our
final elicitation. In contrast, Augenblick, Niederle and Sprenger (2015) had several design differ-
ences that reduced this issue. Since it was a lab experiment they could make it clear to subjects that
they needed to participate on multiple occasions. The physical presence of professor-experimenters
with student subjects makes this requirement more emphatic relative to our text-based requirement
of participating in multiple scheduled surveys, which was highly unusual for ALP participants. Au-
genblick, Niederle and Sprenger (2015) were also able to pay contingent on full participation but
we were not. Even still in Augenblick, Niederle and Sprenger (2015) 12% of subjects may have
exhibited some calendar effects as they dropped over the course of the multiple-week experiment.
Our calendar effects were much more severe.




  44
    We used two different elicitation procedures to identify the time-preference parameters: asking for preferences
regarding real-effort tasks for real stakes (Survey 1), and asking for preferences for different sums of money over
time in a hypothetical choice paradigm (Survey 2). Despite careful design and piloting, the former appear to have
measured calendar effects rather than a behavioral time-preference parameter.


                                                        55
                                      Table A.1: Survey Design
Survey   Module                               Description

         Hypothetical Retirement Savings 1    Elicits a baseline hypothetical 401(k) contribution with and
  1                                           without a matching contribution from an employer.

         Background Characteristics 1         Includes measures of income, marital status, retirement sav-
                                              ings, non-retirement savings, asset allocation, primary res-
                                              idence value, mortgage, secured debts, unsecured debts, 3-
                                              question financial literacy, unincentivized compounding in-
                                              terest question, self-reported financial knowledge.

         EG Bias Elicitation                  Elicits subjects’ α and subjects’ overconfidence regarding
                                              their ability to accurately compute solutions to questions
                                              that involve compounding interest (incentivized).

         Real-Effort PB Elicitation           Elicits subjects’ βR , βˆR , δR . Subjects choose how to allocate
                                              effort over time periods: today, next week, two weeks. Sub-
                                              jects must also predict their future WTA for more effortful
                                              tasks (incentivized).

         Risk Elicitation                     Elicits subjects’ coefficient of absolute risk aversion rA . Sub-
                                              jects choose one binary lottery from a menu of binary lot-
                                              teries that have a risk-return tradeoff (incentivized).

         Hypothetical Retirement Savings 2    Subjects are randomized into EGB and PB Treatment
  2                                           groups, each with two treatment conditions and one control,
                                              for a total of 3X3 experimental groups. The pure control
                                              condition is identical to Hypothetical Retirement Savings 1.


         Hypothetical Monetary PB Elicita-    Elicits subjects’ βM , βˆM , δM . Subjects choose between two
         tion                                 hypothetical sums of money to be received at two different
                                              points in time.

         Background Characteristics 2         Includes number of children, household wellbeing, self-
                                              reported procrastination tendencies, financial decision
                                              maker, income tax behavior, beliefs about active vs. passive
                                              investment strategies, when they plan to collect retirement
                                              benefits, use of payday loans and bankruptcy

         Intelligence Test                    Five-question cognitive and reasoning test: three ques-
                                              tions are alpha-numeric/mathematical, one question is on
                                              pattern-matching, and one question is on mental rotation.




                                                 56
                  Table A.2: Survey Invitations and Responses
Cohort   Survey   Launch Date       Source      Invites Completions   Usable
           1         8/29/14
  1                                               1500        1,008    911
           2        10/17/14
           1        10/24/14
  2                               ALP Panel       1500         692     625
           2        11/21/14
           1         12/1/14
  3                                                500         201     178
           2        12/29/14
           1         4/29/15
  4                               UAS Panel       1200         700     603
           2        5/30/2015




                                    57
A.1    Survey Screenshots


                                   Figure A.1: α Elicitation: Question 1

  Hypothetical Investment Questions

  The closer your response is to the correct answer, the more you will earn. You may use whatever approaches
  you would like to answer these questions.

  Each time your response is within 10% of the correct answer, you will receive $3; responses within 25% will
  receive $2; and responses within 50% will receive $1. Responses more than 50% away from the correct answer
  will not receive a payment for that question.

  Example: An asset has an initial value of $0 but its value increases by $10 every period. What is the value of the
  asset after 6 periods?

  The correct answer is $60. Earnings for different responses are shown below:

      Response       Below $30       $30-$44      $45-$53         $54-$66   $67-$75     $76-$90       Above $90
       Earnings          $0            $1           $2              $3        $2          $1             $0


  Question 1

  An asset has an initial value of $100 and grows at an interest rate of 10% each period. What is the value of the
  asset after 20 periods?


  $

                                                    <<Back    Next>>




                                                             58
                                 Figure A.2: α Elicitation: Question 2

Hypothetical Investment Questions

The closer your response is to the correct answer, the more you will earn. You may use whatever approaches
you would like to answer these questions.

Each time your response is within 10% of the correct answer, you will receive $3; responses within 25% will
receive $2; and responses within 50% will receive $1. Responses more than 50% away from the correct answer
will not receive a payment for that question.

Example: An asset has an initial value of $0 but its value increases by $10 every period. What is the value of the
asset after 6 periods?

The correct answer is $60. Earnings for different responses are shown below:

    Response       Below $30       $30-$44      $45-$53         $54-$66   $67-$75     $76-$90       Above $90
     Earnings          $0            $1           $2              $3        $2          $1             $0


Question 2

An asset has an initial value of $100 and grows at an interest rate of 5% each period. What is the value of the
asset after 50 periods?


$

                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           59
                                  Figure A.3: α Elicitation: Question 3

Hypothetical Investment Questions

The closer your response is to the correct answer, the more you will earn. You may use whatever approaches
you would like to answer these questions.

Each time your response is within 10% of the correct answer, you will receive $3; responses within 25% will
receive $2; and responses within 50% will receive $1. Responses more than 50% away from the correct answer
will not receive a payment for that question.

Example: An asset has an initial value of $0 but its value increases by $10 every period. What is the value of the
asset after 6 periods?

The correct answer is $60. Earnings for different responses are shown below:

    Response       Below $30        $30-$44      $45-$53        $54-$66    $67-$75      $76-$90       Above $90
     Earnings          $0             $1           $2             $3         $2           $1             $0


Question 3

An asset has an initial value of $100 and grows at an interest rate of -20% in odd periods (starting with the first),
and at 25% in even periods. What is the value of the asset after 24 periods?


$

                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           60
                                  Figure A.4: α Elicitation: Question 4

Hypothetical Investment Questions

The closer your response is to the correct answer, the more you will earn. You may use whatever approaches
you would like to answer these questions.

Each time your response is within 10% of the correct answer, you will receive $3; responses within 25% will
receive $2; and responses within 50% will receive $1. Responses more than 50% away from the correct answer
will not receive a payment for that question.

Example: An asset has an initial value of $0 but its value increases by $10 every period. What is the value of the
asset after 6 periods?

The correct answer is $60. Earnings for different responses are shown below:

    Response       Below $30        $30-$44      $45-$53        $54-$66    $67-$75      $76-$90       Above $90
     Earnings          $0             $1           $2             $3         $2           $1             $0


Question 4

An asset has an initial value of $100 and grows at an interest rate of -40% in odd periods (starting with the first),
and at 80% in even periods. What is the value of the asset after 14 periods?


$
                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           61
                                 Figure A.5: α Elicitation: Question 5

Hypothetical Investment Questions

The closer your response is to the correct answer, the more you will earn. You may use whatever approaches
you would like to answer these questions.

Each time your response is within 10% of the correct answer, you will receive $3; responses within 25% will
receive $2; and responses within 50% will receive $1. Responses more than 50% away from the correct answer
will not receive a payment for that question.

Example: An asset has an initial value of $0 but its value increases by $10 every period. What is the value of the
asset after 6 periods?

The correct answer is $60. Earnings for different responses are shown below:

    Response       Below $30       $30-$44      $45-$53         $54-$66   $67-$75      $76-$90       Above $90
     Earnings          $0            $1           $2              $3        $2           $1             $0


Question 5

Asset A has an initial value of $100, and grows at an interest rate of 8% each period. Asset B has an initial value
of $X, and grows at an interest rate of 8% each period. Asset A grows for 10 periods, and Asset B grows for 24
periods. What value of X will cause the two assets to be of equal value?


$
                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           62
                      Figure A.6: EGB Treatment Calculator: Control


New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching

Now suppose your employer just changed the policy and is offering to match your regular contributions. For
each $1.00 you contribute, your employer will contribute an additional $0.50 to your retirement account. This
money will be invested along with your regular contributions.




What is the value of this employer match?

Below you can see how much your regular contribution plus the employer match would be worth for the year.
Enter a regular contribution amount, frequency of contribution, and click Calculate. Try as many times as you
like!

                                                                                   Every two
Contribution Amount                                Every year      Every month                    Every week
                                                                                    weeks
$




                                             Contribution Calculator Output

                                                                                  Annual Value
                                              Your regular contribution       $
                                              Employer match contribution $
                                              Total contribution              $




                                                      63
               Figure A.7: EGB Treatment Calculator: Balance Treatment


New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching

Now suppose your employer just changed the policy and is offering to match your regular contributions. For
each $1.00 you contribute, your employer will contribute an additional $0.50 to your retirement account. This
money will be invested along with your regular contributions.




What is the value of this employer match?

Below you can see how much your regular contribution plus the employer match would be worth for the year
and the projected balance at retirement. Enter a regular contribution amount, frequency of contribution,
projected retirement age, and projected rate of investment return and click Calculate. Try as many times as you
like!

                                                                                   Every two
Contribution Amount                                Every year     Every month                      Every week
                                                                                    weeks
$

Please choose a projected retirement age between 50 and 80.



Please choose a projected rate of investment return.

           %




                                  Contribution Calculator Output

                                                                   Annual Value            Projected Balance
                                                                                             at Retirement
                                  Your regular
                                                              $                        $
                                  contribution
                                  Employer match
                                                              $                        $
                                  contribution
                                  Total contribution          $                        $

                                  The projections are calculated using the contribution amount, projected rate of
                                  investment return, projected retirement age you select, and your current age.
                                  The values assume contributions are made annually at the end of each year
                                  and grow at a constant rate with no inflation and no withdrawals from the
                                  account prior to the assumed retirement age. All values are rounded to the
                                  nearest dollar.




                                                       64
               Figure A.8: EGB Treatment Calculator: Income Treatment


New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching

Now suppose your employer just changed the policy and is offering to match your regular contributions. For
each $1.00 you contribute, your employer will contribute an additional $0.50 to your retirement account. This
money will be invested along with your regular contributions.




What is the value of this employer match?

Below you can see how much your regular contribution plus the employer match would be worth for the year
and the projected annual income in retirement. Enter a regular contribution amount, frequency of contribution,
projected retirement age, and projected rate of investment return and click Calculate. Try as many times as you
like!

                                                                                   Every two
Contribution Amount                                Every year     Every month                      Every week
                                                                                    weeks
$

Please choose a projected retirement age between 50 and 80.



Please choose a projected rate of investment return.

           %




                                  Contribution Calculator Output

                                                                  Annual Value            Projected Annual
                                                                                        Income in Retirement
                                  Your regular
                                                              $                       $
                                  contribution
                                  Employer match
                                                              $                       $
                                  contribution
                                  Total contribution          $                       $

                                  The projections are calculated using the contribution amount, projected rate of
                                  investment return, projected retirement age you select, and your current age.
                                  The values assume contributions are made annually at the end of each year
                                  and grow at a constant rate with no inflation and no withdrawals from the
                                  account prior to the assumed retirement age, and that the projected balance
                                  at retirement is used to purchase a single life annuity based on current
                                  annuity rates, your gender, and your projected retirement age. All values are
                                  rounded to the nearest dollar.



                                                       65
                                   Figure A.9: PB Treatment: Control



New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching
Under your employer’s prior plan (i.e. no match), you stated you would contribute $1000 every year.

You may wish to respond to the new matching contribution from your employer by changing your contributions.
In order to enroll or change your contribution, you must contact an HR administrator and fill out several forms.
You will specify an amount to contribute each year and designate how your contributions will be divided among
investment options, including lifecycle funds that target a specific retirement date, index funds that track major
asset classes, or mutual funds that pursue various investment strategies.

This entire paperwork process will take approximately 60 minutes of your time. At the end of completing the
paperwork, you can elect to make a change in your contributions, or elect to continue with your prior contribution
amount by selecting, "no change."




When answering the following questions, please consider the actual constraints you face in your life, including
financial (i.e. income, savings, debt obligations) and time (i.e. all the things you have to do at work that take
time).

Based on the change to your employer’s match policy, would you choose to go through the paperwork process?
If so, when would you do so?

   No
   Yes. I'd do it today.
   Yes. Not today, but within a week.
   Yes. Not within a week, but some time in the future.




                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           66
                          Figure A.10: PB Treatment: Incentive Treatment



New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching
Under your employer’s prior plan (i.e. no match), you stated you would contribute $1000 every year.

You may wish to respond to the new matching contribution from your employer by changing your contributions.
In order to enroll or change your contribution, you must contact an HR administrator and fill out several forms.
You will specify an amount to contribute each year and designate how your contributions will be divided among
investment options, including lifecycle funds that target a specific retirement date, index funds that track major
asset classes, or mutual funds that pursue various investment strategies.

This entire paperwork process will take approximately 60 minutes of your time. At the end of completing the
paperwork, you can elect to make a change in your contributions, or elect to continue with your prior contribution
amount by selecting, "no change."




Your employer's new policy includes an additional bonus: if you complete the paperwork, you will get an
immediate $50 in cash to help compensate you for the hassle of completing the paperwork.

When answering the following questions, please consider the actual constraints you face in your life, including
financial (i.e. income, savings, debt obligations) and time (i.e. all the things you have to do at work that take
time).

Based on the change to your employer’s match policy, would you choose to go through the paperwork process?
If so, when would you do so?

   No
   Yes. I'd do it today.
   Yes. Not today, but within a week.
   Yes. Not within a week, but some time in the future.




                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           67
                  Figure A.11: PB Treatment: Deadline + Incentive Treatment



New Retirement Savings Plan with Matching
Under your employer’s prior plan (i.e. no match), you stated you would contribute $1000 every year.

You may wish to respond to the new matching contribution from your employer by changing your contributions.
In order to enroll or change your contribution, you must contact an HR administrator and fill out several forms.
You will specify an amount to contribute each year and designate how your contributions will be divided among
investment options, including lifecycle funds that target a specific retirement date, index funds that track major
asset classes, or mutual funds that pursue various investment strategies.

This entire paperwork process will take approximately 60 minutes of your time. At the end of completing the
paperwork, you can elect to make a change in your contributions, or elect to continue with your prior contribution
amount by selecting, "no change."




Your employer's new policy includes an additional bonus: if you complete the paperwork within a week, you
will get an immediate $50 in cash to help compensate you for the hassle of completing the paperwork. If you
complete the paperwork after a week, you will not get the $50 payment.

When answering the following questions, please consider the actual constraints you face in your life, including
financial (i.e. income, savings, debt obligations) and time (i.e. all the things you have to do at work that take
time).

Based on the change to your employer’s match policy, would you choose to go through the paperwork process?
If so, when would you do so?

   No
   Yes. I'd do it today.
   Yes. Not today, but within a week.
   Yes. Not within a week, but some time in the future.




                                                  <<Back    Next>>




                                                           68
Appendix B   Sample Selection, Additional Descriptive Statistics
                    Table B.1: Demographic Controls, All Invitees
                                  Non-Responder/Incomplete       Estimation Sample
    Age                                    48.60                       51.47
                                          (15.78)                     (15.16)
    Female                                 0.550                       0.551
                                          (0.487)                     (0.498)
    Family Income                         60589.9                     65688.5
                                         (46764.8)                   (47368.2)
    Education
      HS or Less                             0.235                      0.189
                                            (0.424)                    (0.391)
        Some College                         0.247                      0.239
                                            (0.432)                    (0.427)
        Assoc Degree                         0.121                      0.122
                                            (0.326)                    (0.328)
        BA/BS Degree                         0.201                      0.267
                                            (0.401)                    (0.443)
        Post BA/BS                           0.140                      0.183
                                            (0.347)                    (0.387)
    Marital Status
     Married/Partnered                        0.532                     0.600
                                             (0.499)                   (0.490)
        Separated                            0.0378                    0.0229
                                             (0.191)                   (0.150)
        Divorced                              0.135                     0.144
                                             (0.342)                   (0.351)
        Widowed                              0.0472                    0.0492
                                             (0.212)                   (0.216)
        Never Married                         0.203                     0.184
                                             (0.402)                   (0.387)
    Add’l HH Members                          1.230                     0.997
                                             (1.145)                   (1.098)
    Hispanic/Latino                           550.7                     0.130
                                            (2281.0)                   (0.337)
    Race
      White/Caucasian                        0.682                      0.791
                                            (0.466)                    (0.407)
        Black/African American               0.135                      0.112
                                            (0.342)                    (0.316)
        American Indian                     0.0115                     0.0108
                                            (0.107)                    (0.103)
        Asian                               0.0288                     0.0311
                                            (0.167)                    (0.174)
        Other                               0.0863                     0.0544
                                            (0.281)                    (0.227)
        Missing                             0.0559                    0.000432
                                            (0.230)                   (0.0208)
    N                                        2434                       2317
Note: Family income is midpoint of 17 income categories. Non-responder/incomplete include
1850 invitees who did not begin the survey, 300 who began but did not complete, and 284
who completed but are missing data.
                                           70
                                               Table B.2: Pairwise Correlation of Behavioral Parameters

                            Alpha      Beta      Delta    Beta Hat     Beta (Effort)     Delta (Effort)     Beta Hat (Effort)      Fin Lit (Std.)   IQ (Std.)
     Alpha                   1.00

     Beta                    -0.04     1.00
                            (0.08)
     Delta                    0.13     -0.36      1.00
                            (0.00)    (0.00)
     Beta Hat                -0.04      0.61      -0.30     1.00
                            (0.03)    (0.00)     (0.00)




71
     Beta (Effort)            0.02     -0.02       0.03     -0.01           1.00
                            (0.32)    (0.33)     (0.21)    (0.69)
     Delta (Effort)          -0.00     -0.01      0.03      -0.03           -0.03              1.00
                            (0.93)    (0.69)     (0.25)    (0.28)          (0.18)
     Beta Hat (Effort)       -0.03     -0.04      0.00      -0.02            0.05              -0.00                1.00
                            (0.28)    (0.08)     (0.97)    (0.31)          (0.06)             (0.84)
     Fin Lit (Std.)           0.12      0.06       0.14     0.00            -0.02              -0.01                -0.02                1.00
                            (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.84)          (0.40)             (0.56)               (0.50)
     IQ (Std.)                0.24     -0.04       0.22     -0.08           -0.04               0.00                -0.03                0.37         1.00
                            (0.00)    (0.04)     (0.00)    (0.00)          (0.11)             (0.92)               (0.22)               (0.00)
     Note: Pairwise correlation coefficients between behavioral parameters. Effort parameters described in Appendix A. P-values in parentheses.
                                             Table B.3: Correlations And Reliability From Reliability Sample

                                           Alpha      AlphaRe       ln(Beta)     ln(Beta)Re   ln(Delta)   ln(Delta)   ln(Beta × Delta)       ln(Beta × Delta)Re
      Alpha                                 1.00

      AlphaRe                               0.15         1.00
                                           (0.09)
      ln(Beta)                              -0.03        0.21         1.00
                                           (0.22)      (0.02)
      ln(Beta)Re                            0.08         0.02          0.09          1.00
                                           (0.37)      (0.86)        (0.30)
      ln(Delta)                             0.12        -0.16         -0.36          -0.00      1.00
                                           (0.00)      (0.07)        (0.00)         (0.97)




72
      ln(Delta)Re                           0.08        -0.04         -0.02          -0.30      0.40        1.00
                                           (0.38)      (0.65)        (0.82)         (0.00)     (0.00)
      ln(Beta × Delta)                      0.11         0.01          0.35           0.07      0.74        0.39              1.00
                                           (0.00)      (0.93)        (0.00)         (0.42)     (0.00)      (0.00)
      ln(Beta × Delta)Re                    0.12        -0.03         0.04            0.30      0.40        0.82              0.43                    1.00
                                           (0.16)      (0.73)        (0.69)         (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)            (0.00)
      Reliability:   Alpha                   0.27
      Reliability:   ln(Beta)               0.14
      Reliability:   ln(Delta               0.51
      Reliability:   ln(Beta*Delta)         0.53
     Note: Pairwise correlation coefficients between behavioral parameters. Subscript Re denotes parameters from reliability survey. P-values in parentheses.
     Reliability coefficient is Cronbach’s reliability based on test-retest correlation.
                          Table B.4: Summary            Statistics for Instruments
                                        mean               sd      min             max
             High Stakes (Alpha)        0.029            0.168 0.000               1.000
             Tool Use – Alpha Elicition
             Pencil-and-Paper           0.568             0.495   0.000              1.000
             Calculator                 0.382             0.486   0.000              1.000
             Spreadsheet                0.056             0.229   0.000              1.000
             Other Tool                 0.033             0.179   0.000              1.000
             Received Help              0.317             0.465   0.000              1.000
             SPQs
             Follow Plans               3.531             0.925   1.000              5.000
             Postpone                   2.572             1.130   1.000              5.000
             Patient                    3.787             0.895   1.000              5.000
             Notes: SPQs scored on 5-point Likert scale (1 = Strongly Disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree).
             Question text for SPQs is: Follow Plans, I do things when I originally planned to do
             them; Postpone, I tend to postpone tasks even when I know it would be better to do
             them right away; Patient, I am willing to give up something that is beneficial today
             in order to receive a larger reward in the future.




              Table B.5: Summary Statistics for Hypothetical Choice Experiment
                             Survey 1 Control Balance Projection Income Projection
     Pre-Match Contribution   3101.4     2850.8          3000.9              2984.9
                             (3591.0) (3588.5)          (3602.6)            (3660.6)
     Post-Match Contribution  4244.3     3796.4          4288.7              4302.9
                             (4800.9) (4495.2)          (4866.9)            (4920.1)
     Paperwork This Week       0.770      0.816           0.810               0.830
                              (0.421)    (0.388)         (0.393)             (0.376)

     N                                   2317          592                574                       589
Notes: Outcomes are from hypothetical choice exercises in Surveys 1 and 2. Contributions Winsorized at 1% level.




                                                         73
                                       Table B.6: Summary Statistics for Mechanisms
                                                         mean          sd      min                                                       max
Planning
Thought about Planning                                                       3.160                0.514             1.000                4.000
Confident about Planning                                                     2.926                0.706             1.000                5.000
Employer Retirement Plan
Enrolled in Employer Plan                                                  0.766                 0.298              0.000            1.000
Annual Contribution                                                      4,378.555             4,984.089            0.000          1.00e+05
Asset Allocation
Inv Ret Savings in Equity                                                    0.813                0.325             0.000                1.000
Housing % of Assets                                                          0.661                0.228             0.000                1.000
Notes: Thought about Planning scored on 4-point Likert scale (1 = Not at all,
4 = A great deal); Confident about Planning on 5-point scale (1 = Strongly
disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree).




                                       Figure B.1: Relationship between EGB and IQ
                      .4
       Predicted z−score on IQ proxy
        −.2         0 −.4      .2




                                                Linear                 Below           Accurate                        Above
                                                                           EG Bias (Alpha)
                                       Note: estimates based on linear regression of IQ on Alpha and set of full demographic controls.




                                                                                 74
                 Table B.7: Summary Statistics for            Additional Robustness Checks
                                        mean                     sd         min       max                count
      Financial Literacy / IQ
      First Fin Lit (3Q - Std)           0.009                  0.994         -3.131        0.806        2,317
      First Fin Lit (5Q - Std)          -0.003                  1.005         -3.124        1.363         706
      IQ - Number                      531.922                 23.298        411.600       568.000       1,287
      IQ - Picture                     555.995                 23.587        476.000       602.000       1,287
      IQ - Analogy                     523.708                 23.168        435.000       560.000       1,287
      Retirement Characteristics
      Empl. Offers Ret. Plan             0.495                 0.500          0.000         1.000        2,316
      Empl. Offers Match                 0.303                  0.460         0.000         1.000        2,316
      Empl. Offers Non-Match Contr.      0.174                 0.379          0.000         1.000        2,316
      Expected Ret Age                  75.243                 15.488         50.000        99.000       2,317
      Wealth Measures
      Retirement Savings (ALP FC)     1.43e+05                2.80e+05         0.000      1.50e+06       1,091
      Housing Equity                  1.60e+05                1.01e+06      -2.25e+05     3.43e+07       2,317
      FICO
      FICO Score                       712.355                 107.539       475.000       825.000        862
      Don’t Know Score                  0.241                   0.428         0.000         1.000        1,136
      Subj. Health Measures
      RateHealthIndex                    2.497                  0.879         1.000         5.000        1,388
      Prob(Live to 75)                  62.686                 23.952         0.000        100.000       1,211
      Prob(Live to 85)                  45.824                 25.034         0.000        100.000       1,368
Notes: First Fin Lit are normalized performance on first attempt on the 3-item and 5-item financial literacy batteries
across any linkable survey, respectively. IQ measures are scores on Number Series, Picture Vocabulary, and Verbal
Analogy modules of ALP Well Being Survey 286. Retirement characteristics are dummies for whether employer offers:
any retirement plan, a matching contribution, and a non-matching contribution, as well as expected retirement age.
ALP FC wealth measures are matched from ALP “Effects of the Financial Crisis” surveys, matching to a respondent’s
most recent answer. FICO score is midpoint of 6-bin response if known, or indicator if respondent does not know.
Subjective health measures are self-rated overall health and probability of living to indicated age, matched from same
FC surveys.




                                                         75
Figure B.2: Relationship between EGB and Financial Literacy



             .2
  Predicted financial literacy
  −.1          0
             −.2            .1




                                          Linear                   Below           Accurate                        Above
                                                                       EG Bias (Alpha)
                                 Note: estimates based on linear regression of financial literacy on Alpha and set of full demographic controls.




                  Figure B.3: Relationship Between Income and Alpha
                                    Predictive margins of income categories with 95% CIs
                    .8
                    .7
  Predicted Alpha
     .5     .6      .4
                    .3

                                   <5 ng
                                   <7 00
                                  <1 500
                                  <1 000
                                  <1 500
                                  <2 000
                                  <2 000
                                  <3 000
                                  <3 000
                                  <4 000
                                  <5 000
                                  <6 000
                                  <7 000

                                   00 0
                                   25 0
                                   00 0
                                   0, 0
                                         0+
                                 <1 ,00
                                 <1 ,00
                                 <2 ,00
                                 20 ,00
                                       si
                                      ,0




                                     00
                                      ,
                                    0,
                                    2,
                                    5,
                                    0,
                                    5,
                                    0,
                                    5,
                                    0,
                                    0,
                                    0,
                                    is




                                    5
                          M




                                                                       Category of income
                                  Note: estimates from linear regression of Alpha on full demographic controls.




                                                                             76
             Figure B.4: Relationship Between Income and Beta
                        Predictive margins of income categories with 95% CIs



          1.2
            1.1
Predicted Beta
1         .9

               <5 ng
               <7 00
              <1 500
              <1 000
              <1 500
              <2 000
              <2 000
              <3 000
              <3 000
              <4 000
              <5 000
              <6 000
              <7 000

               00 0
               25 0
               00 0
               0, 0
                     0+
             <1 ,00
             <1 ,00
             <2 ,00
             20 ,00
                   si
                  ,0




                 00
                  ,
                0,
                2,
                5,
                0,
                5,
                0,
                5,
                0,
                0,
                0,
                is




                5
              M




                                                          Category of income
                      Note: estimates from linear regression of Beta on full demographic controls.




          Figure B.5: Relationship Between Income and Delta
                        Predictive margins of income categories with 95% CIs
          .8    .75
Predicted Delta
       .7 .65
          .6

                    <5 ng
                    <7 00
                   <1 500
                   <1 000
                   <1 500
                   <2 000
                   <2 000
                   <3 000
                   <3 000
                   <4 000
                   <5 000
                   <6 000
                   <7 000

                    00 0
                    25 0
                    00 0
                    0, 0
                          0+
                  <1 ,00
                  <1 ,00
                  <2 ,00
                  20 ,00
                        si
                       ,0




                      00
                       ,
                     0,
                     2,
                     5,
                     0,
                     5,
                     0,
                     5,
                     0,
                     0,
                     0,
                     is




                     5
             M




                                                          Category of income
                      Note: estimates from linear regression of Delta on full demographic controls.




                                                                77
Appendix C   Additional Regression Tables




                              78
                                    Table C.1: Alternative Specifications of Alpha, Beta, Delta and Retirement Wealth
                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)           (7)
                            Alpha                        27,276∗∗       27,127∗∗       26,773∗∗         2,681         .00312    30,075∗         .108
                                                          (10,591)      (10,597)        (10,424)       (24,088)      (.0186)    (15,413)       (.182)
                            ln(Beta)                     71,993∗∗∗                       58,235        58,071∗∗        .0617    85,059∗∗      1.21∗∗
                                                          (26,267)                      (35,418)       (25,299)      (.0584)    (40,237)       (.583)
                            ln(Delta)                    80,646∗∗∗                     80,365∗∗∗     327,817∗∗∗      .141∗∗∗    92,032∗∗      1.93∗∗∗
                                                          (28,012)                      (28,064)      (100,363)      (.0467)    (39,132)       (.477)
                            Beta                                        59,717∗∗
                                                                        (23,441)
                            Delta                                      120,230∗∗∗
                                                                        (39,501)
                            Alpha × ln(Beta)                                             27,660
                                                                                        (46,100)
                            Alpha × Alpha                                                                16,679




79
                                                                                                       (18,458)
                            ln(Beta) × ln(Beta)                                                         -29,948
                                                                                                       (52,148)
                            ln(Delta) × ln(Delta)                                                    346,697∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (129,440)
                            Controls                        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

                            Mean of Dep Var               132,926        132,926        132,926        132,926         .695      191,298        7.39
                            Adj R2                         0.368          0.368          0.367          0.369         0.292       0.325        0.450
                            N                              2,317          2,317          2,317          2,317         2,317       1,610        2,317

     Notes: Dependent variable in Columns (1)–(4) is Winsorized retirement wealth. Dependent variable in Column (5) is indicator of any retirement wealth. Sample in
     Column (6) is conditional on having retirement wealth. Dependent variable in Column (7) is ln(retirement wealth), where those with zero wealth are given wealth =
     $1. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion
     category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; **
     at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
                                   Table C.2: Heterogeneity in Effect of Parameters Across Observable Characteristics
                                               (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)              (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)
                                          Inc < Med       Inc > Med       Fin Head      Not Fin Head       Married      Unmarried      Age < Med       Age > Med
                 Alpha                       -5,234        52,898∗∗∗       23,732∗        33,920∗           26,326         6,177          -4,013        50,434∗∗
                                            (4,994)         (20,095)      (14,059)        (18,553)         (16,138)      (14,473)        (8,146)        (20,016)
                 ln(Beta)                   20,272         125,068∗∗      74,028∗∗         61,704          99,733∗∗       45,430         37,558         97,069∗∗
                                           (17,063)         (54,556)      (34,645)        (51,071)         (40,361)      (34,707)       (26,185)        (44,380)
                 ln(Delta)                  17,523         121,943∗∗     108,003∗∗∗       92,238∗          91,898∗∗       45,480         39,710        128,999∗∗∗
                                           (18,455)         (49,368)      (34,278)        (55,983)         (39,397)      (40,683)       (27,448)        (45,360)
                 Controls                     Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

                 Mean of Dep Var             30,026         232,077        125,730          144,721        173,326        72,239          63,974          196,119




80
                 p-value for Equality
                 Across Groups
                   Alpha                                     0.005                           0.658                         0.352                           0.012
                   ln(Beta)                                  0.069                           0.839                         0.307                           0.249
                   ln(Delta)                                 0.049                           0.807                         0.410                           0.093
                   All                                       0.004                           0.967                         0.557                           0.023
                 Adj R2                      0.295           0.291          0.382            0.331           0.377         0.363           0.403           0.322
                 N                           1,137           1,180          1,439             878            1,391          926            1,108           1,209

     Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of
     children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income
     category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
                              Table C.2: Heterogeneity in Effect of Parameters Across Observable Characteristics (cont.)
                                              (9)          (10)            (11)         (12)             (13)             (14)            (15)           (16)
                                           Women           Men         Low Educ      High Educ       Emp S Plan       No Emp Plan       Enrolled     Not Enrolled
                 Alpha                      19,200       36,037∗           2,548      61,567∗∗         42,078∗∗          10,652         46,531∗         12,981
                                           (11,838)      (21,190)        (6,653)      (24,016)         (20,380)         (10,581)        (25,370)       (10,198)
                 ln(Beta)                    5,783      157,561∗∗∗       23,392      122,390∗∗         90,004∗          70,040∗∗         83,151       92,836∗∗∗
                                           (29,127)      (55,029)       (22,292)      (61,619)         (46,950)         (30,354)        (58,787)       (28,062)
                 ln(Delta)                 82,195∗∗       78,616          -9,306     180,678∗∗∗       117,369∗∗         59,044∗         97,052∗       76,864∗∗
                                           (37,073)      (50,256)       (26,518)      (55,999)         (47,392)         (35,821)        (55,948)       (30,127)
                 Controls                     Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes

                 Mean of Dep Var            94,826       179,627         60,995        220,789         187,226            79,786         217,713         80,814




81
                 p-value for Equality
                 Across Groups
                   Alpha                                   0.485                        0.017                             0.172                          0.211
                   ln(Beta)                                0.014                        0.128                             0.722                          0.880
                   ln(Delta)                               0.954                        0.002                             0.327                          0.747
                   All                                     0.066                        0.002                             0.403                          0.610
                 Adj R2                      0.314         0.385          0.303         0.348            0.332            0.383           0.345          0.348
                 N                           1,276         1,041          1,274         1,043            1,146            1,171            882           1,435

     Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of
     children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income
     category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
     Table C.3: Robustness to Adding Employment, Retirement Plan, Liquidity Measures, and Expectations about Health and Retire-
     ment
                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)
                Alpha                       27,276∗∗   25,592∗∗   24,659∗∗   24,950∗∗ 24,786∗∗ 29,295∗ 29,800∗
                                            (10,591)   (10,705)   (10,593)   (10,607) (10,479) (16,683) (17,494)
                ln(Beta)                    71,993 ∗∗∗ 67,327 ∗∗∗ 69,477 ∗∗∗ 69,556∗∗∗ 58,327∗∗ 86,581∗ 87,170∗
                                            (26,267)   (26,064)   (26,006)   (26,032) (26,036) (44,580) (52,495)
                ln(Delta)                   80,646 ∗∗∗ 70,092  ∗∗ 72,698 ∗∗∗ 72,983∗∗∗ 56,234∗∗    37,651    36,481
                                            (28,012)   (27,787)   (27,625)   (27,581) (27,025) (44,452) (48,640)
                Fin Lit (Std.)                1,726      2,047      1,953      1,919       911      -4,099    -8,501
                                             (4,577)    (4,556)    (4,547)    (4,553)    (4,435)   (8,164)   (8,956)
                IQ Measure (Std.)            9,330∗      7,594      7,758      7,847      7,240    12,729    12,952
                                             (5,132)    (5,147)    (5,149)    (5,131)    (5,156)   (8,369)   (9,255)




82
                Baseline Controls              Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                Occupation                     No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                ER Ret Plan Characteristics    No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                Exp Retirement Age             No         No         No         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                Liquidity Measures             No         No         No         No         Yes       Yes       Yes
                FICO Score                     No         No         No         No         No        Yes       Yes
                Subj. Health Measures          No         No         No         No         No         No       Yes

                   Mean of Dep Var                            132,926        132,926         132,975        132,975        132,975       148,742       146,983
                   Adj R2                                      0.368          0.373           0.379          0.379          0.398         0.412         0.422
                   N                                           2,317          2,317           2,316          2,316          2,316         1,135          966

     Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of
     children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income
     category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
            Table C.4: Robustness to Alternative Definitions of                  Financial Literacy and IQ
                                           (1)         (2)                           (3)          (4)
               Alpha                    27,325∗∗∗ 27,483∗∗∗                        35,447     34,338∗∗
                                        (10,561)    (10,575)                      (22,763)    (15,033)
               ln(Beta)                 69,908 ∗∗∗ 68,084∗∗∗                     142,105 ∗∗  101,542∗∗∗
                                        (26,089)    (25,909)                      (61,775)    (34,462)
               ln(Delta)                80,923 ∗∗∗ 79,988∗∗∗                       61,776     99,348∗∗
                                        (27,981)    (27,993)                      (63,407)    (41,246)
               Fin Lit (Std.)             1,822                                                 -3,781
                                         (4,509)                                               (7,020)
               IQ Measure (Std.)         8,995∗      8,851∗                        14,582
                                         (5,086)     (5,183)                      (12,097)
               First 3Q Fin Lit (Std.)                2,786
                                                     (4,665)
               First 5Q Fin Lit (Std.)                                             13,553
                                                                                  (10,446)
                 IQ - Number                                                                          442
                                                                                                    (367)
                 IQ - Picture                                                                         346
                                                                                                    (353)
                 IQ - Analogy                                                                        -316
                                                                                                    (328)
                 Controls                              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes

                 Mean of Dep Var                    132,926        132,926         134,360         136,259
                 Adj R2                              0.367          0.367           0.368           0.380
                 N                                   2,317          2,317            706            1,287

Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status,
number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups,
highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the
10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.




                                                              83
                           Table C.5: Relationship between Alpha, Beta, Delta and Alternative Survey Wealth Measures
                                                                     (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                                                            Retirement Savings        Retirement Savings        Ret Savings (ALP FC)
                                    Alpha                        27,276∗∗                   33,369∗                   48,356∗∗∗
                                                                  (10,591)                  (17,221)                   (16,162)
                                    ln(Beta)                     71,993∗∗∗                 96,032∗∗                   92,319∗∗
                                                                  (26,267)                  (37,995)                   (39,136)
                                    ln(Delta)                    80,646∗∗∗                  78,554∗                   91,645∗∗
                                                                  (28,012)                  (47,609)                   (40,414)
                                    Fin Lit (Std.)                  1,726                    -10,124                     -7,421
                                                                   (4,577)                   (8,553)                    (7,401)




84
                                    IQ Measure (Std.)              9,330∗                   17,450∗                   17,806∗∗
                                                                   (5,132)                   (8,897)                    (8,588)
                                    Controls                         Yes                       Yes                        Yes

                                    Mean of Dep Var                132,926                   137,261                     142,923
                                    Adj R2                          0.368                     0.349                       0.401
                                    N                               2,317                     1,091                       1,091

     Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in table. Ret Savings (ALP FC) represents Winsorized retirement savings from ALP Financial Crisis surveys from 2014–2015.
     Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion
     category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. Column (2) and (3) restrict to
     same sample. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
                                             Table C.6: First Stage Results
                                                (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                              Alpha      ln(Beta × Delta)         Alpha      ln(Beta × Delta)
                High Stakes (Alpha)           -.0853                             -.0928∗           .00859
                                              (.054)                             (.0537)          (.0249)
                Pencil-and-Paper              -.0121                               -.015           -.0124
                                             (.0245)                             (.0245)          (.0106)
                Calculator                    .0311                                .0326          -.00667
                                             (.0256)                             (.0257)          (.0108)
                Spreadsheet                  .349∗∗∗                              .35∗∗∗           .00818
                                             (.0434)                             (.0436)           (.019)
                Other Tool                    .0669                                .0712            .0352
                                             (.0549)                             (.0553)          (.0222)
                Received Help                   .06                                .0555          -.00724
                                             (.0415)                              (.042)          (.0199)
                Follow Plans
                Strongly disagree                               .0456              .0443            .0487
                                                               (.0311)           (.0772)            (.031)
                Disagree                                        -.0125            -.0414            -.0122
                                                               (.0162)           (.0373)           (.0163)
                Agree                                         -.0385∗∗∗           .0271           -.0369∗∗∗
                                                               (.0108)           (.0256)           (.0108)
                Strongly Agree                                  -.0273              -.03            -.0268
                                                               (.0175)           (.0383)           (.0175)
                Postpone Things
                Strongly disagree                              .00496            -.00307           .00464
                                                                (.016)           (.0353)            (.016)
                Disagree                                        .0117               .02             .0122
                                                               (.0126)           (.0295)           (.0127)
                Agree                                         -.0308∗∗            .0343           -.0296∗∗
                                                               (.0138)           (.0332)           (.0139)
                Strongly Agree                                -.0535∗∗            .0235           -.0526∗∗
                                                               (.0254)           (.0581)           (.0252)
                Patient
                Strongly disagree                               .0114             .0947              .0113
                                                                (.029)           (.0737)           (.0295)
                Disagree                                        -.0173             .033             -.0178
                                                               (.0216)           (.0533)           (.0216)
                Agree                                         .0593∗∗∗           -.00146          .0592∗∗∗
                                                               (.0123)           (.0287)           (.0123)
                Strongly Agree                                 .145∗∗∗            .0159            .144∗∗∗
                                                               (.0149)           (.0354)           (.0149)
                Controls                       Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes

                Mean of Dep Var                .571             -.366              .571             -.366
                Adj R2                        0.077             0.376             0.075             0.374
                N                             2,317             2,317             2,317             2,317

Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in table. Column (1) regresses Alpha on Alpha instruments and controls. Column (2)
regresses ln(Beta × Delta) on Beta × Delta instruments and controls. Columns (3) and (4) regress Alpha and ln(Beta × Delta)
on all instruments and controls. Controls include indicator variables for female, marital status, number of household members,
number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of education, 17
income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level;
*** at the 1% level.
                                                               85
Appendix D               Results using nationally-representative weights
Our main results are based on uniform weighting of observations. In this section, we reproduce many
of the paper’s main results after weighting observations to make the sample more representative
of the U.S. adult population. Our sample is diverse but not nationally-representative due to two
possible sources of selection. First, while both the ALP and UAS recruit participants through
population-sampling methods designed to make each nationally representative, there may be some
selection into panel participation that weights could correct. Second, among the participants in
the panels whom we invite to take our surveys, not all do. Each of these could take the form of
endogenous sampling — where the probability of selection into the sample varies with the dependent
variable even after conditioning on observables — and each is a potential source of bias (Solon et
al., 2015). The ALP and UAS each provided us with weights designed to adjust for these sources
of selection and to make the response sample nationally-representative on demographics.45
     For certain purposes, readers may be more interested in analyses with these weights applied
than in the uniform-weighted results. For instance, to understand descriptively the marginal and
joint distribution of Alpha, Beta, and Delta in the national population, then summary statistics
based on weights could be more informative. Here, we present analogues of Tables 2-4 and Figure 1
here as Tables D.1-D.3 and Figure D.1.

                       Table D.1: Behavioral Parameters and Survey Constructs
                                               mean     sd    min     max
                         Alpha                 0.547 0.493 0.000     3.000
                         Beta                  1.022 0.214 0.468     2.135
                         Delta                 0.695 0.170 0.461     0.985
                         Imputed Beta          0.160 0.366 0.000     1.000
                         Imputed Delta         0.108 0.310 0.000     1.000
                         Fin Lit               2.447 0.768 0.000     3.000
                         IQ Measure            2.206 1.515 0.000     5.000
                         Missing Fin Lit       0.001 0.026 0.000     1.000
                         Missing IQ Measure 0.004 0.064 0.000        1.000
                         Sophisticated         0.470 0.499 0.000     1.000
                         Overconfidence        0.333 0.391 -1.000 1.000
                         Observations          2317
                          Notes: Fin Lit refers to number of questions correct (out of 3).
                          IQ Measure refers to number of questions correct (out of 5).


    Applying weights changes the estimated summary statistics of Alpha, Beta, Delta, and other
behavioral and survey constructs very little. The joint distribution of Alpha and Beta is also hardly
affected.
    Using weights, the levels of retirement savings, non-retirement savings, and net worth are es-
timated to be somewhat lower, as expected when giving younger people more weight. Retirement
savings are estimated at mean $97,313 and standard deviation $228,518 using weights instead of the
$132,926 mean and $276,052 standard deviation from Table 3. Debt statistics are barely affected.
  45
     To pool information across two independent samples with different sets of weights from the same population, we
follow Westat (2006).


                                                        86
        Figure D.1: Joint Distribution of Present Bias and EG Bias, weighted
                                         percent
                                                    16.9
                                            13.9

                                                                        8.1

                                                                                  3.6
                 Present Bias




                                  Not
                                                    22.2

                                            17.7

                                                                        12.1


                                                                                  5.4


                                Biased
                                           Linear   Below             Accurate   Above
                                                            EG Bias
             .




Table D.2: Retirement Savings, Non-Retirement Savings, Debt and Financial Outcomes
                                          mean       sd       min       max
      Retirement Savings                  97,313 228,518       0      1700000
      Has Any Retirement Savings           .654     .476       0          1
      Non-Retirement Savings              40,371 134,517       0      1100000
      Outstanding Mortgage                53,767   93,167      0      460,000
      Other Secured Debt                  16,383   36,071     500     250,000
      Unsecured Debt                      12,469   27,057     500     250,000
      Net Worth                          253,441 863,602 -245,500 9639000
      Short-Term Loan (last 5 years)      .0797     .271       0          1
      Declared Bankruptcy (last 5 years)  .0532     .225       0          1
      Observations                         2317
     Notes: Retirement Savings, Non-Retirement Savings, Outstanding Mortgages Winsorized
     for top 1%. Net Worth Winsorized for top 0.5%. Other Secured Debt and Unsecured
     Debt represent midpoints from categorical responses.




                                                       87
    Using weights, the sample appears younger, lower income, and less educated. Marital status,
race/ethnicity, and risk profiles barely change. By construction, sample demographics appear closer
to those of the national population using weights.
    Beyond calculating descriptive statistics, the study aims to measure causal relationships between
retirement-savings levels and Alpha, Beta, and Delta. As summarized by Solon et al. (2015),
when seeking to understand causal relationships, researchers may have three distinct motives for
using weights: (1) increasing precision by correcting for heteroskedasticity, (2) achieving consistent
estimates by correcting for endogenous sampling, and (3) identifying average partial effects in the
presence of unmodeled heterogeneity of effects. (1) is not a large concern here. (2) and (3) might
be. On the other hand, if selection into the sample is exogenous to the outcome, then weighting
can reduce precision and OLS may be preferred. In the interests of transparency and to facilitate
comparison, we present WLS analogues to our primary, OLS results here.
    We report analogues to Tables 5–7 in Tables D.4–D.6. Using WLS rather than OLS, the
relationships between our variables of interest and the control variables are quite similar.




                                                 88
                      Table D.3: Demographic Controls
                                  mean         sd       min               max
Age                               46.829    16.803    18.000            96.000
Female                            0.516      0.500     0.000             1.000
Family Income                   60663.822 54861.945 0.000              2.00e+05
Education
  HS or Less                          0.420      0.494       0.000       1.000
  Some College                        0.199      0.399       0.000       1.000
  Assoc Degree                        0.089      0.284       0.000       1.000
  BA/BS Degree                        0.177      0.382       0.000       1.000
  Post BA/BS                          0.115      0.320       0.000       1.000
Marital Status
  Married/Partnered                   0.624      0.484       0.000       1.000
  Separated                           0.019      0.137       0.000       1.000
  Divorced                            0.106      0.309       0.000       1.000
  Widowed                             0.040      0.195       0.000       1.000
  Never Married                       0.211      0.408       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000
Add’l HH Members                      1.284      1.155       0.000       3.000
Num of Children                       0.908      1.245       0.000       9.000
Hispanic/Latino                       0.173      0.378       0.000       1.000
Race
  White/Caucasian                     0.775      0.418       0.000       1.000
  Black/African American              0.121      0.326       0.000       1.000
  American Indian                     0.013      0.112       0.000       1.000
  Asian                               0.027      0.163       0.000       1.000
  Other                               0.065      0.246       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.000      0.010       0.000       1.000
Risk Aversion
  Category 1                          0.319      0.466       0.000       1.000
  Category 2                          0.163      0.370       0.000       1.000
  Category 3                          0.181      0.385       0.000       1.000
  Category 4                          0.081      0.272       0.000       1.000
  Category 5                          0.045      0.206       0.000       1.000
  Category 6                          0.207      0.406       0.000       1.000
  Missing                             0.003      0.059       0.000       1.000
Observations                          2317
Notes: Family Income shown Winsorized for top 5%. Higher risk aversion categories
represent decreasing risk aversion.




                                         89
                  Table D.4: Predictors of Alpha, Beta, Delta, Overconfidence, Sophistication and Financial Literacy Measures
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                         Alpha         Beta         Delta      Beta × Delta       Overconf.     Sophis.      Fin Lit
                           IQ Measure (Std.)           0.092∗∗∗       -0.000      0.017∗∗∗       0.017∗∗∗         -0.052∗∗∗      -0.013      0.233∗∗∗
                                                        (0.015)      (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.011)     (0.016)       (0.029)
                           Fin Lit (Std.)                -0.005        0.011        -0.004          0.004            -0.012       0.002
                                                        (0.015)      (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.012)     (0.016)
                           Some Coll                      0.049       -0.020         0.000         -0.010            -0.022       0.027        0.127∗
                                                        (0.038)      (0.017)       (0.011)        (0.011)           (0.030)     (0.039)       (0.072)
                           Assoc Degree                   0.000      -0.033∗        0.017           0.000            -0.007       0.048      0.223∗∗∗
                                                        (0.044)      (0.018)       (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.034)     (0.047)       (0.084)
                           BA/BS Degree                 0.089∗∗       -0.025      0.025∗∗           0.011            -0.036      -0.039      0.253∗∗∗
                                                        (0.039)      (0.016)       (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.031)     (0.042)       (0.073)
                           Post BA/BS                   0.098∗         0.003      0.033∗∗        0.039∗∗∗         -0.098∗∗∗      0.032      0.303∗∗∗
                                                        (0.058)      (0.020)       (0.014)        (0.014)           (0.033)     (0.049)       (0.077)
                           Female=1                     -0.046∗        0.004        -0.002         -0.004             0.015      -0.027     -0.164∗∗∗




90
                                                        (0.027)      (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.008)           (0.021)     (0.028)       (0.056)
                           Black/Afr American            -0.028        0.002         0.006         -0.001          0.138∗∗∗      -0.004     -0.484∗∗∗
                                                        (0.045)      (0.023)       (0.016)        (0.015)           (0.036)     (0.050)       (0.092)
                           American Indian             -0.203∗∗        0.027        -0.014         -0.008             0.063      -0.165       -0.471∗
                                                        (0.101)      (0.069)       (0.035)        (0.028)           (0.078)     (0.119)       (0.280)
                           Asian                         -0.063     -0.066∗∗∗       0.001          -0.043             0.021      -0.014        0.102
                                                        (0.090)      (0.022)       (0.026)        (0.027)           (0.077)     (0.095)       (0.148)
                           Other Race                    0.000        -0.021         0.013         -0.006            -0.006       0.055       -0.254∗
                                                        (0.067)      (0.029)       (0.019)        (0.018)           (0.049)     (0.068)       (0.153)
                           Hispanic/Latino               -0.020      0.051∗∗      -0.026∗           0.006          0.129∗∗∗      0.027       -0.255∗∗
                                                        (0.057)      (0.024)       (0.015)        (0.014)           (0.035)     (0.054)       (0.112)

                           Adj R2                       .0802         .133         .314            .327             .145          .0713       .352
                           N                            2,317         2,317        2,317           2,317            2,317         2,317       2,317

     Notes: Controls also include indicator variables for marital status, number of household members, number of children, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year
     age groups, and 17 income categories. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
              Table D.5: Relationship between Alpha, Beta, Delta and Retirement Wealth
                                            (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
                    Alpha                41,199∗∗∗ 19,772∗∗             18,216∗∗
                                         (10,088)    (8,648)             (8,717)
                    ln(Beta)            107,228∗∗∗ 46,145∗              45,966∗
                                         (31,385)   (23,990)            (24,737)
                    ln(Delta)           142,719 ∗∗∗ 51,433 ∗∗  38,905   49,408∗
                                         (28,619)   (25,936) (25,229) (26,113)
                    Fin Lit (Std.)                              -303      -822
                                                               (6,185)   (6,310)
                    IQ Measure (Std.)                           7,535     5,571
                                                               (4,613)   (4,690)
                    Demog Controls          Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                    Add’l Controls          No         Yes       Yes       Yes

                     Mean of Dep Var               97,313          97,313        97,313        97,313
                     Adj R2                         0.165           0.375         0.373        0.375
                     N                             2,317           2,317         2,317         2,317

Notes: Dependent variable is Winsorized retirement wealth. Demographic controls include indicator variables for female, marital
status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, and 10-year
age groups. Additional controls include indicator variables for highest level of education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age
groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.




                                                              91
                                Table D.6: Relationship between Alpha, Beta, Delta and Wealth, Debt, and Net Worth
                                                   (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)               (6)               (7)
                                           Non-Ret Savings        Mortgage       Sec Debt      Unsec Debt       Net Worth       Payday Loan        Bankruptcy
                  Alpha                           -995               1,412          -17.3        2,051             2,906            .00518           .00261
                                                (5,170)            (4,367)        (1,790)       (2,130)          (37,297)          (.0151)           (.0115)
                  ln(Beta)                    43,460∗∗∗           -21,088∗         -1,025        5,830          258,092∗∗            .0549            -.0175
                                               (15,531)           (11,501)        (4,214)       (4,354)         (113,274)          (.0538)           (.0469)
                  ln(Delta)                    28,923∗             -13,403           243         3,550           229,780∗           -.0295            -.0463
                                               (16,840)           (11,859)        (4,432)       (3,556)         (137,719)           (.035)           (.0331)
                  Fin Lit (Std.)                 -1,132            5,528∗∗       -2,463∗∗         -872            -25,523          -.00618           .00869
                                                (4,764)            (2,269)        (1,149)        (900)           (41,154)          (.0101)          (.00695)




92
                  IQ Measure (Std.)             6,388∗              -3,215         -1,371       -1,905∗           10,246             .0118          -.000728
                                                (3,380)            (2,650)        (1,123)        (997)           (27,511)         (.00967)          (.00775)
                  Controls                        Yes                 Yes            Yes          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

                  Mean of Dep Var                40,371             53,767        16,383          12,469          253,441            .0797             .0532
                  Adj R2                         0.249              0.288         0.078           0.133            0.243             0.135             0.057
                  N                              2,317              2,317         2,317           2,317            2,317             2,317             2,317

     Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in table. All wealth outcomes are Winsorized. Secured and unsecured debt represent midpoint of categorical response.
     Payday loan and bankruptcy outcomes equal one if respondent used payday loan or declared bankruptcy in last five years. Controls include indicator variables for
     female, marital status, number of household members, number of children, race, ethnicity, state of residence, risk aversion category, 10-year age groups, highest level of
     education, 17 income categories, and 10-year age groups × income category interactions. * Significant at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.
Appendix E           Conceptual Framework: Hypothetical Choice Task
We modify the model presented in Section 2 to explicitly consider agents’ retirement savings decision
over both accumulation and decumulation. For simplicity, we assume there is no uncertainty
regarding investment returns or longevity: the agent expects to retire in period R, to consume in
                                                                                 R
retirement until period T , and to have exogenous income flows ~y ∈ R which may be invested at
         R
rates ~r ∈ T+ . Natural extensions would include uncertainty or endogenous retirement and income.
    The agent’s problem is to maximize lifetime utility subject to the perceived budget constraint.
To highlight the treatment effects, we break the budget constraint into two pieces: perceived balance
at retirement, and perceived retirement consumption given this balance.
    In the control treatment, the agent’s problem is therefore to choose a perception-perfect equi-
librium which maximizes:
                                                              T
                                                              X
                                          max~c u(c0 ) + β          δ s u(cs )                    (8)
                                                              s=1
                                              R−1
                                              X
                                 s.t.    A=          p(~r, s|R) · (yt − ct )                      (9)
                                               s=0
                                    T
                                    X
                                          p(~r, s|T )cs ≤ p(~r, R|T ) · A                       (10)
                                    s=R

    Because of EGB, the agent is making two mistakes. In (9), the agent underestimates the impact
of savings on the account balance at retirement, A. In (10), the agent underestimates the amount
of consumption that can be financed by a given balance, since the retirement continues to earn a
return during decumulation.
    The balance treatment is designed to correct the mistake in (9) by giving subjects the correct
expected balance at retirement for a given contribution rate. Subjects in this treatment therefore
replace the mistaken constraint with the true constraint:
                                           R−1
                                           X
                                    A=           e(~r, s|R) · (yt − ct )                         (90 )
                                           s=0

    The income treatment is designed to correct both mistakes by calculating the feasible post-
retirement consumption corresponding to a given savings rate. That is, in addition to correcting
(9) to (90 ), it also corrects (10) to:
                                   T
                                   X
                                         p(~r, s|T )cs ≤ p(~r, R|T ) · A                        (100 )
                                   s=R

    Both treatments correct the perceived prices of consumption. If the agent’s elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution is greater than one, so that for example, they would react to the hypo-
thetical employer match by increasing their contributions (as most subjects did), then the decrease
in the perceived price of future consumption in terms of current consumption will increase the
agent’s savings rate overall. The balance treatment should therefore increase savings, and the in-
come treatment — which makes post-retirement consumption appear even less expensive — should
increase savings even further.


                                                      93
