                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MULTILATERAL TRADE BARGAINING:
                   A FIRST LOOK AT THE GATT BARGAINING RECORDS

                                            Kyle Bagwell
                                           Robert W. Staiger
                                            Ali Yurukoglu

                                         Working Paper 21488
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21488


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2015


We thank the NSF (Grant SES-1326940) and SEED for financial support, and Sushan Demirjian, Diwakar
Dixit, Anwarul Hoda, Lee Ann Jackson, Amelia Porges, William Powers and Suja Rishikesh for very
helpful discussions related to various aspects of this project. We are especially grateful to Ambassador
Julio Lacarte Muró for patiently answering our many questions about the mechanics of the early GATT
rounds. We also thank Jakub Kastl, Nuno Limao, Marcelo Olarreaga, Marzena Rostek, Michele Ruta
and seminar participants at Berkeley, Dartmouth, Indiana, Maryland, Princeton, Stanford, Yale and
The World Bank as well as participants at the Dartmouth-SNU conference on International Trade Policy
and Institutions and the NBER 2015 ITI Summer Institute for very helpful comments. Patricia Abbott,
Ayako Obashi, Woan Foong Wong and Junhui Zeng provided outstanding research assistance, as did
Joanna Yeo, Zhufei Shi, and especially Elizabeth Stone on earlier phases of the data processing portion
of this project. Bagwell thanks CASBS at Stanford for support and hospitality. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21488.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kyle Bagwell, Robert W. Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multilateral Trade Bargaining: A First Look at the GATT Bargaining Records
Kyle Bagwell, Robert W. Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 21488
August 2015
JEL No. C78,D02,F13

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper empirically examines recently declassified data from the GATT/WTO on tariff bargaining.
We document eight stylized facts about these interconnected high-stakes international negotiations.
We use detailed product-level offer and counteroffer data to examine several questions about trade
policy, including whether preferential tariffs were a stumbling block towards liberalization, and whether
the relaxation of bilateral reciprocity to multilateral reciprocity aided liberalization. We organize the
empirical analysis around a theoretical model of multi-party trade negotiations motivated by the terms-of-trade
theory and respecting the institutional features of most-favored-nation status and reciprocity.


Kyle Bagwell                                           Ali Yurukoglu
Department of Economics                                Graduate School of Business
Stanford University                                    Stanford University
Landau Economics Building                              Stanford, CA 94305
579 Serra Mall                                         and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                                yurukoglu_ali@gsb.stanford.edu
and NBER
kbagwell@stanford.edu

Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

The World Trade Organization (WTO) and its predecessor the General Agreement on Tari¤s
and Trade (GATT)1 have presided over the largest and most sustained negotiated trade lib-
eralization in history. Yet challenges remain, as evidenced by the 13-year-long Doha Round
of multilateral trade negotiations now certain to fall far short of its initial aspirations. This
paper introduces and empirically analyzes detailed negotiation data, recently declassi…ed by the
WTO, to understand the nature of tari¤ bargaining in the world trading system. Improving our
understanding of these negotiations is important for addressing the challenges facing modern
trade agreements. At the same time, analyzing these detailed o¤er data in high stakes interna-
tional negotiations contributes to economists’understanding of bargaining more generally.
      GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations display several notable features. The negotiations are a
form of barter, whereby governments accept commitments on their own import tari¤s in ex-
change for the reciprocal tari¤ commitments of their principal trading partners. For each round
a speci…c bargaining protocol is adopted, with explicit rules for the timing of events, the kinds
of interactions expected and the exchange of information among participants. And though it is
a multilateral institution, for the most part the GATT/WTO has adopted a bilateral approach
to multilateral tari¤ bargaining according to which reciprocal “request-o¤er” negotiations oc-
cur on a voluntary basis between pairs of countries at the tari¤-line level, with the results of
these bilateral negotiations then “multilateralized” to the full GATT/WTO membership by a
non-discrimination requirement that tari¤s abide by the most-favored nation (MFN) principle.
      Our empirical analysis has two major components, both of which focus on the US bilateral
negotiations at the Torquay (1950-1951) Round. We …rst describe the salient features of these
high stakes negotiations: How many tari¤-cut o¤ers are made?; How large are the o¤ers?; Which
countries receive o¤ers on which goods?; How do o¤ers evolve over the course of negotiations?;
and so on. Then we ask a series of classic trade policy questions: Does the multilateralization of
trade bargaining aid liberalization?; Are preferential tari¤s a building block or stumbling block
towards liberalization?; Are negotiating patterns consistent with the terms-of-trade theory?
With these two components we show how the new data present a major research opportunity
for economists interested in international trade policy, economic history, or bargaining theory.
  1
    The GATT was created in 1947, and it sponsored a total of eight multilateral negotiating rounds through
1994. With the conclusion of the eighth (Uruguay) round, the WTO came into existence on January 1, 1995,
and it includes the GATT and a set of additional agreements that extend GATT principles to new areas.



                                                    1
   To structure our empirical analysis, we establish a theoretical and institutional framework.
This framework adopts the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements (see
Bagwell and Staiger, 2010a, for a recent review of the central features of this theory). On top
of the basic theory, we layer the institutional features of reciprocity and MFN. Reciprocity
requires that equilibrium agreements increase export volume for a given country by the same
amount as the increase in its import volume. MFN requires that any concession granted in a
bilateral negotiation be extended unconditionally to the other members of GATT.
   With this framework established, we document a series of stylized facts about the negotia-
tions. We …nd that the numbers of back-and-forth o¤ers and counter-o¤ers in any bargain are
relatively small, and that the bargaining appears to have taken the form of essentially take-it-
or-leave-it o¤ers on the intensive margin (the level of the tari¤ cut o¤ered) and back-and-forth
o¤ers and counter-o¤ers on the extensive margin (which products are to be included in the
bargain). We document that countries make counter-proposals by adjusting the set of tari¤
cuts they o¤er, but do not propose adjustments to what their bargaining partners have o¤ered.
Substantial numbers of o¤ers are made that were not requested by the country to which the
o¤er is extended, and some o¤ers are made that were not requested by any country at all. There
is substantial two-way bargaining within narrow product categories, and signi…cant numbers
of these two-way bargains occur within a single bilateral. The biggest supplying countries
play the dominant role in negotiations, but the role of smaller supplying countries can also be
signi…cant. The set of requests a country entertains seems to conform with principal supplier
considerations, but when it comes to deciding which bargaining partners to make requests of on
a given product there appears to be a more narrow focus than principal supplier considerations
would dictate. And initial o¤ers can sit dormant for long periods only to be …nalized with a
single modi…cation at the time that other bargains are concluded.
   After establishing these stylized facts, we turn to analyzing the role of multilateralism in
the negotiations. While negotiations occurred bilaterally, the fact that they were occurring
simultaneously and in geographic proximity to each other allowed the possibility that some
negotiations might succeed by building on others. Put simply, if country A wants a concession
from country B, and country B from country C, and country C from country A, negotiation
outcomes that respect bilateral reciprocity would fail whereas bilateral negotiations which re-
spect only multilateral reciprocity can succeed. Indeed, writings from the time placed great
emphasis on the role of GATT in facilitating multilateral as opposed to bilateral reciprocity, as


                                               2
illustrated by this exert from an early GATT report (see also Curzon, 1966, pp. 75-77):

         Multilateral tari¤ bargaining, as devised at the London Session of the Preparatory
     Committee in October 1946 and as worked out in practice at Geneva and Annecy, is
     one of the most remarkable developments in economic relations between nations that has
     occurred in our time. It has produced a technique whereby governments, in determining
     the concessions they are prepared to o¤er, are able to take into account the indirect
     bene…ts they may expect to gain as a result of simultaneous negotiations between other
     countries, and whereby world tari¤s may be scaled down within a remarkably short time.
     (ICITO, 1949, p. 10)


   We look for evidence that GATT played this role using the o¤er and countero¤er data
from Torquay, and we exploit a “natural experiment”: the breakdown of the US-UK bilateral
midway through the round. Speci…cally, we test whether, after this breakdown, the o¤ers on
the table in the remaining US bilaterals were adjusted to compensate for the disappearance
of expected indirect bene…ts from the US-UK bilateral. Our …ndings support this view. We
…nd that goods which the US was negotiating with the UK were more likely to be revised into
new US o¤ers to other countries following the breakdown at the same time that these other
countries were withdrawing o¤ers to the US, indicating that these other countries had been
counting on concessions from negotiations to which they were not party.
   We close by modeling the decision to make an o¤er on a product, and the success of the
o¤er in becoming a …nalized concession. We focus on US o¤ers, and use a speci…cation that
is suggested by our theoretical and institutional framework, modeling these outcomes at the
product level as functions of the exporter concentration of the product into the US, the extent to
which major exporters of the product to the US were members of a preferential tari¤ agreement
(PTA) with third countries, the extent to which the US had a reciprocal desire for tari¤ cuts
from the major exporters of the product into the US, the fraction of exports of the product
to the US that came from countries that were not present at Torquay, the degree of product
di¤erentiation, a product-level measure of importer market power exerted by the US, whether
any country requested a tari¤ concession from the US on the product, and whether the US had
bound the product’s tari¤ in a previous GATT negotiating round.
   From the speci…cation of these o¤er and failure equations, we …nd that the US was more
likely to make o¤ers, and these o¤ers were more likely to succeed, when the US measure of

                                                3
importer market power is higher. This …nding supports the basic premise of the terms-of-trade
theory. Our …ndings regarding PTAs are more guarded: we …nd that the US was more likely
to make o¤ers on products where a PTA member was a major supplier of that product to the
US market; but we also …nd that those o¤ers were more likely to fail. On net, the …rst e¤ect
outweighs the second, and so our …ndings lend support to the view that PTAs were building
blocks for US liberalization at Torquay. We do not …nd evidence in either our o¤er or failure
equation that the US faced a major free-rider problem associated with MFN, which is in line
with the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory when MFN is combined with reciprocity.
       A focus on the US Torquay bilaterals keeps the data set manageable while still allowing us
to study the multilateral bargaining behavior of one of the major players in GATT. But can
lessons learned from a 65-year-old GATT round have relevance for the modern era? We believe
so, for at least two reasons. First, in its Torquay bargains the US was faced with a set of trade
bargaining challenges that have clear counterparts today: approaching the potential bargaining
externalities associated with MFN, addressing the existence of preferential tari¤s, and dealing
with asymmetries in the tari¤ levels across countries at di¤erent stages of development and
with di¤erent negotiating histories. And second, the basic features of the bargaining protocol
adopted at Torquay are still very much in use: for example, a similar protocol has been adopted
in the Doha Round for market access negotiations in the critical area of trade in services.2
       Our paper is related to several literatures. Recent papers in international trade have asked
whether there is empirical support for the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements (e.g.,
Broda, Limao and Weinstein, 2008, Bagwell and Staiger, 2011, Ludema and Mayda, 2013,
Bown and Crowley, 2013), whether MFN creates a free-rider problem for trade negotiations (e.g.,
Ludema and Mayda, 2009, 2013 ), and whether PTAs create building blocks or stumbling blocks
for multilateral liberalization (e.g., Limao, 2006, Karacaovali and Limao, 2008, Estevadeordal,
Freund and Ornelas, 2008). And economic historians and political scientists have long debated
what made GATT special as an institution for promoting trade liberalization (e.g., Irwin, 1995,
and Gowa and Kim, 2005). Our paper provides evidence on each of these questions, but for
the …rst time from the perspective of actual tari¤ bargaining data.
       In the context of the empirical bargaining literature, a handful of papers empirically examine
bilateral bargaining with not just outcome data, but detailed o¤er and counter-o¤er data. These
   2
    The Doha protocol for market access negotiations over trade in services shares the same bilateral request-
o¤er format as the Torquay protocol, though the Doha rules for the exchange of information across bilaterals
appear to have evolved somewhat. See, for example, Feketekuty (2008), WTO (2001) and WTO (2002).


                                                      4
include Keniston (2013) and Larsen (2014). In these settings, bilateral negotiations do not a¤ect
payo¤s of parties not involved in the bargain. In parallel, there is an emergent literature in
industrial organization empirically examining bilateral bargaining with externalities using data
on only outcomes as in Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012). Our paper is unique in looking at
detailed o¤er and counter-o¤er data in a setting of bilateral bargaining with externalities.
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we present the basic theory
of trade negotiations that guides our empirical analysis of the GATT bargaining data. We
describe the GATT bargaining protocols in section 3, and in section 4 we discuss the broad
features of the GATT bargaining data. In section 5 we present summary statistics relating
to the US Torquay bilaterals and describe stylized facts about multilateral tari¤ bargaining
that are suggested by these bargaining records. In sections 6 and 7 we draw on our theoretical
framework and present our empirical analysis of multilateralism in the negotiations and the
determinants of o¤ers and bargaining failure. Section 8 concludes.


2. The Theory of Trade Negotiations

In this section, we present the theory of trade negotiations that guides our empirical analysis.

2.1. The Trade Negotiation Problem

We begin by reviewing the textbook two-good general-equilibrium model of trade between
two countries, de…ning a general family of government preferences, and using the resulting
framework to identify the problem that a trade agreement can solve. For this purpose we
paraphrase the treatment in Bagwell and Staiger (2010a), and refer readers there for details.


The Model Two countries, domestic (no *) and foreign (*), trade two goods which are
normal in consumption and produced in perfectly competitive markets under conditions of
increasing opportunity costs. We let x (y) denote the natural import good of the domestic
(foreign) country. The local relative price facing domestic (foreign) producers and consumers is
de…ned as p    px =py (p       px =py ). Tari¤s are non-prohibitive, and we represent the domestic
(foreign) ad valorem import tari¤ as t (t ). Letting       (1 + t) and          (1 + t ), we then have
that p = pw      p( ; pw ) and p = pw =         p ( ; pw ), where pw     px =py is the “world” (i.e.,
untaxed) relative price. The foreign terms of trade is given by pw , and the domestic terms of
trade is 1=pw . We interpret     > 1 as an import tax and similarly for     .

                                                 5
    In each country, production levels for x and y are determined by the local relative price:
Qi = Qi (p) and Qi = Qi (p ) for i = fx; yg. Consumption is also in‡uenced by the local
relative price, which de…nes the trade-o¤ faced by consumers and determines the level and
distribution of factor income. Consumption depends as well on tari¤ revenue R (R ), which
is measured in units of the local export good at local prices and is distributed lump-sum to
domestic (foreign) consumers. Domestic and foreign consumption thus may be represented as
Di = Di (p; R) and Di = Di (p ; R ) for i = fx; yg. But tari¤ revenue is implicitly de…ned by
R = [Dx (p; R)     Qx (p)][p     pw ] or R = R(p; pw ) for the domestic country, and similarly we have
that R = [Dy (p ; R )          Qy (p )][1=p      1=pw ] or R = R (p ; pw ) for the foreign country; and
each country’s tari¤ revenue increases with its terms of trade, given our assumption of normal
goods. Hence, we may express national consumption as a function of local and world prices:
Ci (p; pw )   Di (p; R(p; pw )) and Ci (p ; pw )      Di (p ; R (p ; pw )) for i = fx; yg.
    Imports of x and exports of y for the domestic country are respectively de…ned by M (p; pw )
Cx (p; pw )   Qx (p) and E(p; pw )      Qy (p)     Cy (p; pw ). Likewise, for the foreign country, we have
M (p ; pw ) and E (p ; pw ), respectively. For any prices, domestic and foreign budget constraints
are represented by the trade-balance equations:

                      pw M (p; pw ) = E(p; pw ); and M (p ; pw ) = pw E (p ; pw ):                  (2.1)

The equilibrium world price, pew ( ;          ), is determined by market clearing for good y:

                                  E(p( ; pew ); pew ) = M (p ( ; pew ); pew );                      (2.2)

where we make explicit in (2.2) the functional dependencies for local prices. Market clearing
for good x is then guaranteed by (2.1) and (2.2).
    We assume dp=d        > 0 > dp =d            and @ pew =@   < 0 < @ pew =@ , thereby ruling out the
Metzler and Lerner paradoxes, and with the …nal two inequalities indicating that each country
is “large”(i.e., each country can improve its terms of trade by increasing its tari¤).


Government Preferences The traditional approach to representing government preferences
is to impose the assumption that governments maximize national income; by contrast, in the
political-economy approach, governments are motivated by distributional concerns. Here, we
follow Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) and adopt a general approach to modeling government
preferences, representing the objectives of the domestic and foreign governments with the gen-
eral functions W (p; pew ) and W (p ; pew ), respectively. We thus represent welfare in terms of

                                                        6
the prices that the tari¤s induce rather than directly in terms of the tari¤s themselves. This
approach enables us to disentangle the separate roles played by the terms-of-trade externality
and political motivations in explaining the purpose of a trade agreement.
      We place no restrictions on government preferences over local prices: as local prices deter-
mine the level and distribution of factor incomes, we therefore accommodate a wide range of
political motivations. We assume only that, holding its local price …xed, each government is
pleased when its terms of trade improve:

                                       Wpew < 0 and Wpew > 0:                                    (2.3)

The meaning of (2.3) in terms of the underlying tari¤ changes is that a government values the
international income transfer that is implied by an increase in its own tari¤ and a decrease in
the tari¤ of its trading partner that together leave its local price unaltered. As Bagwell and
Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss, governments maximize welfare functions of this form in both the
traditional approach and in the leading political-economy approaches to trade policy.


Unilateral Policies To analyze optimal unilateral (non-cooperative) policies, we suppose
that each government sets its tari¤ policy to maximize its welfare, for any given tari¤ choice of
its trading partner. The associated tari¤ reaction curves are de…ned implicitly by

                                       Wp + Wpew = 0; and                                        (2.4)

                                         Wp +      Wpew = 0;                                     (2.5)

where         [@ pew =@ ]=[dp=d ] < 0 and         [@ pew =@ ]=[dp =d ] < 0. As these expressions
highlight, the best-response tari¤ of each government strikes a balance between the e¤ects on
its welfare of the local- and world-price movements induced by its tari¤ choice.3
      The welfare implications of the local-price movement in the …rst term of (2.4) are domestic
in nature: they re‡ect the trade-o¤ for the domestic government between the costs of the
induced economic distortions and the bene…ts of any induced political support. By contrast, the
welfare implications of the world-price movement in the second term of (2.4) are international
in nature: they re‡ect the bene…ts to the domestic government of shifting some of the costs of
its policy choice onto the foreign government. Cost shifting occurs, since any improvement in
  3
    We assume throughout that the second-order conditions associated with any maximization problem hold
globally.


                                                  7
the domestic country’s terms of trade is a deterioration in the foreign country’s terms of trade.
We may similarly interpret (2.5) for the foreign government.
      In a Nash equilibrium, both governments are on their reaction curves, and a Nash equilib-
                       N       N
rium tari¤ pair (          ;       ) thus satis…es (2.4) and (2.5). We take this equilibrium to represent
the trade-policy decisions that governments would make if there were no trade agreement.


Trade Agreement Governments value a trade agreement if it leads to changes in trade
policies that generate Pareto improvements for governments relative to their welfare in the
Nash equilibrium. Thus, a trade agreement is potentially valuable if and only if the Nash
equilibrium is ine¢ cient, when e¢ ciency is measured relative to government preferences.
      Three observations can be stated.4 First, Nash tari¤s are indeed ine¢ cient. Second, both
governments can gain relative to Nash only if each agrees to set its tari¤ below its Nash level.
The …rst observation means that a mutually bene…cial trade agreement is possible, while the
second observation implies that reciprocal trade liberalization is necessary for mutual gains.
Intuitively, when a government contemplates an increase in its unilateral tari¤, it foresees an
improvement in its terms of trade; thus, it is in part motivated by the prospect of shifting some
of the costs of the tari¤ hike onto its trading partner. The incentive to shift costs naturally
leads governments to set tari¤s that are higher than is e¢ cient.
      To see if the terms-of-trade externality is the only reason for the ine¢ ciency of Nash tari¤s,
consider a hypothetical world in which governments are not motivated by the terms-of-trade
implications of their unilateral trade-policy choices, that is, a hypothetical non-cooperative
setting in which Wpew          0 and Wpew            0. Next de…ne the “domestic politically optimal reaction
curve”by Wp = 0, the “foreign politically optimal reaction curve”by Wp = 0, and the politically
                                            PO         PO
optimal tari¤s as any tari¤ pair (               ;          ) that satis…es the …rst-order conditions Wp = 0 and
Wp = 0: The third observation is that politically optimal tari¤s are e¢ cient (when evaluated
with actual government preferences): the terms-of-trade externality is the sole rationale for a
trade agreement in this (“terms-of-trade theory”) modeling framework.
      The politically optimal tari¤s are not the only e¢ cient tari¤s. In the special case where
governments maximize national welfare, e¢ cient tari¤s satisfy                   = 1=   (as Mayer, 1981 shows)
and politically optimal tari¤s correspond to reciprocal free trade (i.e.,                 =    = 1), a point on
the Mayer locus. A trade agreement enables governments to move from the ine¢ cient Nash
  4
      Formal proofs of these observations can be found in Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002).


                                                               8
tari¤s to some point on the contract curve, where the contract curve is that portion of the
e¢ ciency frontier on which neither government receives below-Nash welfare. The politically
optimal tari¤s lie on the contract curve, provided that the countries are not too asymmetric.

2.2. Reciprocity and MFN: Implications for the GATT bargaining data

We next consider the implications of the key GATT/WTO institutional features of reciprocity
and MFN for tari¤ bargaining and thus the GATT bargaining data. We note at the outset
that there are (at least) two complementary approaches to analyzing the GATT bargaining
data. A …rst approach emphasizes strict adherence to reciprocity and MFN. The bene…t of this
approach is that it can a¤ord a powerful simpli…cation to the GATT bargaining problem and
thereby provide structure to the analysis of the bargaining data. In this paper we emphasize
this approach. A second approach confronts the complications that arise when adherence
to reciprocity and/or MFN is not strict. This approach uses models of bilateral bargaining
with externalities, informed by other institutional features of the GATT bargaining setting, to
analyze the bargaining data. We leave this second approach to future work.
   We show below that the GATT/WTO pillars of reciprocity and MFN can dramatically
simplify the tari¤ bargaining problem. First, building on the two-country model in section 2.1,
we explain that strict adherence to reciprocity simpli…es strategic considerations resulting in
a dominant bargaining strategy. Second, in a multi-country version of the model, we con…rm
as well that strict adherence to reciprocity and MFN neutralizes third-party externalities. But
there is also a potential cost: if GATT bargaining partners are asymmetric in a sense described
below, then strict adherence to reciprocity and MFN also prevents governments from reaching
the e¢ ciency frontier. Finally, to provide further structure for our empirical analysis, we also
examine the relationship between bilateral and multilateral reciprocity when MFN is satis…ed.


Reciprocity We start with a review of the basic properties of reciprocity. For this purpose
we again paraphrase the treatment in Bagwell and Staiger (2010a), and refer readers there
for details. The GATT/WTO principle of reciprocity refers to the ideal of mutual changes
in trade policy which bring about changes in the volume of each country’s imports that are
equal in magnitude to the changes in the volume of its exports. The notion of reciprocity
arises in two places in the GATT/WTO. First, as we discuss in section 3, governments seek
a “balance of concessions” as a norm of negotiations, so that there is a rough equivalence


                                               9
between the market access value of the tari¤ cuts o¤ered by one government and the concessions
won from its trading partners. Second, when a government seeks to renegotiate, modify or
withdraw a previous concession as an original action, GATT Article XXVIII permits a¤ected
trading partners to withdraw “substantially equivalent concessions,”and thereby to retaliate in
a reciprocal manner. Hence, GATT’s reciprocity principle describes a …xed terms-of-exchange
rule (applied to increases and decreases) for negotiated market access, and …xes the particular
terms of exchange at one-for-one.5
      Continuing with the two-country model developed in section 2.1, we now state a formal
de…nition of reciprocity. Suppose that, beginning from an initial pair of tari¤s, ( 0 ;                         0
                                                                                                                    ), a tari¤
negotiation results in a change to a new pair of tari¤s, ( 1 ;                       1
                                                                                         ): Denoting the initial world and
domestic local prices as pew0         pew ( 0 ;      0
                                                         ) and p0     p( 0 ; pew0 ), and the new world and domestic
local prices as pew1      pew ( 1 ;   1
                                          ) and p1         p( 1 ; pew1 ), we say that the tari¤ changes conform to
the principle of reciprocity provided that

                       pew0 [M (p1 ; pew1 )     M (p0 ; pew0 )] = [E(p1 ; pew1 )           E(p0 ; pew0 )];              (2.6)

where changes in trade volumes are valued at the existing world price. We next use the domestic
balanced trade condition in (2.1) to establish that (2.6) may be rewritten as

                                               pw1
                                              [e         pew0 ]M (p1 ; pew1 ) = 0:                                      (2.7)

According to (2.7), reciprocity can be given a simple and striking characterization: mutual
changes in trade policy conform to the principle of reciprocity if and only if they leave the world
price unchanged. With this characterization in hand, we next consider how strict adherence to
reciprocity simpli…es the complexity of the bargaining problem.
      We examine an illustrative model. Let us take the pre-negotiation tari¤ pair as exogenous,
with the Nash tari¤s being the natural candidate. The initial tari¤ pair …xes a particular
iso-world-price line, where as we illustrate below any such line is upward sloping in a graph
with tari¤s on the axes. Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999), governments simultaneously
  5
    The adding-up constraint imposed by market clearing makes a one-for-one terms of exchange inevitable
as long as governments are committed to adopting a common terms of exchange for market access applied
uniformly across all governments. See Bagwell and Staiger (forthcoming) for elaboration on this point. We
note also that the application of GATT’s reciprocity principle in circumstances where a government modi…es
or withdraws a previous concession extends beyond Article XXVIII to include the case of temporary safeguard
measures under GATT Article XIX and responses to nulli…cation or impairment under GATT Article XXIII.
For shorthand we continue to refer only to GATT Article XXVIII in the text.


                                                               10
make tari¤ proposals, where any such proposal conforms to reciprocity and thus speci…es a
tari¤ pair ( ;     ) that lies along the …xed iso-world-price line. If the proposals agree, then
the common proposal is implemented; otherwise, the proposal with the higher tari¤ pair (i.e.,
the lowest trade volume) is implemented. This model clearly captures the reciprocal nature of
tari¤ liberalization negotiations in GATT; in addition, the structure of the game captures in
a short-hand way the potential for renegotiation under GATT Article XXVIII, since neither
government can be forced to import a volume greater than implied by its proposal.6
       As established by Bagwell and Staiger (1999), strict adherence to reciprocity ensures that
it is a dominant strategy for each government to propose the tari¤ pair that if implemented
would deliver its preferred trade volume along the given iso-world-price line. Indeed, once the
iso-world-price line is …xed, this conclusion holds whether or not a government has private
information about its preferred local price. In this sense, strict adherence to reciprocity can
induce governments to truthfully reveal their politically optimal reaction curves. The key
features of the argument are illustrated in Figure 1 (which is an adaptation of Figure 4 in
Bagwell and Staiger, 1999).7
       In the symmetric case, de…ned as when the Nash trade war leaves countries facing the same
terms of trade as would prevail at their politically optimal tari¤s, strict adherence to reciprocity
leads to an e¢ cient outcome. To develop this point, we refer to Figure 1, which depicts                       on
the vertical axis and        on the horizontal axis. The symmetric case is illustrated by the Nash
point labeled N(C), which lies on the same iso-world-price locus as does the politically optimal
point, which is labeled PO and lies below N(C). In Figure 1 we label as pw        w
                                                                         N (C) = pP O the

iso-world-price locus passing through both N(C) and PO. As reciprocity …xes the world price,
the two governments bargain along the iso-world-price locus pw        w
                                                             N (C) = pP O . The only dimension

on which the governments negotiate is the volume of trade to be exchanged at the …xed world
price (and trade volume is increasing as we move downward along the locus pw        w
                                                                           N (C) = pP O ).
   6
     Under GATT Article XXVIII, if a negotiated tari¤ pair induces more trade volume than one government
desires given the world price, then that government could raise its tari¤, knowing that the other government
would respond in reciprocal fashion. Our model captures this possibility in a short-hand way, by assuming that
the proposal with the highest tari¤ pair is ultimately implemented. For more on the trade-e¤ects interpretation
of reciprocity in GATT/WTO practice in line with our discussion above, see Hoda (2001) and the Appellate
Body Opinion in WTO (2004). Limao (2006, 2007) and Karacaovali and Limao (2008) provide empirical
evidence that actual tari¤ bargaining outcomes in the GATT/WTO conform to a reciprocity norm. See also US
International Chamber of Commerce (1955) for particular evidence on the importance of the reciprocity norm
for the results of the Torquay Round.
   7
     As we later discuss, with some additional structure this property implies that a researcher could invert tari¤
o¤ers to estimate government preferences.


                                                       11
                                                 p Nw (A)
                           E            N ( A)
                                                          p Nw (C )  p PO
                                                                        w

                                   A'        W*                         p Nw (B)
                                                     N (C )
                               A             W
                                                                         N (B )
                                                              W
                                                  W*
                                                                         Wp  0
                                                             B'
                                        PO          B
                                                                              E
                                                                  W 0
                                                                   *
                                                                   p*



                                                                                   *
                Figure 1: Reciprocity and Politcally Optimal Reaction Curves

At this …xed world price, the domestic government’s desired trade volume is determined where
its politically optimal reaction curve (labeled as Wp = 0) intersects the iso-world-price locus
pw        w
 N (C) = pP O ; and similarly the foreign government’s desired trade volume is determined where

its politically optimal reaction curve (labeled as Wp = 0) intersects the iso-world-price locus
pw        w
 N (C) = pP O . In the symmetric case, these two points of intersection correspond to the single

point which de…nes the political optimum (the point PO). Hence, according to Figure 1, the
governments would agree on the desired volume of trade. Since it is a dominant strategy for
each government in our game to propose the tari¤ pair that delivers its desired trade volume
(i.e., to truthfully reveal its politically optimal reaction curve), it follows that the outcome
of the bargaining game is the politically optimal tari¤ pair. Thus, in the symmetric case,
strict adherence to reciprocity ensures that the bargaining outcome yields an e¢ cient outcome
corresponding to the political optimum.
   Now consider an asymmetric environment. Let us begin with point N(A). As in the symmet-
ric case, the fact that reciprocity …xes the world price implies that the two governments bargain
along the iso-world-price locus passing through N(A), which we label pw
                                                                      N (A). At this …xed world

price, the domestic government’s desired trade volume is determined where its politically opti-
mal reaction curve Wp = 0 intersects the iso-world-price locus pw
                                                                N (A); and similarly the foreign



                                                   12
government’s desired trade volume is determined where its politically optimal reaction curve
Wp = 0 intersects the iso-world-price locus pw
                                             N (A). But the two governments no longer agree
                                                                                                             0
on the desired volume of trade; the foreign government’s desired trade volume (labeled as A ) is
less than the desired trade volume of the domestic government (not labeled). In practice, this
is where Article XXVIII comes in: any bargain that leaves the governments on a point along
                                                               0
the iso-world-price locus pw
                           N (A) and which is below A will be renegotiated at the request of the
                                            0
foreign government up to the point A . In terms of our game, it is a dominant strategy for each
government to propose the tari¤ pair that delivers its desired trade volume (i.e., to truthfully
reveal its politically optimal reaction curve), and so the outcome of the bargaining process is
              0
the point A : If GATT bargaining partners are asymmetric in the sense that we have described
above, then the strict adherence to reciprocity that is necessary for this result will itself prevent
governments from reaching the e¢ ciency frontier (labeled EE in Figure 1).8


Reciprocity with MFN We next consider MFN, and describe how reciprocity and MFN
together can neutralize bargaining externalities across bargaining pairs, thereby converting a
potentially complex multilateral bargaining problem into a comparatively straightforward set
of bilateral bargains. To develop this point, we extend the framework of section 2.1 to a world
of three countries. For this purpose we once again paraphrase the treatment in Bagwell and
Staiger (2010a), and refer readers there for details.
       The domestic country now exports good y to two foreign countries, denoted by the su-
perscripts ‘ 1’ and ‘ 2,’ and imports good x from each of these countries (who do not trade
with each other). Each foreign country can impose a tari¤ on its imports of good y from the
                                                                             i
domestic country (we denote the tari¤ of foreign-country i by                    ), while the domestic country
can set tari¤s on its imports of good x from the two foreign countries. If the domestic country
   8
     Indeed, as the discussion in US International Chamber of Commerce (1955, p. 33) well illustrates, the issue
of asymmetries between “high-tari¤” and “low-tari¤” countries was increasingly emphasized as an impediment
to further negotiations with each passing GATT round. If governments have private information about their
political preferences, then similar conclusions hold with respect to the ex post e¢ ciency of bargaining outcomes,
where the symmetric case then corresponds to the situation in which the pre-negotiation tari¤ pair lies along the
same iso-welfare-price line as the ex post politically optimal tari¤s. We conjecture that analogous arguments
apply as well if instead the private information that governments possess concerns their levels of impatience
or threat points. Throughout, we assume that governments are su¢ ciently patient that the negotiated tari¤s
satisfy self-enforcement constraints, and our conjecture is understood in this context. Finally, governments
might also have private information about the form of import demand and/or export supply functions, in which
case they might not agree as to the tari¤ pairs that satisfy the principle of reciprocity. We leave consideration
of this possibility for future work.



                                                       13
                           1                                                                                                        2        1
applies the tari¤              to imports from foreign-country 1 and the discriminatory tari¤                                           6=       to
imports from foreign-country 2, then separate world prices pw1 and pw2 apply to its trade with
foreign-countries 1 and 2 respectively. This follows because there can only be one local price
                                                                                                 1 w1                       2 w2
in the domestic economy, and the pricing relationships p =                                           p         and p =       p     then imply
pw1 6= pw2 whenever             1
                                    6=   2
                                             .
       The MFN rule imposes a very simple requirement: the domestic country must apply a
                                1            2
common tari¤ level                  =                to the imports of x, regardless of whether these imports
originate from foreign-country 1 or 2. An important implication of the MFN rule is then that
a single equilibrium world price, pew ( ;                  1
                                                               ;   2
                                                                       ), must prevail; consequently, we may continue
to express government preferences with the simple representation W (p; pew ), W 1 (p 1 ; pew ) and
W 2 (p 2 ; pew ), where p = pw                   p( ; pw ) and p i = pw =                 i
                                                                                              p i(       i
                                                                                                             ; pw ), i = 1; 2.
       In a multilateral world, the MFN principle ensures that the international externality at the
root of the problem to be solved by a trade agreement continues to exhibit the same structure
as in the simpler 2-country setting. This suggests that, in the company of MFN, the a¢ nity
between reciprocity and truth telling described above might extend to a multilateral setting.
We can show that this is indeed the case.
       In addition, MFN and reciprocity together eliminate third-country spillovers from bilateral
tari¤ bargaining. To see why, consider the case where foreign-country 2 is not involved in the
negotiations and keeps its tari¤ unaltered. In the presence of MFN, the domestic government
and the government of foreign-country 1 can still negotiate a reciprocal reduction in their tari¤s
               1
  and              which leaves the terms of trade pew ( ;                1
                                                                              ;       2
                                                                                          ) unaltered but reduces p while raising
p 1 , and which therefore provides these two countries with greater trade volume. But recall now
                                                                                  2
that in foreign-country 2 we have the relationship p                                  = pw =     2
                                                                                                     . It follows that, with             2
                                                                                                                                             held
…xed, if the negotiation between the domestic country and foreign-country 1 abides by MFN
(so that a single equilibrium world price pew prevails) and reciprocity (so that pew is unaltered)
           2
then p             and therefore W 2 (p 2 ; pew ) and foreign-country 2’s trade volume are unaltered by
these negotiations as well. In abiding by the principles of MFN and reciprocity, the domestic
government and the government of foreign-country 1 have thus engineered a bilateral tari¤
bargain without third-country spillovers.9
   9
    These and related points are developed in Bagwell and Staiger (2005, 2010b). An interesting question
relates to the role of the “principal supplier” rule in GATT/WTO bargaining, which as we detail below directs
the negotiations to emphasize the requests of the largest suppliers, if reciprocity and MFN induce the features
we emphasize above. Our conjecture is that the principal supplier rule might still play two important roles



                                                                   14
    Intuitively, the reciprocity principal balances two opposing third-party externalities that
are present in bilateral MFN tari¤ bargaining: a negative externality on third parties arises
when foreign country 1 cuts its tari¤ on imports of good y in a bilateral bargain with the home
country, and the externality is transmitted to competing importers of good y (foreign country
2); at the same time, a positive third-party externality arises when the home country cuts its
tari¤ on imports of good x in a bilateral bargain with foreign country 1 and is transmitted to
competing exporters of good x (foreign country 2). If the home country and foreign country 1
engage in a bilateral MFN tari¤ bargain that cuts the tari¤ of foreign country 1 and the tari¤ of
the home country in a way that just balances these two opposing third-party externalities, they
can then neutralize the third-party externality of their bilateral tari¤ bargain. This balance is
precisely what GATT’s principle of reciprocity achieves in a multi-country MFN world.
    In this general manner, reciprocity and MFN together can neutralize bargaining externalities
across bargaining pairs, while at the same time generating dominant strategy selections for
governments, thereby converting a potentially complex multilateral bargaining problem into a
comparatively straightforward set of bilateral bargains. Still, as we have pointed out, if GATT
bargaining partners are asymmetric, then the strict adherence to reciprocity and MFN that is
necessary for these results will itself prevent governments from reaching the e¢ ciency frontier.


Multilateral Reciprocity The preceding discussion suggests a pragmatic solution for gov-
ernments to what might otherwise be an insurmountably complicated bargaining problem:
endeavor to set up the GATT multilateral bargaining problem as a collection of simultaneous
bilateral bargains that adhere strictly to the twin pillars of reciprocity and MFN.10 To pro-
vide further structure for our empirical analysis, we now illustrate and examine the distinction
between bilateral and multilateral reciprocity. As we describe further in section 6, this dis-
in this environment: …rst, where strict reciprocity is not feasible – because for example the dynamic e¤ects of
tari¤ liberalization make it di¢ cult to achieve reciprocity in the short run even for tari¤ cuts that do achieve
reciprocity in the long run – and hence some spillovers become inevitable, arranging bargains in accordance
with the principal-supplier rule is a natural technique for minimizing third-party spillovers; and second, even
if all third-party spillovers were eliminated by a strict adherence to MFN and reciprocity, countries on the
“long” side of the market for tari¤ cuts and who therefore face the prospect of being rationed in their ability
to …nd enough willing bargaining partners might naturally employ the principal supplier rule to prioritize their
bargaining e¤orts. In any case we view the development of a compelling answer to this question as an important
task for future research.
   10
      We have described these results in a simple 2-good model, and it remains to demonstrate that they extend
to a many-good setting of the kind that would more accurately describe the GATT bargaining environment.
We believe that the key features can be extended to such environments along the lines of Bagwell and Staiger
(2002, Appendix B), but this extension remains an important task for future research.


                                                       15
tinction was emphasized in GATT writings at the time of the early rounds and will play an
important role in our empirical analysis. After de…ning and illustrating multilateral reciprocity,
we specify a multilateral bargaining setting and argue that each country again proposes for
itself a tari¤ that corresponds to its politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤ when countries use
dominant strategies, provided that tari¤ proposals satisfy MFN as well as multilateral - but
not necessarily bilateral - reciprocity.


                                                                              *1
                                                                                                *1
                                                                                        x

                                                                                  *2

                                                                                        x       *2
                      y
             1

                                                                                            x
                                   1
                                                                                                *3
                                                                           *3




                                Figure 2: Multilateral Reciprocity

   We begin by illustrating the distinction between bilateral and multilateral reciprocity. To
this end, we consider a 4-country extension of the 2-good general equilibrium trade model
described in section 2.1. Figure 2 illustrates the pattern of trade and tari¤ protection for the
domestic country 1 and its three foreign trading partners 1, 2 and 3. In line with our
discussion above, we assume that the equilibrium world price is decreasing in the domestic
country tari¤ and increasing in each of the foreign country tari¤s:
                                                 ( ) (+) (+) (+)
                                        w    w     1   1   2   3
                                     pe     pe (   ;    ;   ;      ):

For purposes of illustration, we suppose that domestic country 1 is engaged in a bilateral bargain
with foreign country 1, and also engaged in a bilateral bargain with foreign country 2, but not

                                                   16
with foreign country 3. Let the initial tari¤ vector be given as (^1 ; ^ 1 ; ^ 2 ; ^ 3 ) and suppose
that, in combination with the initial tari¤ level ^ 3 , the three new tari¤ levels                                               1
                                                                                                                                     ,     1
                                                                                                                                               and   2

(with      1
               < ^1 ,      1
                                <^    1
                                          and        2
                                                         < ^ 2 ) would preserve the world price at its initial level, so
that pew ( 1 ;     1
                       ;   2
                               ; ^ 3 ) = pew (^1 ; ^ 1 ; ^ 2 ; ^ 3 ).
       We …rst illustrate a path from the initial to new tari¤s that is characterized by bilateral
reciprocity between domestic country 1 and each of its two bargaining partners. Suppose the
domestic country starts with foreign country 1 and negotiates a reciprocal deal, in which the
domestic country lowers its tari¤ from ^1 to ~1 in exchange for a reciprocal reduction in the tari¤
                                            1            1
of foreign country 1 from ^                     to           ; where the exchange preserves the level of pew . The domestic
country could then turn to foreign country 2 and negotiate an additional reciprocal deal, in
which the domestic country agrees to a further lowering of its tari¤ from ~1 to                                                   1
                                                                                                                                         in exchange
                                                                                                             2        2
for a reciprocal reduction in the tari¤ of foreign country 2 from ^                                              to       , again preserving the
level of pew . Each of the just-described bilaterals satis…es reciprocity (and each therefore leaves
the level of pew unchanged), and hence the bargain described conforms to bilateral reciprocity,
in the sense that the bilateral between the domestic country and foreign country i involves
a reciprocal exchange of tari¤ cuts between the domestic country and foreign country i, for
i = 1; 2.11 Notice further that, since the bilateral negotiations leave the world price unaltered,
they do not a¤ect foreign country 3, and thus do not give rise to a free-rider problem.
       We next consider an alternative path from the initial to new tari¤s in which bilateral reci-
procity fails but multilateral reciprocity holds. In its bilateral with foreign country 1, suppose
that the domestic country agrees to lower its tari¤ from ^1 to                                           1
                                                                                                                 in exchange for a reduction
                                                                   1             1
in the tari¤ of foreign country 1 from ^                               to            . The tari¤ changes agreed to in this bilateral
would by themselves result in a rise in the level of pew , as at the existing world price foreign
country 1 would experience a smaller increase in the volume of its exports than the increase in
the volume of its imports: these tari¤ changes are not bilaterally reciprocal. In its bilateral with
foreign country 2, suppose that the domestic country o¤ers no further tari¤ cut but foreign
                                                                       2             2
country 2 agrees to lower its tari¤ from ^                                 to            . The tari¤ changes agreed to in this bilateral
would by themselves result in a drop in the level of pew , as at the existing world price foreign
country 2 would experience a greater increase in the volume of its exports than the increase
in the volume of its imports: these tari¤ changes are not bilaterally reciprocal either. Nev-
  11
     Indeed, the procedure we describe here corresponds to the so-called “split concession” procedure often
utilized by the US in its sequential bilateral tari¤ bargains under the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act that
predated GATT (see Beckett, 1941, p. 23).


                                                                                17
ertheless, taken together these two bilaterals satisfy multilateral reciprocity, as in combination
they do leave the world price unaltered; that is, both foreign country 1 and foreign country
 2 experience an equal increase in the volume of their exports and imports once each takes
account of the indirect trade e¤ects associated with the tari¤ changes negotiated in the other
bilateral. Further, with the world price unaltered by the combination of bilaterals, a free-rider
problem does not arise, as foreign country 3 is again una¤ected by the bilaterals.
       In our Online Supplementary Notes, we examine our dominant-strategy arguments in the
multi-country setting. Speci…cally, we assume that bilateral negotiations must satisfy MFN and
multilateral reciprocity, and develop one formalization of our dominant-strategy arguments for
a simple 3-country model (with one domestic country and two foreign countries). We de…ne a
game in which the three countries take as given the initial tari¤ vector and the accompanying
world price, and then make simultaneous tari¤ proposals. A strategy for each country is a
proposal concerning its own tari¤ and that of its trading partner(s), where a proposal must
satisfy MFN and multilateral reciprocity (i.e., if accepted, the proposed tari¤s would maintain
the initial world price). Since the foreign countries do not trade with one another, a proposal
from a foreign country leaves the tari¤ of the other foreign country at its initial value. As in the
2-country model above, each country’s proposal is associated with an “implied import volume”
for itself. We then construct a simple mechanism that takes the three proposals and assigns a
vector of tari¤s. The domestic country’s proposal is assigned if the proposals agree.12 If the
proposals do not agree, we require that the constructed mechanism assigns a vector of tari¤s
that maximizes the value of trade volume subject to maintaining the initial world price and not
forcing any country to import a volume in excess of its implied import volume.13
  12
      Agreement is de…ned to mean that, for any foreign country i, the domestic country and foreign country
  i make the same proposal as regards foreign country i’s tari¤ while foreign country i is indi¤erent between
its own proposal and the domestic-country proposal as regards the tari¤s for the domestic country and foreign
country j; j 6= i.
   13
      This requirement delivers a unique tari¤ vector assignment when the value of the domestic country’s implied
import volume weakly exceeds the aggregate value of the foreign countries’ implied import volumes. If the
domestic country is on the “short”side, rationing occurs, and our requirement does not result in a unique tari¤
vector assignment. For this case, we construct the mechanism so that it randomly selects one foreign country to
have …rst priority. The constructed mechanism assigns tari¤s such that the prioritized foreign country imports
a volume equal to the minimum of its implied import volume and the value of the domestic country’s implied
import volume, while the other foreign country imports a volume equal to the di¤erence between the value of
the domestic country’s implied import volume and the prioritized foreign country’s implied import volume (if
that di¤erence is positive). Similar results would obtain under other prioritization rules, including rules that
give priority to a principal supplier, provided that priority is not in‡uenced by foreign proposals (conditional
on being in the case where the domestic country is short).



                                                       18
   For the constructed mechanism, if countries use dominant strategies, we show that each
country’s proposal must specify a tari¤ for itself that delivers its preferred trade volume, given
the initial world price. As our 4-country illustration above suggests, a novel feature of the
multi-country setting is that the domestic country now has a set of dominant strategies. This
set is de…ned by proposals under which the domestic country proposes for itself the tari¤ that
delivers its preferred trade volume given the world price and proposes for the foreign countries
any tari¤s that when combined with the domestic tari¤ maintain the world price and thus ensure
multilateral reciprocity. Importantly, the set of dominant strategies for the domestic country
allows that its proposed tari¤ for itself may violate bilateral reciprocity when paired with its
proposed tari¤ for an individual foreign country. And …nally, as in the two-country model, we
note that once the world price is …xed, dominant strategy proposals are similarly characterized
even when governments have private information about their respective preferences.
   The basic arguments apply as well in a 4-country setting, where country 3 does not partici-
pate in the negotiations. In this context, when negotiations must satisfy MFN and multilateral
reciprocity, (i) if countries 1, 1 and 2 use dominant strategies, then each of these countries
makes a proposal that speci…es its politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤ for itself, and (ii)
foreign country 3 will be una¤ected by the bilaterals (and there can be no free rider problems
as a result). As before, under dominant strategy proposals, the implemented tari¤ vector is
again e¢ cient if and only if the initial world price is set at the politically optimal level.


3. The GATT Bargaining Protocols

The …rst …ve GATT rounds adopted selective product-by-product tari¤ negotiations on a bilat-
eral request-o¤er basis, as did the eighth (Uruguay) and to varying degrees the present (Doha)
round. As Hoda (2001) explains, the protocols for the …rst …ve rounds were broadly similar:

         Each round began with the adoption of a decision convening a tari¤ conference on a
      …xed future date. The decision required the contracting parties to exchange request lists
      and furnish the latest edition of their customs tari¤s and their foreign trade statistics for
      a recent period well in advance of the …rst day of the conference and the o¤ers had to be
      made on the …rst day. The negotiations were concluded generally over a period of six to
      seven months after the o¤ers had been made...These negotiations were essentially bilateral
      between pairs of delegations. (pp. 44-45)


                                                   19
   As a general matter, the initial request lists of tari¤ cuts were common knowledge (circulated
among all of the participating governments) in each of the …rst …ve rounds, while the back-
and-forth o¤ers and countero¤ers that transpired within each bilateral were known only to the
participating governments in that bilateral, until the GATT Secretariat was informed that an
outcome for that bilateral (success or failure) had been achieved, at which point the details of
the outcome became common knowledge. Tari¤s agreed in a bilateral would apply on a non-
discriminatory basis to exports from any GATT-member country through the MFN principle.


General Objectives and the Nature of Negotiations The protocols all included a state-
ment of general objectives (“...to bring about the substantial reduction of tari¤s and the elim-
ination of tari¤ preferences”), and a description of the general nature of negotiations which
placed emphasis on achieving balance in the negotiations and ‡exibility to maintain tari¤s at
individually preferred levels. For example, the protocol for the initial 1947 GATT round in
Geneva stated that

         ...tari¤ negotiations shall be on a ‘reciprocal’and ‘mutually advantageous’basis. This
     means that no country would be expected to grant concessions unilaterally, without action
     by others, or to grant concessions to others which are not adequately counterbalanced by
     concessions in return

   The elimination of tari¤ preferences (mainly those of the British Commonwealth system,
which were often product speci…c and re‡ected a grant of market access at preferential but
not necessarily zero tari¤ rates) was also emphasized in the early GATT protocols; and it was
anticipated that negotiated reductions in MFN tari¤s would be the main engine for achieving
this goal, as re‡ected for example in the statement from the protocol for the initial 1947 GATT
round in Geneva that

         All negotiated reductions in most-favored-nation import tari¤s shall operate automat-
     ically to reduce or eliminate margins of preference.


A Base Date for Preference Standstill and Avoidance of New Tari¤s It was agreed
that no margin of tari¤ preference should be increased as a result of GATT negotiations, and
to implement this agreement a base date for the calculations of the preference margins existing
prior to the …rst GATT negotiating round had to be set. In addition, in order to avoid the

                                                 20
problem of “bargaining tari¤s” raised on the eve of a round for bargaining purposes, each
protocol contained rules against such conduct.


Principal Supplier Rule All protocols envisaged that the selective product-by-product tari¤
negotiations would proceed according to the “principal supplier” rule. In the protocol for the
initial 1947 GATT round in Geneva which was held among 23 member countries of the (Havana
Charter) Preparatory Committee, the principal supplier rule was de…ned:

         It is generally agreed that the negotiations should proceed on the basis of the ‘principal
     supplier’ rule, as de…ned in this paragraph. This means that each country would be
     expected to consider the granting of tari¤ or preference concessions only on products of
     which the other members of the Preparatory Committee, are, or are likely to be, principal
     suppliers... In other words, if a principal part of total imports of a particular product into
     the territory of a particular member is supplied by the other members of the Preparatory
     Committee taken together, then the importing member should, as a general rule, be willing
     to include that product in the negotiations, even though no single other member of the
     Committee, taken by itself, supplies a principal part of the total imports of the product.


Extensive Form of Negotiations The protocols described procedures for conducting ne-
gotiations which amounted to a four stage process. At a broad level, these procedures were
described in greatest detail in the protocol for the initial 1947 GATT round in Geneva, though
as we explain further below there was some evolution in particular features of these procedures
across rounds. The protocol for the 1947 round stipulated the following timing:

  1. Prior to the opening of talks, each participating country transmits a list of requests of
     concessions it seeks at the product level.

  2. At the opening of talks, each country submits a list of concessions it would o¤er given
     the requests it has made of others.

  3. Pairs of countries negotiate directly over concessions of primary concern between those
     two countries. This is e¤ectively simultaneous interconnected bargaining.

  4. As bilateral agreements are reached, third party countries can examine the agreements,
     and potentially modify their agreements in response.

                                                  21
   Later rounds evolved along several speci…c dimensions. In particular, the rules on sharing
the information among participants about initial o¤ers (the second stage of the 1947 protocol)
evolved somewhat from round to round. For example, the protocol for the 1949 Annecy Round
states:

          ...On 11 April, 1949, – that is, on the …rst day of the meeting..., each government
      will make known to all participating governments the concessions which it is prepared to
      o¤er to each government from which a request for concessions was received...When the
      concessions o¤ered by all participating governments have been exchanged and distributed,
      negotiations between pairs of delegations will begin.

Here it seems clear that the initial o¤ers, like the initial requests, were to be common knowledge.
But by the 1950-51 Torquay Round, the emphasis on sharing initial (second stage) o¤ers among
participants seems to have disappeared. The Torquay protocol states:

          On September 28, 1950 – that is, on the …rst day of the meeting in Torquay – each
      government should be ready to make known the concessions it is prepared to o¤er to each
      government from which a request for concessions is received...When the o¤ers have been
      exchanged, negotiations between pairs of delegations will begin.


4. The GATT Bargaining Records

The GATT bargaining records make it possible to recover the complete history of o¤ers and
countero¤ers in a given round. For the Torquay Round, we illustrate in Figure 3 with a sample
of the bargaining record from the US-France bilateral negotiation from that round.
   This particular bilateral began on February 6 1951 with an exchange of secret o¤ers (not
shown in Figure 3) between France and the US describing the tari¤ cuts to which each would
agree if the other met its earlier (and publicly) announced requests. The excerpted bargaining
record in Figure 3 describes a portion of the (secret) request by the US on February 24 that
France supplement its February-6 o¤er. France did supplement its o¤er on March 31 1951, and
on that day the US and France announced publicly the agreement resulting from their bilateral
(which amounted to the US tari¤ cuts o¤ered to France on February 6 and the supplemented
France tari¤ cuts o¤ered to the US on March 31). By following in this way the timing and se-
quence of the request-o¤er records, we can construct the full sequence of o¤ers and countero¤ers
that led to agreement or disagreement for each of the bilaterals in the Torquay round.

                                                 22
                     Figure 3: Excerpt of US-France Negotiation Record

   To illustrate further how the GATT bargaining records can be used to illuminate the multi-
lateral bargaining behavior of participants in the Round, we highlight in Figure 4 the bargaining
behavior of the US with regard to one particular 6-digit product, HS 843319 (Mowers for lawns,
other than powered and with a horizontal rotating cutter). Speci…cally, Figure 4 depicts the
complete request-o¤er sequence involving the tari¤s on such lawn mowers between the US and
each of the …ve countries whose bilateral bargains with the US involved a request and/or o¤er
on this product. We denote by the symbol R a request, by O an o¤er, by OW a withdrawn
o¤er and by A an agreement. These symbols are positioned at the height of the tari¤ request
or o¤er, so that a horizontal line between any two symbols indicates that the tari¤ level across
those two actions is the same, while an upward sloping (downward sloping) line between any
two symbols indicates that the tari¤ level across those two actions increased (decreased).
   As re‡ected in Figure 4, between June 1 and July 1, 1950, the US made requests of all …ve
of these countries (Canada, New Zealand, Peru, Sweden and the UK) to reduce their import
tari¤s on such lawn mowers, and the US received requests to reduce its own tari¤ on these lawn
mowers from two of the countries (Canada and the UK). In the months that followed, Peru and
Sweden each made o¤ers to the US at a level which met the US request, while New Zealand,
Canada and the UK each made o¤ers to the US at a level which did not go all the way to meet


                                               23
the US request and New Zealand and the UK subsequently withdrew their o¤ers; and for its
part, the US did not respond to the Canadian request but did make an o¤er to the UK to cut
its tari¤ on this product, an o¤er that the US subsequently withdrew. The …nal commitments
on HS 843319 tari¤s emerging from these …ve bilaterals were three: a commitment by Canada
negotiated with the US to reduce the Canadian tari¤ on lawn mowers; a commitment by Peru
negotiated with the US to reduce the Peruvian tari¤ on lawn mowers; and a commitment by
Sweden negotiated with the US to reduce the Swedish tari¤ on lawn mowers.


                                                                                                          HS 843319
                                                                                                                                                                                     US request/
                                                                             R                                        O                                                    A
                 US‐Peru




                                                                                                                                                                                     Peru offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                     Peru request/
                                                                                                                                                                                     US offer
                                           0
                US‐New Zealand US‐Sweden




                                                                                                                                                                                     US request/
                                                     R                                                    O                                                      A                   Sweden offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sweden request/
                                                                                                                                                                                     US offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                            O                             OW         US request/
                                                     R                                                                                                                               New Zealand offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                     New Zealand request/
                                                                                                                                                                                     US offer
                                           0
                US‐Canada




                                                                                                O                                                                            A       US request/
                                                                                       R                                                                                             Canada offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                     Canada request/
                                                                   R                                                                                                                 US offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                          OW         US request/
                                                                                                                                                      O
                 US‐UK




                                                                   R                                                                                                                 UK offer
                                           0
                                               R                                                                                  O                                       OW         UK request/
                                               Level unspecified                                                                                                                     US offer
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   date
                                                                                                                                 11/17/50
                                                                                                           10/10/50
                                                                                                                      10/19/50




                                                                                                                                            12/1/50
                                                                             6/30/50
                                                                   6/15/50




                                                                                                                                                                           3/31/51
                                                                                                                                                      2/17/51




                                                                                                                                                                3/15/51
                                                                                                10/6/50
                                                      6/1/50




                                                                                       7/1/50




Figure 4: Requests and O¤ers on Lawn Mowers in US Torquay Bilaterals.
Notes: This Figure depicts the complete request-o¤er sequence between the US and each of the …ve countries
whose bilateral bargains with the US involved a request and/or o¤er on lawn mowers (HS 843319). The symbol
R denotes a request, O an o¤er, OW a withdrawn o¤er and A an agreement. These symbols are positioned at
the height of the tari¤ request or o¤er, so that a horizontal (upward/downward sloping) line between any two
symbols indicates that the tari¤ level across those two actions is the same (increased/decreased).


   A critical question is the degree to which the GATT bargaining records provide a complete
catalog of every o¤er and countero¤er that was tendered in a round. If they do not, then there
is still valuable information in the recorded bargaining outcomes in the sense that not only


                                                                                                                      24
successful bargains but also bargaining failure can be observed, but the o¢ cial record of o¤ers
and countero¤ers is less likely to be an informative object of study.
       While it would be implausible to suppose that there was no communication outside of the
formal o¤ers and countero¤ers recorded in the GATT bargaining records, at least for the earlier
rounds there is reason to believe that the records o¤er a fairly complete catalog of the tendered
o¤ers and countero¤ers.14 This is so for two reasons. First, in older rounds such as the Torquay
Round that predated the ready use of electronic records and portable computing devices, a
written record of the detailed product-level bilateral tari¤ cutting proposals –proposals which
typically included dozens if not hundreds of product-level tari¤ cuts to be considered –was the
only way that a proposal or counter-proposal could be o¤ered and assessed.15 Second, the …nal
bargaining outcomes in the GATT bargaining records predominantly emerge in a continuous
fashion from the recorded requests, o¤ers and countero¤ers, rather than appearing in the …nal
agreement as a new and never-before-recorded proposal – for example, over 95% of the exact
tari¤ bindings to which the US ultimately agreed in the Torquay Round …rst appear in the US-
Torquay bargaining records as either requests by US bargaining partners or as earlier US o¤ers
to some bargaining partner – which is at least consistent with the lack of important informal
proposals being tendered outside of the recorded o¤ers and countero¤ers.16
       There are a number of signi…cant challenges that must be overcome before the GATT
bargaining data can be used for research. The Online Data Appendix covers these issues
in detail. The most challenging issue concerned creating product level concordances across
negotiations. Our solution was to concord product level descriptions into HS 1988 6-digit
codes. We henceforth refer to an HS6 code as a product.
  14
      In fact, we can document one example of explicit communication that occurred outside of the GATT Torquay
bargaining records. In a secret cable from the head of the UK delegation to the head of the US delegation at
Torquay on March 14 1951 (see US State Department, 1951a), the UK presented the US with a revised request
list. However, this example also seems to acknowledge the non-routine nature of the action with the following
statement made by the head of the UK delegation: “I should be glad if you would consider this list as a revised
request list in what one would have to regard as changed circumstances...”.
   15
      We thank Sushan Demirjian, Deputy Assistant USTR for Market Access and Industrial Competitiveness,
for pointing this out to us.
   16
      More speci…cally, only 44 out of the 988 tari¤ bindings to which the US agreed in its Torquay bilaterals
do not appear as either requests or earlier o¤ers in some US bilateral; and this count re‡ects an upper bound,
because the numbers are calculated at the HS6 level and a lack of match could (and does in each of the cases we
have checked) re‡ect changes in the 10 digit product mix in any given HS6 product category over the course of
the bargain rather than the appearance of a tari¤ binding in the …nal agreement that did not appear somewhere
in the US bilateral bargaining records at an earlier date. That said, this statistic may be less informative
regarding the completeness of the bargaining records than it …rst appears, because as we discuss below there is
very little intensive-margin movement in the o¤ers through time.


                                                      25
5. Stylized Facts of GATT Tari¤ Bargaining

We now use data from the US bilaterals at Torquay to develop a number of stylized facts relating
to GATT tari¤ bargaining. While our subsequent data analysis in part helps to provide possible
interpretations for some of these stylized facts, our main purpose here is simply to identify the
facts. We start with an overview of the number of parties and the timing and frequency of
o¤ers. We then state a set of stylized facts, focusing …rst on bargaining patterns alone and then
introducing trade data and expanding our focus to bargaining and trade patterns.

5.1. Overview

We begin with a helicopter view of the US-Torquay negotiations. There were 39 participating
countries in the Torquay Round, accounting for well over 80 percent of world trade as of 1949
(see, for example, US Department of State, 1951b, p. 1).17 However, the Benelux customs union
(consisting of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands) negotiated its common external
tari¤s as a single entity, reducing the total number of parties negotiating at Torquay to 37. Of
the 666 possible bilaterals, 588 were initiated. The US was engaged in bilateral negotiations
with 24 of its 36 potential negotiating partners (i.e., the US made initial requests of and/or
received initial requests from 24 of these countries).18 It reached …nal agreement with 15.
       In Figure 5 we provide an overview of the timing and actions – request (R), modi…cation
of request (RM), o¤er (O), modi…cation of o¤er (OM), withdrawal of o¤er (OW), agreement
(A) and modi…cation of agreement (AM) – for each of the 24 bilateral negotiations involving
the US at Torquay. The dates of each action are recorded on the horizontal axis. For each
US negotiating partner listed on the vertical axis, the bottom (blue) line displays the actions
relating to the US tari¤ – the o¤ers by the US and the requests of its negotiating partners –
while the top (red) line displays the actions relating to the foreign negotiating partner’s tari¤
–the requests by the US and the o¤ers of its negotiating partners. Figure 5 displays 57 dates,
distributed across the 10 month period of the Torquay Round, on which the US and/or at least
  17
     The countries were Australia, Austria, Benelux Countries – Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Brazil,
Burma, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Ger-
many, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Italy, Korea, Liberia, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Southern Rhodesia, Sweden, Syria-Lebanon, Turkey, South Africa, United King-
dom, United States and Uruguay. Of these, six were negotiating for accession at Torquay: Austria, Germany,
Korea, Peru, Philippines and Turkey.
  18
     The countries present at Torquay with which the US did not negotiate were Burma, Ceylon, Chile, Finland,
Greece, Liberia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Philippines, Southern Rhodesia, Syria-Lebanon and Uruguay.


                                                     26
               United Kingdom                                                 R                                                                 RM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O                                                                                                                                                                                     OM                                                                                  OW
                                                  R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OW
                        Turkey                    R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                  R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                       Sweden                     R                                                                                                                                                                                                   RM                                                                O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                    R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A                           AM
                  South Korea                                                                                                                                               R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O                                         A
                   South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                          Peru                                                                            R                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                          R                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                       Norway                                                                             R                                                            RM                                                                                                                                                   O                                                                                   OM                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                       O                                                                                                                                                           OM                                                      OM                          A                                                                                               AM
                  New Zealand                     R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OW
                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OW
                          Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                         R                                                                                                                O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                  R                                                                                           RM                                                                                                                                                                                        O                                                                                                                               OM                                                                                                                                                  OM                              AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                     Indonesia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R                                                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                                                                                                                       O                                           OM                                                                                                                          A
                          India                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                              OW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                                                                                                                                              OW
                          Haiti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                    Guatemala                                                                      R
                     Germany                                                                                R                                                                                                                           RM                                                                                         O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                       RM                                                                           O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A             AM
                        France                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O                                  RM                                                                     A
                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                                                                         A
            Dominican Republic                                                                              R                                                                                                                           RM                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A




27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R                                                O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                      Denmark                                                                                                                                               R                                                       RM                                                                                                                                              O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                Czechoslovakia                                                R
                         Cuba                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R                                         O             OW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                         O             OW
                       Canada                                                                               R                                                                                                                           RM                                                                    O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                    OM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                         Brazil                   R                                                                                                                    RM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RM                                                    O                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                                                      OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                       Benelux                    R                                                                                                                                                                                     RM                                                           O                                                       OM                                                                                                OM                                             OM                                                                                                    A                                                 AM
                                                  R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O                        OM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A                                                 AMAM
                        Austria                   R                           R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A                                         AM
                      Australia                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                                                                                           O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OW




                                                                                                                        07-Jul-1950
                                                                                                                                      14-Jul-1950
                                                                                                                                                    21-Jul-1950
                                                                                                                                                                  28-Jul-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06-Oct-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13-Oct-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20-Oct-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        27-Oct-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          06-Apr-1951




                                                  02-Jun-1950
                                                                09-Jun-1950
                                                                              16-Jun-1950
                                                                                            23-Jun-1950
                                                                                                          30-Jun-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    05-Jan-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12-Jan-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19-Jan-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              26-Jan-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            02-Feb-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          09-Feb-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16-Feb-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23-Feb-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    02-Mar-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  09-Mar-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16-Mar-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23-Mar-1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30-Mar-1951




                                                                                                                                                                                04-Aug-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                              11-Aug-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                            18-Aug-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25-Aug-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        01-Sep-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      08-Sep-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15-Sep-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22-Sep-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29-Sep-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      03-Nov-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10-Nov-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17-Nov-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                24-Nov-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              01-Dec-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            08-Dec-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15-Dec-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        22-Dec-1950
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      29-Dec-1950




                                    26-May-1950
     Figure 5: Timing of Actions in the US Torquay Bilaterals. Notes: Time is on the horizontal axis. For each US negotiating partner
     listed on the vertical axis, the bottom (blue) line displays the actions relating to the US tari¤ while the top (red) line displays the actions relating
     to the foreign negotiating partner’s tari¤. R indicates request. O indicates o¤er. A indicates agreement. M indicates modi…cation. W indicates
     withdrawal
one of its negotiating partners took an action in their bilateral. As Figure 5 illustrates, most
of the dates involve multiple actions across a number of bilaterals.

5.2. Stylized Facts: Bargaining Patterns

We now record and document six stylized facts relating to GATT bargaining patterns.

Stylized Fact 1: The numbers of back-and-forth o¤ers and counter-o¤ers in any bilateral
bargain are relatively small, and for some bargains the initial o¤ers sit dormant on the table
for long periods of time and are then …nalized with a single modi…cation at the time that other
bargains are concluded.

       While the US and/or its negotiating partners took actions on 57 separate dates before
reaching a conclusion to the Round, Figure 5 reveals that the amount of “back-and-forth”
within any bilateral is much more limited, often consisting of only a couple of actions by each
party over the course of the Round and never more than a handful by either. In Tables 1 and
2 we present speci…c evidence on the amount of back-and-forth o¤ers and counter-o¤ers during
negotiations, with Table 1 focused on US sales (i.e., for requests and o¤ers that refer to US
tari¤s) and Table 2 focused on US purchases (i.e., for requests and o¤ers that refer to the tari¤s
of US bargaining partners). As Table 1 shows, on HS6 products for which the US made at
least one o¤er in the bilateral, the maximum number of o¤ers it made on that product is 3 and
the average is 1.6; for requests the analogous numbers are 2 and 1.19 Conditional on a …nal
agreement reached on that HS6 product in that bilateral, the maximum number of o¤ers the
US made on that product is again 3 but the average is now 2; and for requests the analogous
numbers are still 2 and 1. Table 1 also reports the data on the simple counts of US o¤ers and
counter-o¤ers for a country pair (but not also per good). For bilaterals where the US made at
least one o¤er, the average number of US o¤ers per bilateral is 2.6, with a maximum number of
5, and conditional on a …nal agreement reached between the two countries in that bilateral the
analogous numbers are 3.1 and 5. And the analogous numbers of US requests for a country pair
are an average of 1.2 and a maximum of 3 independently of whether or not a …nal agreement
is reached. Table 2 shows the analogous information for the requests and o¤ers that refer to
the tari¤s of US bargaining partners, and depicts broadly similar patterns. Models of strategic
  19
     For example, a product might be included in an initial o¤er, and then also be in the set of products that
is included in a modi…ed o¤er, and then later the o¤er on this product might be withdrawn, in which case we
would record that a total of 3 o¤ers were made on this product.


                                                     28
delay in bargaining (e.g., Admati and Perry, 1987, and Cramton, 1992) predict small numbers
of o¤ers and counter-o¤ers broadly in line with our …ndings here, though these models cannot
be applied directly to settings of bilateral bargaining with externalities.20
       Figure 5 also reveals that some bilateral bargains sit dormant for long periods of time and yet
ultimately end in agreement. For example, Figure 5 shows that the US and Denmark exchanged
initial o¤ers on 11/8/1950, made no modi…cations to their requests of or o¤ers to each other
after that date, and reached a …nal agreement on 3/31/1951. A possible interpretation is that
the initial proposals contained the elements of a …nal agreement, but the details of the …nal
agreement hinged on details of other bilaterals that had yet to be concluded. Relatedly, a
number of the initial o¤ers were not tabled until midway through the round, possibly re‡ecting
issues of sequencing across bilaterals. These features suggest multilateral linkages across the
bilateral bargains.21 Finally, there are a number of agreements that are themselves modi…ed late
in the round (AM). One interpretation of these modi…cations is that they re‡ect the kinds of
adjustments that stage-4 of the Torquay Protocol anticipated might be necessary as information
became available about other agreements that were concluded in the round. Together these
patterns point to important multilateral dimensions of the bargaining, whereby large numbers
of separate bilateral bargains, each with small numbers of moves, were linked together into an
interrelated fabric. We will later o¤er evidence that countries sought multilateral reciprocity
in their negotiations, which would introduce an important multilateral dimension into each
country’s bargaining and therefore be consistent with this interpretation.

Stylized Fact 2: While in principle a proposal can be altered by either modifying the tari¤
commitment requested of one’s bargaining partner or modifying the own-tari¤ commitment of-
fered to the bargaining partner, in practice the mechanics of altering proposals through time
overwhelmingly takes the form of modi…cations to o¤ers rather than modi…cations of requests.

       An additional interesting pattern revealed by Figure 5 is that, once initial o¤ers had been
exchanged and the bilateral bargaining stage of the Torquay Round began, virtually all the
  20
     While we do not attempt structural estimation of a bargaining model in this paper, it is nevertheless useful
to point out that the mechanism characterized in our Online Supplementary Notes can generate equilibrium
outcomes consistent with no o¤er adjustments (when countries are symmetric) or one o¤er adjustment (when
countries are asymmetric), and two or more o¤er adjustments in the presence of shocks (e.g., a given bilateral
randomly fails) that require countries to switch to other strategies within their sets of dominant strategies.
  21
     Indeed, the importance of such linkages for understanding the pattern of bargaining at Torquay was em-
phasized in various accounts at the time. For example, in its October 2 coverage of the opening of the Torquay
Round negotiations, The New York Times (1950a) observed: “There is always a tendency in these meetings for
delegations to delay negotiations until they get some inkling as to how bigger ones are going...”

                                                       29
back-and-forth occurs on o¤ers rather than requests. That is, countries choose overwhelmingly
(in fact, with only one exception) to make counter-proposals by modifying their own-tari¤-cut
o¤ers rather than modifying the tari¤-cut requests they make of their bargaining partners.
This pattern warrants future study, but one possibility is again that it may re‡ect important
multilateral dimensions of the bargaining. For example, if a country is attempting to achieve
a balance in its bilaterals that is consistent with multilateral reciprocity, it is likely to be more
straightforward for the country to modify its own o¤ers in order to achieve this balance than
to attempt to achieve balance by requesting modi…cations to its bargaining partners’ o¤ers,
because the rami…cations of such requests for the bargaining partners with regard to their other
bilaterals are likely to be unknown to the country making these requests. We note as well that
the lack of modi…ed requests of a bargaining partner is consistent with our earlier observation
that, in light of GATT Article XXVIII, it is pointless to attempt to force a bargaining partner
to import a volume greater than implied by the bargaining partner’s proposal.22

Stylized Fact 3: While the set of requests a country entertains seems to conform with what
might be expected on the basis of the principal supplier rule, when it comes to deciding which
bargaining partners to make requests of on a given product there appears to be a more narrow
focus than principal supplier considerations alone would dictate.

       Table 3 details the number of HS6 level product categories involved in negotiations for US
tari¤ cuts (“sales,” in the top panel) and negotiating partner tari¤ cuts (“purchases,” in the
bottom panel). The …rst column reports the number of HS6 products across all negotiating
partners, the second column reports the number of HS6 product-negotiating partner pairs,
and the third through sixth columns report summary statistics by negotiating partner on the
number of HS6 products.
       We may conclude from the …rst and third rows of the top panel in Table 3 that on aver-
age the requests received by the US and the o¤ers made by the US re‡ect a high degree of
concentration across exporting countries, with somewhere between 1 and 2 exporting countries
typically bargaining with the US over a given US tari¤ reduction. Under the assumption (which
  22
     As we observed earlier (see note 14), we have also documented a case (US State Department, 1951a) in
which the UK issued a revised request list to the US during the bilateral bargaining stage in a secret cable that
is not contained in the GATT Torquay bargaining records. However, in its request modi…cations the UK did
not ask the US for greater market access concessions than the US had o¤ered; instead, the US was preparing
to scale back its previous o¤ers to match the disappointing o¤ers it had earlier received from the UK, and in
the words of the US delegation as quoted in note 3 of the cable, the revised request list was “clearly intended
to inform us that the U.K. did not want a limited agreement without [these] controversial items.”


                                                       30
we will con…rm below with the US import data) that the larger export suppliers of a product
into a market are the suppliers usually involved in the bargaining over access to the market for
that product, this in turn implies that typically it is the largest 1 or 2 export suppliers into
the US market on a given product that are engaged in negotiations over the US tari¤ in that
market, consistent with the principal supplier rule. But the bottom panel of Table 3 seems to
tell a di¤erent story. The US was one of the largest trading economies of the day, and while
product-level by-country export data for the period is not currently available, it seems likely
that, when the US was among the largest export suppliers of a product into one country, it
would have enjoyed similar status for that product in the markets of many countries.23 And
yet, the …rst and third rows of the bottom panel in Table 3 indicate that on average the US
singled out just a couple of countries in its Torquay bargaining attempts to lower foreign tari¤s
on any given product. It therefore appears that something beyond principal supplier status is
limiting the cross-country scope of US bargaining e¤orts at Torquay.
       Table 4 provides further evidence on this point. This table shows that, for both US sales (i.e.,
for requests and o¤ers that refer to US tari¤s) and US purchases (i.e., for requests and o¤ers
that refer to the tari¤s of US bargaining partners), the modal HS6 level product category was
under negotiation with only one partner. At the same time, Table 4 indicates that a signi…cant
number of HS6 level product categories were at play with multiple numbers of negotiating
partners, indicating important direct linkages across negotiations. In particular, the left panel
indicates that, of the HS6 products on which the US received a request, it received a request
from only one trading partner on 57% of these products but received requests from more than
three trading partners on only 7% of these products. Similarly, of the HS6 products on which
the US made an o¤er, it made the o¤er to only one trading partner on 65% of these products
but made the o¤er to more than three trading partners on only 4% of these products, with the
corresponding percentages for successful o¤ers being 78% and 1% respectively. Turning to the
right panel of Table 4 we see that, of the HS6 products on which the US made a request, it made
its request of only one trading partner on 51% of these products and made requests from more
than three trading partners on 17% of these products. Similarly, of the HS6 products on which
the US received an o¤er, it received the o¤er from only one trading partner on 54% of these
products and received an o¤er from more than three trading partners on 14% of these products,
  23
    While we have the relevant trade data in electronic form, the necessary concordances have yet to be created.
This is a major undertaking, and it is the focus of ongoing work.



                                                      31
with the corresponding percentages for successful o¤ers being 64% and 5% respectively.
   There is a rightward shift of the distribution between the left and right panels of Table
4 as would be expected for a large country such as the US that is likely to be the principal
supplier of products into multiple foreign markets. But what is surprising is how small this
rightward shift is, again indicating that something beyond principal supplier status seems to be
limiting the cross-country scope of US bargaining e¤orts at Torquay. An interesting question,
which we leave for future research, is whether strategic elements in the GATT tari¤ bargaining
environment could account for this.

Stylized Fact 4: Substantial numbers of o¤ers are made that were not requested by the country
to which the o¤er is extended. In signi…cant numbers of cases, these o¤ers are made without a
request from any bargaining partner.

   Again from Table 3, while the US entertained requests for tari¤ cuts on 2,586 HS6 products,
it o¤ered tari¤ cuts on 1,769 HS6 products, 1,357 of which correspond to HS6 products that
were requested by some bargaining partner, and 412 of which correspond to products that
were not requested by any bargaining partner. And while the US requested tari¤ cuts from
its bargaining partners on 2,298 HS6 products, it received o¤ers on 1,844 HS6 products, 1,595
of which corresponded to HS6 products that it had requested, and 249 of which corresponded
to HS6 products that it had not requested. Moreover, of the 2,635 initial o¤ers that the US
made across its bargaining partners, 1,107 of these were made to bargaining partners on HS6
products which they themselves had requested, while the remaining 1,528 of these were made
to bargaining partners on HS6 products that they themselves had not requested; by contrast,
of the 3,665 initial o¤ers that the US received from its bargaining partners, 2,793 of these were
received from bargaining partners that were responding to a US request on this HS6 product,
while the remaining 872 of these were received from bargaining partners that had not received
a US request on this HS6 product.
   In the end, as Table 3 reveals, the US agreed to …nal concessions on 1,260 of the 1,769 HS6
products that it had o¤ered, while its bargaining partners agreed to …nal concessions in their
bilaterals with the US on 1,505 of the 1,844 HS6 products that they had o¤ered the US. Most,
but not all, products that reached a …nal agreement were initially requested: 23.7% of the
agreed US tari¤ cuts were on HS6 products that were not requested by its negotiating partners,
while 13.5% of the tari¤ cuts agreed to by US negotiating partners in their bilaterals with the
US were on HS6 products that were not requested by the US.

                                               32
Stylized Fact 5: The bargaining appears to have taken the form of essentially take-or-leave
o¤ers on the intensive margin (the level of the tari¤ cut o¤ered) and back-and-forth o¤ers and
counter-o¤ers on the extensive margin (which products are to be included in the bargain).

       Table 5 describes the magnitude of the tari¤ concessions requested and o¤ered for US “sales”
(i.e., for requests and o¤ers that refer to US tari¤s) and US “purchases”(i.e., for requests and
o¤ers that refer to the tari¤s of US bargaining partners). This table reports statistics by HS
code –country pair; and it conditions on …nalized agreed concessions being reached. As the top
row reveals, the average tari¤ cut requested from the US by its bargaining partners amounted
to roughly a 40% cut in the existing (ad valorem and speci…c) US tari¤, while the average tari¤
cut requested by the US of its bargaining partners amounted to approximately a 30% cut in
their existing (ad valorem and speci…c) tari¤ level. The bottom rows show that the tari¤ cuts
that the US actually agreed to amounted to on average a 32% cut in its existing tari¤, whereas
the tari¤ cuts that the US was able to convince its bargaining partners to agree to amounted
to on average roughly an 11% cut in their existing tari¤.
       The middle three rows of Table 5 reveal that the levels of the initial o¤ers in e¤ect determined
the levels of the …nalized concessions. For both US sales and US purchases, these averages reveal
an apparent lack of adjustment along the intensive margin between the initial o¤ers and the
…nalized concessions. In Table 6 we provide additional evidence that changes on the intensive
margin were small in magnitude. Unlike Table 5, Table 6 reports statistics by HS code but
does not condition on country pair; and it does not condition on …nalized concessions being
reached. As Table 6 re‡ects, for US sales the average …nal o¤er was very close to the initial
o¤er (US purchases in Table 6 re‡ect movements across US bargaining partners, and so are not
informative about this feature).24 Finally, we return to Table 3 and now focus on the fourth row,
  24
     Of course, our focus on the averages reported in Tables 5 and 6 ignores the fact that the standard deviations
are fairly substantial. But we believe that the size of the standard deviation is largely being driven by outliers
associated with the maximum values listed in the table, which are themselves explained by our aggregation to
the HS6 level. For example, in the US-German bilateral, the initial US o¤er made on 10/16/1950 for “Nail,
barbers’and animal clippers, and blades: valued at more than $1.75 per dozen,” which falls into HS6 851020,
was to bind its tari¤ at a 10% ad valorem level, and this same tari¤ level was included in its …nal o¤er dated
3/21/1951. But the US subsequently modi…ed its …nal o¤er to Germany on 3/31/51, and in that modi…cation
it (a) maintained its o¤er of a 10% ad valorem tari¤ on “Nail, barbers’and animal clippers, and blades: valued
at more than $1.75 per dozen,” but also added (b) an o¤er to bind its tari¤ on “Nail, barbers’ and animal
clippers: valued not over 50 cents per dozen”at the level of 1.75% ad valorem and (c) an o¤er to bind its tari¤
on “Nail, barbers’and animal clippers: valued over 50 cents but not over $1.75 per dozen” at the level of 7.5%
ad valorem, and both of these product categories also fall into HS6 851020. Hence, in this case our HS6 measure
would indicate substantial intensive margin movement of the HS6 851020 tari¤ between the initial US o¤er and
the (modi…ed) …nal US tari¤, when in fact at the 10 digit product level there is no intensive margin movement


                                                       33
which describe the degree of adjustments to o¤ers at the extensive margin over the course of
the Torquay Round.25 After the initial o¤er and prior to a …nal agreement, the US modi…ed its
o¤ers on roughly 12% of the HS6 products on which it made an initial o¤er, and US bargaining
partners modi…ed their o¤ers to the US on approximately 14% of the HS6 products for which
they made initial o¤ers. Together these tables indicate that the most important dimension for
negotiations was on the extensive margin, that is dropping and/or adding products from the
negotiation, whereas there was minimal adjustment taking place on the intensive margin, that
is, in the size of the tari¤ cuts being o¤ered on any particular product. Moreover, 99.5% of the
product-level o¤ers that the US made over the course of the round are contained in its initial
set of o¤ers, indicating that at least for the US these extensive margin adjustments appear to
be essentially a reallocation of a …xed set of o¤ers across bargaining partners.26
    Figure 6 demonstrates extensive margin movement in one detailed example, the US-Italy
bilateral. Each colored line corresponds to one product. The x-axis represents time. As time
goes on, the US modi…es its o¤er by adding and removing products. Similarly, Italy’s …nal o¤er
to the US removes many products from its initial o¤er, while adding a handful. Revisiting the
detailed example (the US bilaterals on lawn mowers) contained in Figure 4 similarly con…rms
the lack of intensive margin adjustment there, as embodied in the horizontal lines that connect
each o¤er (O) that ends in agreement (A).

Stylized Fact 6: There is substantial two-way bargaining within narrow product categories,
and only an extensive margin movement.
   25
      As the second rows of the top and bottom panels of Table 3 indicate, after the initial request and prior
to …nal agreement, the US modi…ed its requests on approximately 19% of the HS6 products on which it made
initial requests, and US bargaining partners modi…ed their requests of the US on approximately 3% of the
HS6 products for which they made initial requests. Recalling however our earlier observation in the context
of Stylized Fact 2 that only one modi…cation of requests occurred across the US bilaterals subsequent to the
exchange of initial o¤ers and the beginning of bilateral bargaining, it follows that subsequent to the exchange
of initial o¤ers virtually all of the extensive margin adjustments occur on the o¤er side, which is why we do not
emphasize the extensive margin adjustment of requests in the text.
   26
      The lack of intensive margin movement in the US bilaterals, both for the US and for its bargaining partners,
is striking, and warrants further study. But we note here that it is suggestive of what one might expect if
countries came to the bargaining table with their preferences revealed and their truthful o¤ers put forward,
along the lines of the dominant strategies we have described in section 2.2 in the presence of strict adherence to
reciprocity and MFN. US preparations on the eve of the Torquay conference seem to support this view. As the
secret memorandum in US State Department (1950) suggests, President Truman approved on September 26 the
set of o¤ers that US negotiators would apparently open with at Torquay on September 28: the memorandum to
the President closes with “It is, of course, not possible to say that these o¤ers if approved...will o¤er su¢ cient
bargaining power to secure an agreement with all of the countries at Torquay. It may therefore be necessary to
request additional authority on particular items as the negotiations proceed. However, it is believed that the
o¤ers which are recommended at this time will provide an adequate basis on which to begin the negotiations.”


                                                       34
                                        US Offers                                             Italy Offers
                O            OM                        OM             A             O                            A
                                                                                                                  A
                                                                      A                                           A
                                                                      A                                           A
                                                                      A                                           A
                                                                      A                                           A
                                                                                                                  A
                                                                      A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                              O                                       A             O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                                                                                    O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                                                                                    O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                       OW                          O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                                                                                    O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                            OW
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
                                                                                    O                             A
                O                                                     A             O                             A
            25-Oct-1950   01-Jan-1951               15-Mar-1951   30-Mar-1951   28-Oct-1950                  30-Mar-1951




Figure 6: Extensive margin adjustments in US negotiations with Italy.
Notes: Each colored line corresponds to one product. The horizontal axis represents time. O indicates o¤er. A
indicates agreement. M indicates modi…cation. W indicates withdrawal.


and signi…cant numbers of these two-way bargains occur within a single bilateral.

   In Table 7, we present information on the degree of “two-way” exchanges of tari¤ cuts for
similar products. The US was both …elding and seeking requests for tari¤ cuts on the same
HS6 product category for 1,293 HS6 products, it made o¤ers on 829 HS6 products for which
it had also made a request, and it received o¤ers on 972 HS6 products on which it had also
made o¤ers, with 444 of these two-way exchanges occurring within the same bilateral. Hence,
for approximately half of the HS6 products on which the US received requests or made o¤ers,
it was simultaneously making requests of its trading partners and receiving o¤ers on those
products, and more than a third of these involved two-way exchanges within the same bilateral.

5.3. Additional Stylized Facts: Trade Patterns and Bargaining

We next develop a pair of additional stylized facts regarding the pattern of GATT tari¤ bar-
gaining as it relates to trade patterns. To this end, we link the bargaining data at the HS6
level to US import values from 1948 compiled in the Census Bureau’s United States Imports for
Consumption of Merchandise report. This report provides import values by 7-digit Schedule A
product category-country in 1948 current dollars into the US. We concord Schedule A codes to


                                                                          35
HS6 codes by text analysis and manual inspection to link to the bargaining data.
       From these data, we calculate the Her…ndahl-Hirschmann concentration index (HHI) of
suppliers into the US and the fraction of supply from trading partners that were absent at
Torquay. We further link these data to the Rauch (1999) indices of product di¤erentiation,
assigning a product to be undi¤erentiated if it is traded on an exchange or features a reference
price. Finally, we link by HS4 code to the trade elasticities estimated in Broda et al. (2008) as a
measure of product level market power. We use these additional variables in our data analysis
of the next section, where we also discuss limitations associated with these variables.
       The summary statistics for the trade and trade-related variables are in Table 8. The products
on which the US made tari¤-cut o¤ers or received requests at Torquay are broadly similar on
observable dimensions to the full set of products.

Stylized Fact 7: The largest suppliers of a product into a market are usually involved in the
negotiations over the tari¤ on that product in that market.

       In Table 9 we use the trade data together with the bargaining data to con…rm an important
and widely acknowledged feature of GATT tari¤ bargaining: the largest supplying interests are
usually involved in the bargain. The top left-hand panel of Table 9 provides one way to gauge
the importance of the largest suppliers in the negotiations. The …rst row reports the number
and fraction of HS6 products o¤ered by the US that did not include an o¤er to the top ranked
Torquay supplier of that HS6 product into the US market, the second row reports the number
and fraction of HS6 products o¤ered by the US that did not include an o¤er to either the …rst
or second ranked Torquay supplier of that HS6 product into the US market, and so on. As the
numbers indicate, for roughly 79% of the HS6 products that the US o¤ered at Torquay, at least
one of the top 2 Torquay suppliers of that HS6 product into the US market received an o¤er on
that product. The bottom left-hand panel displays the same measure based on “overall” (i.e.,
whether or not at Torquay) ranking of suppliers, and shows that, for roughly 68% of the HS6
products that the US o¤ered at Torquay, at least one of the top 2 overall suppliers of that HS6
product into the US market received an o¤er on that product. The right-hand panels of Table
9 display the same measures, but for requests of the US made by its bargaining partners. The
numbers in the right-hand panels show that the largest supplying interests were also important
in generating requests, though not as important as in generating o¤ers.27
  27
   In principle the total numbers of HS6 products o¤ered and requested in Table 9 should correspond to the
numbers in the “Unique” column of Table 3, but in fact the totals underlying Table 9 are smaller. This is


                                                   36
Stylized Fact 8: There can be a signi…cant role in the negotiations for smaller suppliers of a
product into a market where the largest suppliers are not involved.

   We next use the trade and bargaining data to illustrate a less-appreciated point: despite
the dominant role of the largest suppliers in negotiations, there can be a signi…cant role for
the smaller suppliers when the largest suppliers are not involved. This can be seen with the
measures we present in Table 10 when those measures are compared with the measures in Table
9. The top left panel of Table 10 depicts the number and fraction of HS6 o¤ers that the US
made to the Nth ranked Torquay supplier of that HS6 product into the US market.28 For
example, as can be seen from Table 10, roughly 40% of the US o¤ers are made to suppliers
ranked 3rd or lower, roughly 26% of the US o¤ers are made to suppliers ranked 4th or lower,
roughly 16% of the US o¤ers are made to suppliers ranked 5th or lower, and roughly 11% of the
US o¤ers are made to suppliers ranked 6th or lower. The question we wish to ask is, what is
the role played by these lower-ranked suppliers when they receive an o¤er: Are they the biggest
suppliers involved in the negotiations?; Or are they secondary players that receive an o¤er on
the HS6 product that has also been made to a larger supplier? The answer is suggested by
comparing the numbers in the top left panel of Table 10 to those in the top left panel of Table
9. Speci…cally, as the numbers in Table 9 show, roughly 21% of the HS6 products o¤ered by the
US are made when only the 3rd and lower-ranked Torquay suppliers are involved, and roughly
11% of the HS6 products o¤ered by the US are made when only the 4th and lower-ranked
suppliers are involved. This suggests that, when they are involved, the 3rd- and 4th- ranked
Torquay suppliers sometimes play a primary role in the negotiations, in the sense that they
are the largest suppliers receiving a US o¤er on the HS6 product under negotiation. Similar
conclusions regarding overall supplier rank and requests follow from an examination of the other
panels of Table 10 in comparison with those of Table 9.29
because calculating the rankings in Table 9 requires that HS6 imports into the US are strictly positive, and
this is not always true in the 1948 import data, with such HS6 products then excluded from Table 9. The o¤er
measures on the left-hand-side panels of Table 9 are probably overstated due to aggregation to the HS6 level.
When the measures are recalculated on the subsample of data for which we have 7-digit schedule A codes, each
of the fractions is roughly cut in half (the request measures on the right-hand side seem to be una¤ected by
aggregation). This, of course, only strengthens our claim. The column sums of the entries in Table 9 will be
larger than the total numbers of HS6 products o¤ered and requested that underlie the statistics presented in
Table 9, because for example an HS6 product that is not o¤ered to the …rst or second ranked supplier would be
counted in both the …rst row and the second row of Table 9.
  28
     The total numbers of HS6 o¤ers and requests in Table 10 should in principle correspond to the numbers in
the “Total”column of Table 3, but as with the corresponding comparison in Table 9, the totals in Table 10 are
smaller, for the same reason as explained in note 27.
  29
     The percentages we report in Tables 9 and 10 might overstate the role of smaller suppliers because these

                                                     37
6. Multilateral versus Bilateral Reciprocity

As we noted in the Introduction, GATT reports from the early rounds emphasize that a key
feature of GATT relative to previous attempts to negotiate MFN tari¤ reductions (e.g., the US
Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act) is that the multilateral nature of GATT allowed countries
to relax their need for strict bilateral reciprocity (“balance”) in negotiations and focus instead
on achieving reciprocity on a multilateral basis. As one early GATT report put it:

           ...The multilateral character of the Agreement enabled the negotiators to o¤er more
      extensive concessions than they might have been prepared to grant if the concessions
      were to be incorporated in separate bilateral agreements. Before the Geneva negotiations
      a country would have aimed at striking a balance between the concessions granted to
      another country and the direct concessions obtained from it without taking into account
      indirect bene…ts which might accrue from other prospective trade agreements; it might
      even have been unwilling to grant an important concession if it had been obliged to extend
      that concession to third countries without compensation. (ICITO, 1949, p. 10)


In e¤ect, the claim is that GATT rounds allowed governments to exchange externalities across
bilaterals in a balanced way that allowed them to maintain multilateral reciprocity.
    Was the relaxation of strict bilateral reciprocity a¤orded by the multilateral nature of the
GATT bargaining forum a key to GATT’s success? One approach to assessing this claim would
be to attempt direct measures of the degree to which the GATT bargaining outcomes violated
bilateral reciprocity but conformed with multilateral reciprocity. A di¢ culty with this approach
is that it requires knowledge of detailed trade elasticities that would apply to the countries
percentages are based on the 1948 US import data, and some countries (e.g. Germany) may appear to be small
suppliers only because the 1948 data re‡ects World War II disruptions of normal trade patterns. To check
for this possibility, we collected and concorded the 1938 US import data and recalculated the percentages in
Tables 9 and 10 based on this prewar period. These percentages show an even greater role of smaller suppliers,
suggesting that the impacts of World War II are not creating a false sense of the importance of smaller suppliers
in the Torquay negotiations. A second possibility is that aggregation of the US import data to the HS6 level may
disguise the importance of some suppliers at the tari¤-line level. We have spot checked this second possibility
by using the 7 digit Schedule A 1948 US import data, and have found that the apparent role of small suppliers
is indeed reduced under these calculations. Nevertheless, even by these calculations the role of smaller suppliers
remains more than just a curiosum, which is why in the text we emphasize this role. Further corroborating
evidence on this point is provided in US State Department (1951b), where there are many documented examples
of US concessions granted at Torquay to countries that were not principal suppliers at the time (and in some
cases did not supply to the US market any of the product for which the US concession was granted; see for
example, the discussion of US concessions granted to Austria on pp. 292-293).


                                                       38
involved in the GATT negotiations during the period in which they were negotiating.30
       Here we develop an alternative approach to assessing this claim. In particular, if countries
were counting on indirect trade bene…ts from the MFN tari¤ cuts negotiated between third
parties to achieve multilateral reciprocity in the Torquay Round, then we might expect to
see reactions in the bilateral bargaining records of some countries when an unexpected event
occurs in the bilateral negotiations of other countries (whereas according to the theory sketched
out in section 2.2 no such reaction would be expected if strictly bilateral reciprocity had been
demanded and achieved all along). Indeed, a report issued by the GATT Secretariat in the
aftermath of the failure of the UK and its Commonwealth partners to reach agreement with
the US in the Torquay Round suggests that such reactions to unexpected third-party events
were thought to be an important feature of the round:

            The fact that certain of the more important negotiations initiated between existing
         contracting parties did not result in agreements inevitably had some reactions on other
         negotiations. If, for example, the other countries engaged in tari¤ negotiations at Torquay
         had been sure that substantial concessions were going to be exchanged between the United
         Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand on the one hand, and the United States on the other,
         they might have been prepared, in the light of the bene…ts which they would have enjoyed
         from the automatic extension of these concessions to them, to go somewhat further in
         reducing their own tari¤s. Substantial cuts in the tari¤s of these Commonwealth countries,
         however, would inevitably have involved substantial reductions in some of the margins of
         preference which they accord to one another and the Commonwealth negotiators were not
  30
     One could attempt to rely on simpler measures of reciprocity that abstract from elasticities and focus only
on the average depth of tari¤ cuts or the trade volume covered by those cuts, but such measures seem to point in
di¤erent directions and are di¢ cult to interpret. For example, according to Table 5, the US agreed at Torquay
to an average tari¤ cut of 32.5% and secured foreign tari¤ cuts from its bargaining partners that averaged
11.3%, yet the foreign tari¤ cuts secured by the US applied to over 1 billion dollars of 1949 US exports while
the tari¤ cuts to which the US agreed applied to less than half that amount of 1949 US imports (US State
Department, 1951b, p. 1). In the next subsection we will make use of trade elasticities for the US under the
assumption that the cross-product pattern of these elasticities applied to the period relevant to the Torquay
Round, but this approach would have to be expanded to all trading countries of the time in order for us to use
it to assess reciprocity directly, and elasticity estimates for many of the countries present at Torquay are not
available. An additional di¢ culty with direct assessment of reciprocity is the prevalence of quotas during the
Torquay period (often rationalized by dollar shortages and balance of payment exceptions). As Curzon (1966;
pp. 70-1, pp. 85-6, Chapter VI) describes, quotas were regularly used in early round eras by many countries
other than the US, which accounted in part for the willingness of countries to o¤er major tari¤ cuts in the …rst
couple of rounds but which makes it di¢ cult to draw a tight connection between tari¤ cuts and trade volume
changes for these other countries. The concern is that tari¤ cuts were coincident with greater use of quotas, as
a substitute instrument.

                                                      39
         prepared to agree to major tari¤ concessions of this kind at the price which the United
         States negotiators were prepared to o¤er in return. (ICITO, 1952, p. 9)


       This discussion suggests an indirect way to evaluate the contribution to the success of GATT
tari¤ bargaining of the relaxation of strict bilateral reciprocity. If the collapse of the bilateral
bargains between the US on the one hand and the UK and a number of its Commonwealth
partners on the other triggered signi…cant changes in the remaining bilaterals that the US
negotiated with third countries at Torquay, then this would be evidence that strict bilateral
reciprocity was not a feature of the bargains that were anticipated to prevail on the eve of
this collapse, and evidence therefore consistent with the view that the relaxation of strict
bilateral reciprocity which was facilitated by the GATT multilateral bargaining forum was
indeed important to the success of the GATT approach.31 On the other hand, if little or no
change in the remaining US bilaterals is observed in response to this collapse, this would suggest
that bilateral reciprocity between the US and each of its bargaining partners was in fact built
in to the bargains all along, and that the relaxation of the need for strict bilateral reciprocity
facilitated by the GATT multilateral forum was not a central reason for GATT’s success.
       We follow this logic with two tests. First, we check whether the US-UK breakdown led to
a retrenchment of o¤ers by US bilateral partners at the country level. Second, we test at the
product level whether goods which were under negotiation with the UK prior to the breakdown
were more likely to be re-o¤ered by the US to other countries after the breakdown.32
       To implement these tests, we must identify when the news of the US-UK/Commonwealth
breakdown occurred. This news was o¢ cially announced at the GATT Secretariat on March
31, 1951, but The New York Times (1951a) broke the news with a dateline March 30 special
  31
     To further relate this interpretation to our theoretical analysis in section 2.2, we make two additional
observations. First, if the failure of the US/UK bargain is regarded as random and exogenous, then under
multilateral reciprocity any resulting changes in US proposals might be broadly interpreted as the utilization of
an alternative dominant strategy for the US. Second, we note that the simple theory sketched out in section 2.2
does not explain why the relaxation of bilateral reciprocity in favor of multilateral reciprocity would matter to
the success of tari¤ bargaining. Alternative models, however, may provide potential explanations. For example,
as suggested in the Introduction, in a 3-good, 3-country model of triangular trade, where country A exports good
a to country B, country B exports good b to country C, and country C exports good c to country A, negotiations
over import tari¤s can generate potential gains under multilateral reciprocity but not under bilateral reciprocity.
More generally, empirical evidence of a bene…cial role for multilateral reciprocity may motivate interesting and
new theoretical analyses.
  32
     It would be interesting to consider the impact of news about third-party bilaterals more generally on the
pattern of o¤ers at Torquay. But with our focus here on only the US bilaterals, we choose to restrict attention
to the central surprise of the Round – the breakdown of the US-UK bilateral – and leave a more systematic
investigation of these issues to future research that can consider the full set of Torquay bilaterals.


                                                        40
press report, and it seems unlikely that even the March 30 announcement would have come as
a complete surprise to the other negotiating countries at Torquay. Below we will report results
that set the “news”date at February 18, because that was the day after the last action in the US-
UK bilateral –the UK’s modi…cation of its o¤er to the US on 2/17/1951 –and it seems plausible
that general news of the disappointing UK response to the US request that it substantially
reduce the margins of preference which it accorded to its Commonwealth partners would have
become known to other negotiators soon after. But we also experiment with alternative news
dates between March 1 and March 30.
    We begin with the question: Did the willingness of US bargaining partners to make o¤ers
in their bilaterals with the US diminish once it was known that the US-UK/Commonwealth
bilaterals had failed? Fixing 2/18/1951 as the date by which negotiators at Torquay had learned
that the US-UK/Commonwealth bilaterals would fail, we calculate the total number of HS6
product-country pairs with an existing tari¤ o¤er to the US outstanding on 2/18/1951, summed
across all US bilaterals except the US-UK, US-Australia and US-New Zealand bilaterals.33 This
number is 2,333. We then calculate the total number of HS6 product-country pairs with a …nal
tari¤ o¤er to the US at the end of the Round, again summed across all US bilaterals (with the
failures of the US-UK, US-Australia and US-New Zealand bilaterals excluding these bilaterals
automatically from this sum). This number is 2,396. Clearly, comparing these two numbers
would not lead one to conclude that there had been a diminished willingness on the part of US
bargaining partners to make o¤ers in their bilaterals with the US after they had learned that
the US-UK/Commonwealth bilaterals would end in failure. Performing this same calculation
with the “news”date …xed at either 3/1/1951 or 3/30/1951 yields similar results.
    However, on closer examination this simple di¤erence is driven strongly by a suite of o¤ers
from France after the US-UK/Commonwealth breakdown. While these o¤ers from France may
have been in‡uenced by the US-UK breakdown, the narrative from the time suggests that other
factors unique to the France-US negotiation were probably more decisive.34 Eliminating France
  33
     Of the other Commonwealth members at Torquay, only Canada had outstanding o¤ers to the US on
2/18/1951, and the US-Canada bilateral concluded successfully.
  34
     In particular, as Curzun (1966, p. 110) describes, France was alone in following a strategy at Torquay
that relied heavily on threats of renegotiating the existing tari¤ concessions it had agreed to in prior GATT
rounds (under the GATT renegotiation provisions contained in Article XXVIII that we described in section
2.2). Curzun notes that most countries renegotiated less than ten items, whereas France was the exception
and “renegotiated some 200 items, only to …nd later, to quote one of her negotiators, ‘that it had neither been
necessary nor worthwhile.”’ This discussion raises the possibility that France abandoned this strategy late in
the round, which may account for the large number of o¤ers it made to the US subsequent to 2/17/1951. That


                                                      41
from the calculation produces a total number of outstanding o¤ers to the US of 2,282 before
and 1,856 after 2/18/1951, a result that is consistent with the position that countries were
counting on indirect trade bene…ts from the MFN tari¤ cuts negotiated between the US and its
UK/Commonwealth bargaining partners to achieve (multilateral) reciprocity, and pulled back
on their o¤ers to the US in an attempt to reestablish reciprocity once they realized that these
indirect bene…ts would not be forthcoming.
   We next turn to the question: Did the failure of the US-UK/Commonwealth bilaterals lead
the US to extend o¤ers to countries directly on products where those countries had anticipated
gaining access indirectly into the US market through the US-UK/Commonwealth bilateral? We
estimate the following regression on the sample of HS6 codes for which the US made an o¤er:


       U SOf f P osti;f =        HS1   +   f   +   1 U SOf f U KAU N Zi   +   2   log(1 + U SImpi ) +    (6.1)

                                 3   log(1 + U SImpi;f ) +   4   log(1 + U SImpU KAU N Zi ) +      if


where we include HS1 …xed e¤ects, negotiating partner …xed e¤ects, and condition on total US
import volume, bilateral volume from each non-Commonwealth US negotiating partner, and
volume from the Commonwealth countries.35 The key coe¢ cient in equation (6.1) is                   1   which,
if positive, indicates that a good was more likely to be o¤ered after the US-UK/Commonwealth
breakdown (i.e., U SOf f P osti;f is more likely to take a value of 1) if it was part of the out-
standing set of o¤ers that the US had extended to the UK and its Commonwealth partners
(i.e., when the dummy variable U SOf f U KAU N Zi takes a value of 1).
   Table 11 provides the regression evidence (OLS and Probit), with the news date …xed at
2/18/1951. The coe¢ cient on U SOf f U KAU N Z is positive and signi…cant in all speci…cations,
as would be expected if the failure of the US-UK/Commonwealth bilaterals led the US to
extend its o¤ers to countries directly on products where those countries had anticipated that
they would gain access indirectly into the US market through the US-UK/Commonwealth
possibility seems to be supported by news coverage at the time: a November 8 1950 article in The New York
Times (1950b) ran with the headline “French Now Seek New Tari¤ Duties: Torquay Trade Body Amazed as
Paris Negates E¤orts to Relax Import Curbs”; while an article published by the Times (1951b) on March 11
1951 stated that “France, which was frightening all participants in November with the number of items on
which she wanted to raise duties (mostly items on which the French granted reductions in the earlier meetings
at Geneva and Annecy) has molli…ed most of her trading partners. The French have withdrawn some of their
demands for revision and given quoted compensation in other cases in the form of reductions on some other
items, all after prolonged and sometimes acrimonious bargaining in dozens of hotel rooms.”
   35
      Here and throughout we experimented with both HS1 and HS section …xed e¤ects, …nding that it made no
material di¤erence to our results, so we report results with HS1 …xed e¤ects in both Tables 11 and 12.

                                                       42
bilaterals. Using news dates of 3/1/1951 and 3/15/1951 yields similar results, while if the
o¢ cial 3/30/1951 dateline of The New York Times press release is used for the news date, the
results are still signi…cant in the Probit, but overall the relationship is weaker. The results are
robust to excluding o¤ers to France.
       Overall, these results provide indirect evidence that news of the breakdown in the US-
UK/Commonwealth bilaterals caused 3rd countries to rebalance their bilaterals with the US, and
hence evidence that bilateral reciprocity was not a feature of the bargains that were anticipated
to prevail on the eve of this collapse, consistent with the view that the relaxation of bilateral
reciprocity which was facilitated by the GATT multilateral bargaining forum was important
for the success of the GATT approach.36 Our results also provide some speci…c support for
the view expressed in the report by the GATT Secretariat quoted above, that this rebalancing
took the form at least partially of a general retrenchment of o¤ers to the US, but only if the
US-France negotiations are treated as unique, as described above. If one treats the US-French
negotiations as the same as others, our results suggest that this rebalancing still occurred,
but that it was achieved not by an overall retrenchment of o¤ers but rather by reorienting
US o¤ers directly to those 3rd countries who stood to gain the most indirectly from successful
US-UK/Commonwealth bargains.


7. Bargaining under Reciprocity and MFN

The theoretical analysis developed in section 2 highlights the potential value of recasting the
GATT multilateral bargaining problem as a collection of simultaneous bilateral bargains that
adhere strictly to the twin pillars of reciprocity and MFN. In particular, we have shown there
that in the presence of these institutional features it is a dominant strategy for each country
  36
     To be clear, our results reject the null hypothesis that the US Torquay bilaterals satis…ed the restriction of
bilateral reciprocity, because under this null the breakdown of the US-UK bilateral would not have triggered
adjustments in the remaining US bilaterals. Moreover, the nature of the adjustments that we document are
consistent with the kind of rebalancing that would be required to reestablish multilateral reciprocity after such
a breakdown; and in further support of this interpretation we note that in US State Department (1951b, p. 6)
the US provided a preliminary estimate (based on trade coverage) of “the indirect bene…ts, which will accrue
to the United States as the result of concessions exchanged by other participants in the Torquay Conference in
approximately 130 negotiations between pairs of countries,”and concluded that these indirect bene…ts amounted
to about 10 percent of the trade bene…ts accruing directly from its own negotiations at Torquay (a later
accounting by the US International Chamber of Commerce, 1955 p. 24, put the number closer to 20 percent).
Still, we can’t rule out the possibility (i) that there was a general lack even of multilateral reciprocity before
the US-UK breakdown, and (ii) that as a consequence there were externalities across bilateral bargains which
were impacted by the US-UK breakdown and led to further adjustments in the remaining bilaterals.



                                                        43
to truthfully reveal its (e¢ cient-under-symmetry) politically optimal reaction curve tari¤s on
a product-by-product basis. An implication is that, by comparing initial o¤ers to the …nal
agreed tari¤ concessions in the round, we can construct measures of the success of the Torquay
Round.37
       Accordingly, we now assume that the US satis…ed strict multilateral reciprocity and MFN in
its Torquay tari¤ bargaining.38 Given this assumption, and de…ning the set O as the set of all
HS6 products for which the US made an o¤er at Torquay, we can then use the union of the US
                                                                        U S O¤er
initial o¤ers in each of its Torquay bilaterals, denoted by             i          for product i 2 O, to identify
the set of politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤s for the US in the Torquay Round. Denoting
                                                                          U S RP O
the politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤s for the US by               i        ,   we therefore impose

                                         U S RP O       U S O¤er
                                         i          =   i          8 i 2 O:                      (Assumption 1)

We then characterize the degree of tari¤ bargaining failure at the product level for the US in the
Torquay Round by a dummy variable T orqF ailiU S that takes the value 1 if the US did not reach
agreement on product i at Torquay and 0 if the US did reach an agreement on product i. Notice
that our focus is on whether or not the US reached agreement at Torquay on product i with
at least one of its bargaining partners, and therefore whether a new US tari¤ commitment on
product i resulted from the Torquay Round; we leave as an important topic for future research
the pattern of successful and failed o¤ers across bargaining partners.
       Implicit in our discussion of bargaining failure is the assumption that all US o¤ers that
should be made on e¢ ciency grounds are in fact made, and therefore that for i 2
                                                                               = O US tari¤s
  37
     In principle, by imposing additional structure we could use this result to recover government preferences and
construct the complete-information e¢ ciency frontier for the round, against which the actual outcome of the
round can be judged and the performance of counter-factual bargaining protocols can be assessed. For example,
adopting the political economy model of Grossman and Helpman (1994), the assumption of strict adherence to
reciprocity and MFN would allow us to utilize the initial o¤ers from a given GATT round to estimate the value
that each government places on lobby contributions along the lines of Goldberg and Maggi (1999), and with
these estimates we could then construct the e¢ ciency frontier for the round. This would require data from all
of the bilaterals of a given round, however, and so we leave this more ambitious program for future research.
  38
     Entering into the Torquay negotiations the US did maintain a small number of tari¤ preferences (e.g., on
sugar imports from Cuba), but by the conclusion of the Torquay Round the US had terminated even these tari¤
preferences and maintained only MFN tari¤s (see United Nations, 1952, p. 204). As a consequence, the only
strong assumption we are making here is that the US satis…ed strict multilateral reciprocity. We emphasize,
too, that we are only assuming that the US satis…ed strict multilateral reciprocity and MFN in its Torquay
tari¤ bargaining, not that its bargaining partners also did. Hence, as we will exploit below, there could still
exist bargaining frictions generated on the side of US bargaining partners (e.g., one-sided private information
or one-sided bargaining externalities) that could give rise to strategic behavior on the part of US bargaining
partners and account for bargaining failure in US bilaterals.


                                                        44
are already at their politically optimal levels. Below we will relax this assumption and allow
that bargaining failure may also take the form of US o¤ers that are not made. As a separate
matter, we could characterize the degree of bargaining failure with a continuous variable that
measures the distance between the initial US o¤er and the …nal agreed US tari¤. But as we have
established in section 5, conditional on an agreement occurring there is almost no movement
on the intensive margin between the initial o¤er and the …nal agreed tari¤, so our dichotomous
bargaining failure variable T orqF ailU S captures the relevant variation in the data.
       Our goal is now to understand the patterns of US bargaining failure as displayed by
T orqF ailU S with factors that could introduce bargaining frictions – and thereby potentially
account for this failure –but would not invalidate Assumption 1. To this end, we consider the
following seven factors:


       (i) Bargaining Externalities: As a partial check on our assumption that the US satis…ed
strict multilateral reciprocity and MFN in its Torquay tari¤ bargaining, we include a measure
of foreign exporter concentration on the right-hand side of the failure equation, and check to see
whether there is evidence that the US faced a free-rider problem. If, as we assume, the US abides
by MFN and its bargains satisfy strict multilateral reciprocity, then bargaining externalities
should not lead to a free-rider problem for the US.39 But under MFN, if multilateral reciprocity
is not achieved, 3rd party externalities could lead to free rider problems, the more so the less
concentrated are the foreign supplier-countries into the US market.40 To perform this check, we
use the US bilateral import data from 1948 as described in the previous section to create the
following variable: for each US product i we construct the Her…ndahl-Hirschmann concentration
index among all Torquay-country suppliers of that product into the US market. We denote this
variable by HHI. If the US faces a signi…cant free-rider problem among the supplier-countries
at Torquay (we consider supplier-countries not at Torquay below), HHI should be negatively
  39
     Of course, free-rider issues might still arise if the export supply adjustments embedded in the de…nition of
reciprocity are realized gradually over time, as problematic 3rd party externalities might then be experienced
in the short run. Our simple model abstracts from these considerations as a …rst pass.
  40
     See Ludema and Mayda (2013) for related ideas regarding the impact of supplier-country concentration
on the free rider problem. Ludema and Mayda develop a model predicting that exporter participation in
negotiations on a given MFN tari¤ reduction is limited by the potential for free riding and where the negotiated
tari¤ level is e¢ cient for the participants in the negotiation on that good, leading them to interact measures of
exporter concentration with measures of importer market power as a predictor of the negotiated tari¤ level in
their empirical speci…cation. In order to exploit the GATT bargaining data, we pursue a related but distinct
approach, focusing directly on the impact of supplier concentration on the tari¤ o¤ers made and their probability
of success. As we describe further below, we also include measures of importer market power.


                                                       45
related to our measure of US bargaining failure: the higher our measure of exporter-country
concentration into the US market, the smaller the free-rider problem and the lower the chance
of US bargaining failure. Finding this negative relationship would be evidence against our
Assumption 1. On the other hand, in the absence of a signi…cant free-rider problem among
the supplier-countries at Torquay, concentration of supply of product i could actually raise the
probability of o¤er failure, if such concentration simply constrains the number of countries to
which the US can make an o¤er on product i without appreciably decreasing the probably that
any single o¤er would fail. We therefore interpret a positive (or zero) relationship between
supplier-country concentration and US o¤er failure as evidence consistent with Assumption 1.
   It might be thought that the relationship between bargaining success and the concentration
of export suppliers is hard-wired into GATT negotiations by the principal supplier rule. Recall,
though, that the de…nition of principal supplier contained in the original 1947 GATT bargaining
protocol and quoted above in section 3 explicitly provides for the possibility of de…ning principal
supplier status based on the cumulative trade share of countries present at Torquay even if no
single country alone has a principal supplying interest, suggesting that it was anticipated that
concentration of the suppliers present at a round need not be the critical factor in bargaining
success of failure. Our theoretical results point to reciprocity as a potential force for overcoming
the free-rider issue even when the concentration of suppliers is not high.


   (ii) UK Preferential Trade Agreements: US bargaining failures could be associated
with the existence of tari¤ preferences in the UK. This re‡ects the well-known possibility of a
“stumbling block” relationship between PTAs and multilateral liberalization, but the partic-
ular mechanism here is novel: for the UK and its Commonwealth partners, such preferences
would violate MFN and lead thereby to the possibility of strategic behavior in the US/UK and
US/UK-Commonwealth bilateral bargains; and this possibility of strategic behavior in turn
potentially could result in bargaining failures for the US in products where the UK or UK-
Commonwealth countries are a principal supplier into the US market. As long as the US does
not itself have preferences and hence abides by MFN (and expects multilateral reciprocity),
Assumption 1 still holds; thus, the US would continue to have a dominant strategy in which
it o¤ers its politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤s. The UK and its Commonwealth partners,
however, might have additional strategic considerations when making their tari¤ o¤ers, since
their tari¤s may generate 3rd party externalities due to the PTAs in which they participate. As


                                                46
a consequence, their tari¤ o¤ers may di¤er from their politically-optimal-reaction-curve tari¤s.
In this way, such PTAs may act as stumbling blocks to GATT/WTO multilateral liberalization
because they introduce strategic considerations into the GATT bargaining setting that are not
present for countries that abide by MFN.41 Making use of the US bilateral import data from
1948, we check for this possibility by asking if a dummy variable –whose ith value is 1 when the
UK and UK-Commonwealth countries together are the principal suppliers into the US market
of product i and 0 otherwise –is positively related to our measure of US bargaining failure. We
denote this dummy variable by P T A.42


       (iii) Barter: US bargaining failures could be associated with the lack of a double coinci-
dence of wants that barter requires, again a possibility that would not invalidate Assumption
1. To check for this, we make use of the bargaining and 1948 US import data to construct a
variable whose ith value is the ratio of the number of HS6 product requests that the US makes
of the largest volume exporter to which the US made an o¤er on product i, relative to the
number of such HS6 product o¤ers that the US made to that country. We denote this variable
by W AN T . For a product i where this measure is low, the double coincidence of wants needed
for the US to successfully complete a bargain over its tari¤ on product i is likely to be lacking,
and bargaining failure could result for that reason. Hence, we expect that W AN T should be
negatively related to our measure of US bargaining failure.


       (iv) Preserving Bargaining Power for Future Rounds: It is possible that US bar-
gaining failures could be associated with the degree to which countries absent from the Torquay
Round constitute principal suppliers of product i, measured by the share of 1948 US imports
of product i that are supplied by countries not present at the Torquay Round. We denote this
variable by ABSEN T . The absence of principal suppliers from Torquay would not invalidate
  41
      The Benelux countries were also members of a PTA. But unlike the UK Commonwealth, theirs was a
customs union, and following arguments similar to those in Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2001) it can be shown
that customs unions do not invalidate our dominant strategy arguments made in section 2 and therefore should
not be the source of any particular bargaining frictions.
   42
      Notice that our investigation of possible stumbling-block e¤ects of PTAs adopts a di¤erent focus from that
typical in the literature (e.g., Limao, 2008, and Estevadeordal, Freund and Ornelas, 2008). In the context of
the Torquay Round, the typical focus would examine whether the UK was less likely to cut its MFN tari¤s on
products where its Commonwealth partners enjoyed preferential access to its markets, and similarly for each UK-
Commonwealth partner. We focus on whether non-Commonwealth trading partners (in particular the US) are
less likely to succeed in cutting their MFN tari¤s in a reciprocal bargain when the UK or a UK-Commonwealth
country is the principal supplier of the product into the US market.



                                                      47
Assumption 1; and whether or not it would lead to bargaining failure as we have de…ned it
would depend in part on whether the US could make use of the so-called “split-concessions”
bargaining technique that Beckett (1941) claims was utilized by the US in the context of the
US Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act. If the absence of principal suppliers from Torquay does
result in bargaining failure, then we would expect to …nd that ABSEN T is positively related
to our measure of US bargaining failure.


       (v) Previously Bound Tari¤s The Torquay Round was the third GATT bargaining
round, and by the beginning of this round the US had in place a set of tari¤ commitments
to which it had agreed over the …rst two rounds.43 It is possible that the presence of previ-
ously bound tari¤s could help predict the likelihood of bargaining failure at Torquay in several
ways. One possibility is simply that a previous tari¤ binding indicates that the ine¢ ciency in
the level of that tari¤ has been largely addressed in previous rounds, and there is little left
to bargain over for that tari¤. Under this possibility, we would expect that the presence of
previously bound US tari¤s would increase the chance of bargaining failure. But “gradualism,”
whereby the reductions on a single tari¤ are purposefully spread over many rounds, is a widely-
acknowledged feature of GATT tari¤ liberalization. And from this perspective the presence
of previously bound US tari¤s might be expected to predict a reduced chance of bargaining
failure at Torquay, because the early success suggests that the ingredients for success in further
negotiated reductions in that tari¤ are also likely in place.44 To allow for these possibilities,
we create the variable P REV BN D, which is de…ned as a dummy variable whose ith value is
1 if the US has a pre-existing GATT tari¤ commitment on product i at the beginning of the
Torquay Round and 0 otherwise. If the gradualism e¤ect dominates, then we would expect to
  43
      As Hoda (2001, pp. 84-85) describes and as we have noted above, the tari¤ bindings negotiated in the …rst
(Geneva 1947) round came up for renewal during the Torquay Round and could have been the subject of Article
XXVIII renegotiations under a parallel process at Torquay. In principle these renegotiations might be important
for understanding the broader tari¤ negotiations at Torquay, but the derestricted GATT bargaining data does
not yet include records on any of the renegotiations that occurred. However, as Hoda notes, the US stated that
it did not wish to invoke Article XXVIII during the Torquay negotiations, and it carried out discussions for
“certain adjustments”under Article XXVIII on just 3 product-level tari¤s. Given our focus on the US bilaterals
at Torquay, it therefore seems unlikely that the lack of Article XXVIII bargaining records would substantially
undercut our ability to understand the bargaining behavior of the US in the Torquay Round.
   44
      Whether or not evidence of gradualism would be consistent with our Assumption 1 would depend on the
reasons for gradualism. Gradual tari¤ reductions that re‡ect split concessions and the gradual accession of
countries through time would not pose a problem for Assumption 1, but gradualism that re‡ects the evolution
of binding self-enforcement constraints (see for example Staiger, 1995, Devereux, 1997 and Bond and Park,
2002) could invalidate Assumption 1.



                                                      48
…nd that P REV BN D is negatively related to our measure of US bargaining failure.


       (vi) Di¤erentiated Goods: Ossa (2014) has argued that the existence of di¤erentiated
goods can interfere with the ability of MFN and reciprocity to neutralize 3rd party externalities.
This suggests that US bargaining failures (stemming from bargaining externalities) could be
associated with the presence of di¤erentiated goods imported into the US, even if the US abides
by MFN and achieves strict multilateral reciprocity in its Torquay bargains. Of course, in the
presence of product di¤erentiation, the scope of application of the MFN principle becomes
critical: At what point do di¤erentiated products cease to become “like products,”and thereby
not require a common tari¤ treatment under the MFN principle? The answer to this question is
important in the present context, because as Ossa demonstrates the magnitude of the 3rd party
externality is directly proportional to the degree of product di¤erentiation over which the MFN
principle applies (inversely proportional to the elasticity of substitution across the products),
and so the externality should be small to the extent that like products are narrowly de…ned
for purposes of the MFN principle.45 Nevertheless, to allow for this possibility we use the
Rauch (1999) index concorded to each 1948 US import product i, and denote a product as
undi¤erentiated if the Rauch index lists the product as being traded on an exchange or having
a reference price.46 We denote this variable by U N DIF F . Based on Ossa’s …ndings, we would
expect to …nd that U N DIF F is negatively related to our measure of US bargaining failure.


       (vii) Market Power The terms-of-trade theory predicts that the goods for which nego-
tiated reductions in tari¤s are the most attractive are those for which the conceding country
holds more market power. This suggests that a given level of bargaining frictions would be
less likely to lead to US bargaining failure over product i the greater the US market power in
product i, and hence the greater the potential surplus from agreement. We therefore condition
on market power using the log inverse foreign export supply elasticity (log(! i )) as estimated
by Broda, Limao, and Weinstein (2008) for the US at the HS4 level, and we expect to …nd
that log(! i ) is negatively related to our measure of US bargaining failure. We apply the HS4
  45
     As illustrated for example in note 24, the product lines on which individual tari¤s are de…ned and within
which MFN would apply can be and often are quite detailed and narrowly de…ned.
  46
     We treat products which do not have a Rauch index as di¤erentiated. Dropping these observations does
not meaningfully change the results we present, however we lose a substantial number of observations in that
case. Needless to say, applying the Rauch index to data from 1948 requires a large leap of faith. We discuss
this further in note 48 below.



                                                     49
level estimate to all HS6 codes within the HS4 description, and emphasize that this measure
is estimated with trade data covering the 1990’s and early 2000’s which is much later than our
period of interest.47 Thus we are making the strong assumption that the relative magnitudes
of these elasticities across goods has not changed over the relevant time period.48

       Finally, as noted above we have thus far imbedded into our discussion of bargaining failure
the assumption that all US o¤ers that should be made on e¢ ciency grounds at Torquay were in
fact made, and therefore that US tari¤s are already at their politically optimal levels for i 2
                                                                                              = O.
But it is reasonable to expect that the US might have targeted certain kinds of o¤ers at Torquay
and left others for future rounds: for example, it was well known at the time that a major goal
of the US at Torquay was to use its tari¤ o¤ers to bargain down the external MFN tari¤s of
Commonwealth countries and thereby achieve a reduction in the margin of tari¤ preferences
that they o¤ered to each other. And it also seems reasonable to expect that the US may have
refrained from making tari¤ o¤ers even when its tari¤s were set above their politically optimal
levels if it thought that those o¤ers would fail with high probability. De…ning M as the set of
HS6 products which the US imported in 1948, and de…ning T orqOf f eriU S as a dummy variable
whose ith value is 1 if the US made an o¤er at Torquay on product i 2 M and 0 otherwise,
we therefore estimate an “o¤er equation” in addition to our “failure equation,” to allow that
bargaining failure may also take the form of o¤ers that are not made.49
       Collecting these points, we estimate the following regressions:

T orqOf f eriU S =       HS1     +   1 HHIi   +        2
                                                  2 HHIi     +       3 P T Ai      +   4 W AN Ti                          (7.1)
                         +   5 ABSEN Ti     +     6 U N DIF Fi       +     7   log(! i ) +   8 REQi    +   9 P REV   BN Di +    i




T orqF ailiU S =      HS1    +   1 HHIi   +          2
                                                2 HHIi   +    3 P T Ai         +   4 W AN Ti                            (7.2)
                     +   5 ABSEN Ti     +     6 U N DIF Fi       +     7   log(! i ) +    8 REQi   +   9 P REV   BN Di +    i

  47
     As a robustness check, we also experimented with the 4-digit and 6-digit export supply elasticity estimates
contained in Nicita, Olarreaga and Silva (2014) and provided to us by Marcelo Olarreaga, and found similar
results to those we report below.
  48
     If this mis-measurement and the analogous mis-measurement associated with our use of the Rauch (1999)
index for the 1948 import data is random across products, we would expect it to attenuate the results we …nd.
A more subtle form of mis-measurement could arise whereby the US granted concessions on products that were
on their way to having centralized exchanges, or whose market power was trending upward. Future research
could use the data we are collecting across GATT rounds to re-estimate elasticities from this time period.
  49
     We also check whether accounting for selection into o¤ers a¤ects the failure equation.

                                                         50
where equation (7.1) is a Probit for whether the US makes an o¤er on product i 2 M, and where
equation (7.2) is a linear probability model of whether product i 2 O, on which the US made an
o¤er at some point during Torquay, ultimately resulted in a …nal concession. The variable REQi
is a dummy variable for whether the US received a request from a counterparty at Torquay to
reduce its tari¤ on product i, and         HS1   and   HS1   are HS1 …xed e¤ects.50 The W AN Ti variable
in the o¤er equation is constructed slightly di¤erently from the W AN Ti variable in the failure
equation as we described that variable above. Speci…cally, for the o¤er equation W AN Ti is
constructed as a variable whose ith value is the ratio of the number of HS6 product requests
that the US makes of the largest volume exporter from which the US received a request on
product i, relative to the number of such HS6 product requests that the US received from that
country. Finally, we include both HHIi and HHIi2 in each equation to allow for the possibility
that free-rider e¤ects might vary non-linearly with exporter-country concentration.
       The results from estimating equation (7.1) and (7.2) are contained in Table 12. The …rst
four columns present the results of estimation with log(! i ) omitted, and the last four columns
present the estimation with log(! i ) included (and a roughly 10% reduction in the sample size
due to the exclusion of products for which log(! i ) is unavailable). In both sets of speci…cations,
we also check robustness with respect to di¤erent assumptions on accounting for selection
into o¤ers in the failure equation. The second and …fth columns do not include any selection
correction. The third and sixth columns include the inverse Mills ratio from the o¤er equation,
but do not exclude any other variables in the failure equation. The fourth and eighth exclude
REQ and HS1 …xed e¤ects from the failure equation. Across these speci…cations, we do not
…nd evidence that selection into o¤ers signi…cantly a¤ects the results of the failure equation;
nonetheless, we focus on the results where we account for selection, and exclude REQ and HS1
…xed e¤ects from the failure equation.51 Most of the coe¢ cients of interest are signi…cant and
  50
      We also include ^ i , the estimated inverse Mills ratio from the Probit to correct for non-random selection
of products into o¤ers, as the failure regression is conditional on there being an initial o¤er. However, we …nd
that this correction does not a¤ect our results.
   51
      The inclusion of REQ and HS1 in the o¤er equation are based on the following observations: (i) for any tari¤
that the US government wished to o¤er up for negotiations at Torquay, it had to secure tari¤-cutting authority
from Congress by the October 1 date at which the o¤er stage of the Torquay Round bargaining was set to
commence, (ii) there are political costs to securing tari¤-cutting authority, (iii) these political costs are higher
for tari¤s that have not been requested by any trading partner, because US exporters cannot then be pitted
against US import-competing interests to mitigate the costs, and (iv) these political costs vary by industry. The
exclusion of these variables from the failure equation then follows based on the view that, once authority to
make tari¤-cutting o¤ers has been granted, these particular costs have been borne and so they do not impact
the probability of o¤er failure. That we …nd no evidence of selection into o¤ers could of course be an indication
that our o¤er equation is poorly speci…ed. But it could also indicate that US o¤ers were largely determined


                                                        51
of the expected sign. A couple of speci…c points are noteworthy.
    First, focusing on the failure equation (columns 4 and 8 of Table 12), there is strong evidence
of a positive relationship between bargaining failure and the concentration of Torquay-country
suppliers into the US market, the opposite of what would be expected if the free-rider problem
were present. This relationship appears to be non-linear, and it turns slightly negative for
very high levels of concentration (when there exists a single supplying country whose share
among Torquay suppliers into the US market exceeds 90%). But the central message of the
failure equation estimates regarding bargaining externalities and the free-rider problem is that
there is little if any evidence for the negative relationship between HHI and our measure of
US bargaining failure that would be expected if the free-rider problem is present. In fact,
according to our estimates, an increase in the HHI of a product’s supply into the US from
one standard deviation below the mean HHI to one standard deviation above the mean would
increase the probability of bargaining failure by 0:09. Turning to the o¤er equation (columns
1 and 5 of Table 12), the estimates imply that for low levels of supplier concentration a rise
in the concentration of Torquay country suppliers increases the likelihood of an o¤er, possibly
indicating the presence of a free-rider problem at low levels of Torquay supplier concentration;
but for concentration levels beyond a mid-level threshold, higher concentration reduces the
chances of an o¤er, again the opposite of what would be expected if the free-rider problem were
present. And here according to our estimates, an increase in the HHI of a product’s supply
into the US from one standard deviation below the mean HHI to one standard deviation above
the mean would decrease the probability of a US o¤er by 0:11.
    We interpret these coe¢ cient estimates as together providing substantial support for the
position that the free-rider problem among those countries present at Torquay was likely not
a major issue for the US in its Torquay negotiations. This interpretation is in turn consistent
with our Assumption 1 and broadly supports the view that the US abided by MFN and strict
multilateral reciprocity in the Torquay Round. That said, our coe¢ cient estimates do point to
the existence of a free-rider issue for o¤ers at low levels of concentration, suggesting that an
important task of future research is to confront the complications associated with 3rd party
externalities that arise when adherence to reciprocity and/or MFN is not strict.
    A second noteworthy …nding from Table 12 concerns the impact of PTAs. As would be
by US tari¤-cutting authority, and that o¤er-failure probabilities were very di¢ cult for the US government to
predict at the time that it was seeking this tari¤-cutting authority.



                                                     52
expected based on the bargaining-friction stumbling block arguments described above, columns
4 and 8 of Table 12 imply that US bargaining failure is more likely for products that are
principally supplied to the US market by the UK and its Commonwealth partners (though
this e¤ect loses signi…cance when log(! i ) is included). On the other hand, the o¤er equations
in columns 1 and 5 indicate that PTAs stimulate o¤ers, a …nding that is consistent with the
emphasis placed by the US on reducing the size of within-Commonwealth tari¤ preferences by
bargaining down their external MFN tari¤s at Torquay.52 Hence, our estimates indicate that
PTAs can have two counter-acting e¤ects: they can stimulate o¤ers, and in this way can be
seen as “building blocks”of negotiated MFN tari¤ reductions, but they also make those o¤ers
more likely to fail and in this way are stumbling blocks to the multilateral system. The overall
e¤ect of PTAs in the Torquay Round –that is the impact on generating successful o¤ers and
hence …nal agreed tari¤ concessions –can be gauged by evaluating the net e¤ect of these two
forces for each observation in our sample and taking the mean of the net e¤ects. When we
do this using the estimates in columns 1 and 4 of Table 12, we …nd that the probability of a
…nal agreed US tari¤ concession in the Torquay Round rises from roughly 0.36 when PTAs are
absent to 0.41 in the presence of PTAs, which amounts to a sizable building block e¤ect.53
       Finally, Table 12 also indicates a strong positive relationship between US market power and
the likelihood and likely success of US o¤ers at Torquay (consistent with the terms-of-trade
theory), a strong positive relationship between previous US tari¤ bindings and the likelihood
and likely success of US o¤ers at Torquay (consistent with a gradualism story), a strong posi-
tive impact on the likelihood of o¤ers when the double coincidence of wants needed for barter
to occur is present, and a strong positive relationship between the degree of product di¤eren-
tiation and the likelihood of bargaining failure. This last result is in line with Ossa’s (2014)
prediction, and provides further support for the view that allowing for 3rd party externalities
  52
     This …nding is also consistent with a view often expressed by trade policy practitioners at the time of the
early GATT rounds, that multilateral GATT negotiations were a needed response to the formation of PTAs.
For example, in remarks made before the Joint Economic Committee, former Secretary of State Christian Herter
appealed to the formation of the European Community (EC) in 1957, and the phase-in of the EC customs union
among the original six EC countries over the next decade and the prospect of an integrated EC market that this
implied, as a key reason that the US should push for a new GATT round of multilateral tari¤ negotiations (see
Herter, 1961). The US e¤orts in this regard led eventually to the initiation of the Kennedy Round of GATT
negotiations in 1964. That said, our …nding that PTAs stimulate o¤ers is reversed when we re-estimate the
regressions in Table 12 using the 1938 US import data (see also note 29), and so we view the results in Table
12 as suggestive of a possible building block e¤ect but not conclusive.
  53
     When we redo this calculation weighting each observation in our sample by US import volumes, the corre-
sponding numbers are 0.37 when PTAs are absent and 0.41 when PTAs are present.



                                                      53
in the analysis of GATT tari¤ bargaining is an important task for future research.54


8. Conclusion

Our initial look at the Torquay Round bargaining records has shown that GATT multilateral
tari¤ bargaining displays an array of interesting features. We document that governments
bargain with back-and-forth o¤ers on the particular tari¤s they are willing to cut, but they
make take-or-leave o¤ers on the depth of these cuts. They make counter-proposals by adjusting
the set of tari¤ cuts they are willing to o¤er in light of the cuts o¤ered by their bargaining
partners, but they do not propose adjustments to what their bargaining partners have o¤ered.
The big supplying countries play the dominant role in negotiations, but the role of smaller
supplying countries can also be signi…cant. Initial o¤ers sometimes sit dormant on the table
for long periods of time and are then …nalized with a single modi…cation at the time that other
bargains are concluded.
       We also show that tari¤ cuts are more likely to be o¤ered on products where the country has
substantial market power, and that these o¤ers are more likely to succeed. We …nd evidence
that tari¤ cuts are more likely to be o¤ered by a country when members of a PTA from
which that country is excluded have a principal supplying interest; and while these o¤ers are
individually less likely to succeed, on net PTAs generate greater numbers of successful o¤ers and
hence appear to be building blocks rather than stumbling blocks for MFN tari¤ liberalization.
We …nd little evidence of a major free-rider problem associated with the bilateral-bargaining-
under-MFN approach that GATT has frequently adopted in its rounds of multilateral tari¤
bargaining. And we use the breakdown of the US-UK bilateral midway through the Torquay
Round as a natural experiment to provide novel evidence that GATT’s ability to facilitate
multilateral reciprocity indeed aided liberalization.
       Many of these features seem consistent with the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory of
trade agreements, as we have detailed above. In our analysis we have built on the implications
of this theory augmented by the institutional features of reciprocity and MFN, but we have
left the full exploitation of these implications for future work. And some of the features seem
to re‡ect a more general bargaining environment, pointing to the importance of more general
theoretical structures and additional theoretical work to guide the analysis and interpret the
  54
    Our evidence on gradualism may also point to the importance of this task for future research, especially if
the reasons for gradualism relate to self-enforcement constraints (see also note 44).


                                                      54
results, theoretical work that is needed in any event if the focus of analysis is to expand
beyond the US Torquay bilaterals to include the bilaterals of countries such as the UK and its
Commonwealth partners that were clearly not abiding by MFN at the time of the early GATT
rounds. All of these features would be unknowable without the detailed bargaining data that
the WTO has begun to make publicly available. In this light, as more and more of this data
becomes accessible to researchers, we view our initial look at the GATT bargaining data as
providing a promising view for the road ahead.


References

 Admati, Anat R. and Motty Perry (1987), “Strategic Delay in Bargaining,” Review of Economic
     Studies, LIV, 345-364

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (1999), “An Economic Theory of GATT,”American Economic
     Review 89(1): 215-48

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2001), “Reciprocity, Non-discrimination and Preferential
     Agreements in the Multilateral Trading System,”European Journal of Political Economy, June

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2002), The Economics of the World Trading System, Cam-
     bridge, MA: The MIT Press

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2005), “Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Oppor-
     tunism and the Rules of GATT/WTO,” Journal of International Economics 67(2): 268-94

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2010a), “The WTO: Theory and Practice,”Annual Review of
     Economics, 2: 223-56

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2010b), “Backward Stealing and Forward Manipulation in the
     WTO,” Journal of International Economics, 82(1): 49-62

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2011), “What do trade negotiators negotiate about? Empirical
     evidence from the World Trade Organization,” American Economic Review 101(4): 1238-73

 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (forthcoming), “The Design of Trade Agreements,” in Kyle
     Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds) Handbook of Commercial Policy. Elsevier, Amsterdam.



                                               55
Beckett G (1941), The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Program. New York: Columbia Univ. Press

Bond E, Park J-H (2002), “Gradualism in trade agreements with asymmetric countries,” Review of
    Economic Studies 69: 379-406

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley (2013), “Self-Enforcing Trade Agreements: Evidence from
    Time-Varying Trade Policy,” American Economic Review 103(2): 1071-1090

Broda, Christian, Nuno Limao, and David E. Weinstein (2008), “Optimal Tari¤s and Market Power:
    The Evidence,” American Economic Review, 98(5): 2032-65

Cramton, Peter (1992), “Strategic Delay in Bargaining with Two-Sided Uncertainty,” Review of
    Economic Studies, 59(1): 205–225

Crawford, Gregory S., and Ali Yurukoglu (2012), “The Welfare E¤ects of Bundling in Multichannel
    Television Markets,” American Economic Review, 102(2): 643-85

Curzon, Gerard (1966), Multilateral Commercial Diplomacy: The General Agreement on Tari¤ s and
    Trade and its Impact on National Commercial Policies and Techniques, Praeger: New York

Devereux, M.B. (1997), “Growth, Specialization, and Trade Liberalization,”International Economic
    Review, 38(3)

Estevadordal, Antoni, Caroline Freund, Emanuel Ornelas (2008), “Does regionalism a¤ect trade
    liberalization toward nonmembers?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1531-75

Feketekuty, Geza (2008), “A Guide to Services Negotiations,” in Aadita Mattoo, Robert M. Stern
    and Giani Zanini (eds) A Handbook of International Trade in Services, The World Bank, Oxford
    University Press, pp. 542-592

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Giovanni Maggi (1999), “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation,”
    American Economic Review, 89(5): 1135-55

Gowa, Joanne and Soo Yeon Kim (2005), “An Exclusive Country Club: The E¤ects of the GATT
    on Trade, 1950-94,” World Politics, 57(4): 453-478

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,”American Economic Review
    84(4): 833-50


                                              56
Herter, C. (1961), Statement before the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress of the United
    States, December 4-14, pp. 8-13

Hoda, Anwarul (2001), Tari¤ Negotiations and Renegotiations under the GATT and the WTO:
    Procedures and Practices, WTO and Cambridge University Press

Irwin, Douglas A. (1995), “The GATT in Historical Perspective,”American Economic Review Papers
    and Proceedings 85 May: 323-328

Interim Commission for the ITO (1949), The Attack on Trade Barriers: A Progress Report on the
    Operation of the General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade. Geneva, August

Interim Commission for the ITO (1952), GATT in Action: Third Report on the Operation of the
    General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade. Geneva, January

Karacaovali Baybars and Nuno Limao (2008), “The Clash of Liberalizations: Preferential vs. Multi-
    lateral Trade Liberalization in the European Union,”Journal of International Economics 74(2):
    299-327

Keniston, Daniel (2013), “Bargaining and Welfare : A Dynamic Structural Analysis of the Autorick-
    shaw Market,” Working Paper

Larsen, Bradley (2013), “The E¢ ciency of Dynamic, Post-Auction Bargaining: Evidence from Whole-
    sale Used-Auto Auctions,” Working Paper

Limao, Nuno (2006), “Preferential Trade Agreements as Stumbling Blocks for Multilateral Trade
    Liberalization: Evidence for the U.S.,” American Economic Review 96(3): 896-914

Limao, Nuno (2007), “Are Preferential Trade Agreements with Non-trade Objectives a Stumbling
    Block for Multilateral Liberalization?” Review of Economic Studies 74(3): 821-55

Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda (2009), “Do Countries Free Ride on MFN?,” Journal
    of International Economics 77(2): 137-50

Ludema, Rodney and Anna Maria Mayda (2013), “Do Terms-of-Trade E¤ects Matter for Trade
    Agreements? Theory and Evidence from WTO countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    128(4)



                                               57
Mayer Wolfgang (1981), “Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tari¤ Adjustments,” Oxford
    Economic Papers 33(1): 135-53

Ossa, Ralph (2014), “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data,”American Economic Review 104(12):
    4104-46

Rauch, James E. (1999), “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade,”Journal of International
    Economics 48(1) : 7-35

New York Times (1950a), “Tari¤ Parley O¤ To A Good Start: 20 or 30 Negotiations to Open at
    Torquay This Week–U.S. in a Position to Bargain,”Special to The New York Times by Michael
    L. Ho¤man, dateline October 1; published October 2

New York Times (1950b), “French Now Seek New Tari¤ Duties: Torquay Trade Body Amazed as
    Paris Negates E¤orts to Relax Import Curbs,” Special to The New York Times by Michael L.
    Ho¤man, dateline November 8; published November 10

New York Times (1951a), “U.S.-British Trade Talks Fail: Imperial Preference Blamed,”Special Press
    Report to The New York Times by Michael L. Ho¤man, dateline March 30; published March 31

New York Times (1951b), “Big Tari¤ Parley Nearing Its Close: 1,000 Experts at Torquay See New
    Convention Ready for Signatures by April 20,” Special to The New York Times by Michael L.
    Ho¤man, dateline March 11; published March 12

Nicita, Alessandro, Olarreaga, Marcelo and Peri Silva (2014), “Cooperation in WTO’s Tari¤ Waters,”
    mimeo, May.

Staiger, Robert W. (1995), “A Theory of Gradual Trade Liberalization,”in Deardor¤, A., Levinsohn,
    J., and Stern, R. (eds.) New Directions in Trade Theory, Univ of Mich Press

United Nations (1952), Treaties and International Agreements Registered or Filed and Recorded with
    the Secretariat of the United Nations, Vol 144 No 814 (VIII)

United States Council of the International Chamber of Commerce (1955), G.A.T.T.: An analysis
    and appraisal of the General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade. Prepared by the William L.
    Clayton Center for International Economic A¤airs of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy,
    February.


                                               58
United States Department of State (1950), Secret Memorandum: Memorandum by the Chairman
    of the Interdepartmental Committee on Trade Agreements (Corse) to the President. Foreign
    Relations of the United States, 1950 Volume 1, National Security A¤airs; Foreign Economic
    Policy, Document 282, September 26, Washington DC.

United States Department of State (1951a), Secret Cable: Mr E.T. Casdagli of the United Kingdom
    Delegation to the Torquay Conference to Mr. James H. Lewis of the Untied States Delega-
    tion. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1951 Volume 1, National Security A¤airs; Foreign
    Economic Policy, Document 470, March 14, Torquay England.

United States Department of State (1951b), Preliminary Analysis of Torquay Protocol of Accession,
    Schedules, and Related Documents: General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade. US Government
    Printing O¢ ce, Washington, DC.

WTO (2001), Guidelines and Procedures for the Negotiations on Trade in Services, March 28

WTO (2002), WTO Seminar on the GATS: Technical Aspects of Requests and O¤ ers, February 20

WTO Appellate Body (2004), United States-Anti-Dumping Act of 1916— Recourse to arbitration by
    the United States under 22.6 of the DSU. WT/DS136/ARB, 24 February




                                              59
9. Tables

                                                    Mean      SD Min Max
                               Unconditional
                      N o¤ers per good-country      1.617   0.558     1     3
                           N o¤ers per country      2.550   1.356     1     5
                   N requests per good-country      1.003   0.054     1     2
                        N requests per country      1.150   0.489     1     3
              Conditional on …nal agreement
                      N o¤ers per good-country      1.965   0.379     1     3
                           N o¤ers per country      3.067   1.163     2     5
                   N requests per good-country      1.009   0.094     1     2
                        N requests per country      1.214   0.579     1     3

Table 1: Sales by US: This table presents statistics on the amount of back and forth on goods
and with negotiating partners over US concessions.


                                                    Mean      SD Min Max
                               Unconditional
                      N o¤ers per good-country      1.433   0.538     1     5
                           N o¤ers per country      2.100   1.071     1     6
                   N requests per good-country      1.005   0.074     1     2
                        N requests per country      1.545   0.596     1     3
              Conditional on …nal agreement
                      N o¤ers per good-country      1.639   0.546     1     5
                           N o¤ers per country      2.400   1.056     2     6
                   N requests per good-country      1.008   0.088     1     2
                        N requests per country      1.733   0.594     1     3

Table 2: Purchases by US: This table presents statistics on the amount of back and forth on
goods and with negotiating partners over concessions from the negotiating partner.




                                             60
                                                                  By Negotiating Partner
                                               Unique   Total    Mean       SD Min Max
   Sales
                               HS6 requests      2586   4387    182.792   384.709   0   1692
                  HS6 request modi…cations         65     65      2.708    11.323   0     55
                                  HS6 o¤ers      1769   2635    109.792   195.404   0    783
                     HS6 o¤er modi…cations        218    225      9.375    19.882   0     77
                      HS6 o¤ers on requests      1357   1107     46.125    87.097   0    349
             Fraction HS6 o¤ers on requests     0.767             0.315     0.282   0      1
                  HS6 o¤ers without request       412   1528     63.667   114.024   0    434
         Fraction HS6 o¤ers without request     0.233             0.518     0.339   0      1
                       HS6 …nal concessions      1260   1589     66.208   126.891   0    475
          HS6 …nal concessions with requests      962    680     28.333    54.513   0    174
       Fraction …nal concession with request    0.763             0.263     0.292   0      1
        HS6 …nal concession without request       298    909     37.875    79.459   0    308
   Fraction …nal concessions without request    0.237             0.362     0.353   0      1
   Purchases
                               HS6 requests      2298   5104    212.667   188.645   0   667
                  HS6 request modi…cations        436    496     20.667    55.038   0   267
                                  HS6 o¤ers      1844   3665    152.708   168.606   0   574
                     HS6 o¤er modi…cations        264    270     11.250    29.846   0   114
                      HS6 o¤ers on requests      1595   2793    116.375   130.484   0   555
             Fraction HS6 o¤ers on requests     0.865             0.634     0.402   0     1
                  HS6 o¤ers without request       249    872     36.333    80.429   0   379
         Fraction HS6 o¤ers without request     0.135             0.200     0.293   0     1
                       HS6 …nal concessions      1505   2396     99.833   166.179   0   574
          HS6 …nal concessions with requests     1302   1682     70.083   124.558   0   555
       Fraction …nal concession with request    0.865             0.486     0.420   0     1
        HS6 …nal concession without request       203    714     29.750    78.763   0   371
   Fraction …nal concessions without request    0.135             0.139     0.200   0     1

Table 3: Sales and Purchases by US. Sales concern US tari¤s. Purchases concern non-US tari¤s.
Requests correspond to negotiating partners seeking a tari¤ reduction. O¤ers correspond to a
country o¤ering a tari¤ reduction. Unique refers to the number of unique HS6 codes. Total
refers to the number of HS6 code-country pairs.




                                                61
                  Sales by US                   Purchases by US
    N countries    N products Fraction products      N products Fraction products
                            Any request                    Any request
              1          1484             0.574            1163             0.506
              2           629             0.243             497             0.216
              3           287             0.111             251             0.109
              4           152             0.059             143             0.062
              5            29             0.011              97             0.042
              6             4             0.002              59             0.026
              7             1             0.000              25             0.011
              8                                              23             0.010
              9                                              10             0.004
             10                                              14             0.006
             11                                                2            0.001
             12                                              10             0.004
             13                                                4            0.002
                             Any o¤er                        Any o¤er
              1          1151             0.651             991             0.537
              2           445             0.252             370             0.201
              3           111             0.063             231             0.125
              4            52             0.029             112             0.061
              5             8             0.005              73             0.040
              6             1             0.001              44             0.024
              7             1             0.001              22             0.012
             10                                                1            0.001
                         Final Concession                Final Concession
              1           987             0.783             961             0.639
              2           224             0.178             312             0.207
              3            42             0.033             150             0.100
              4             7             0.006              57             0.038
              5                                              17             0.011
              6                                                8            0.005

Table 4: This table presents the number of negotiating partners associated with a product
conditional on the product having any request, any o¤er, or a …nal concession. Sales concern
US tari¤s. Purchases concern non-US tari¤s.




                                            62
                                  Sales                Purchases
                                Ad Val Speci…c     All  Ad Val Speci…c   All
        Initial Request     N      1402     716   2118      2788  2117 4905
                    over Mean     0.615   0.648 0.626      0.645 0.820 0.721
         Existing Tari¤    SD     0.167   0.199 0.179      0.202 0.244 0.238
                          Min     0.000   0.000 0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000
                          Max     1.000   1.000 1.000      1.000 1.000 1.000
           Initial O¤er     N       423     197    620       691   953 1644
                    over Mean     1.192   1.155 1.181      1.472 1.193 1.310
        Initial Request    SD     0.505   0.825 0.624      0.683 0.500 0.600
                          Min     0.033   0.000 0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000
                          Max     5.000  10.000 10.000     5.000 6.667 6.667
  Finalized Concession      N       399     167    566       543   924 1467
                    over Mean     1.195   1.083 1.162      1.291 1.190 1.227
        Initial Request    SD     0.541   0.560 0.549      0.444 0.531 0.503
                          Min     0.033   0.000 0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000
                          Max     5.000   4.571 5.000      3.571 8.000 8.000
  Finalized Concession      N      1267     610   1877      1222  1122 2344
                    over Mean     1.000   1.025 1.008      1.006 0.992 0.999
           Initial O¤er    SD     0.066   0.437 0.255      0.192 0.269 0.232
                          Min     0.020   0.000 0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000
                          Max     1.714  10.000 10.000     2.933 5.500 5.500
  Finalized Concession      N      1273     608   1881      1240  1170 2410
                    over Mean     0.673   0.678 0.675      0.878 0.897 0.887
         Existing Tari¤    SD     0.184   0.196 0.188      0.192 0.206 0.199
                          Min     0.008   0.333 0.008      0.000 0.000 0.000
                          Max         1       1      1         1     1     1

Table 5: This table conveys requests, o¤ers, concessions and existing tari¤s in proportion to
each other. Some goods appear in both the ad valorem and speci…c columns. Sales concern US
tari¤s. Purchases concern non-US tari¤s.




                                             63
                                                                     N Mean    SD   Min    Max
     Sales by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (AdVal.)     774 1.042 0.389 0.315 10.000
         Sales by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (Sp.)    409 1.020 0.494 0.000 9.167
         Sales by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (All)   1183 1.035 0.428 0.000 10.000
           Sales by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (AdVal.)    1107 1.006 0.307 0.146 9.333
               Sales by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (Sp.)    497 0.988 0.236     0 2.743
               Sales by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (All)   1604 1.001 0.287     0 9.333
 Purchases by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (AdVal.)     502 1.124 0.701     0 7.000
    Purchases by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (Sp.)     244 1.160 1.204     0 8.567
    Purchases by US: Earliest Request over Final Request (All)     746 1.136 0.897     0 8.567
      Purchases by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (AdVal.)      369 1.262 0.817     0      6
          Purchases by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (Sp.)     527 1.068 0.572     0 9.066
          Purchases by US: Earliest O¤er over Final O¤er (All)     896 1.148 0.690     0 9.066

Table 6: Ratio of …nal requests and o¤ers to earliest requests and o¤ers. “AdVal.”denotes Ad
Valorem. “Sp.”denotes Speci…c. Sales concern US tari¤s. Purchases concern non-US tari¤s.




                                             HS6 received request and made request 1293
                                                  HS6 made o¤er and made request      829
                                             HS6 received o¤er and received request   972
 HS6 received request or made o¤er and made request or received o¤er (same country)   444
                             HS6 made and received a …nal concession (same country)    78
           Fraction for which US made and received a …nal concession (same country) 0.176

Table 7: Sales and Purchases by US. This table represents goods for which the US was both
o¤ering tari¤ reductions, and seeking tari¤ reductions, sometimes with the same negotiating
partner.




                                            64
                Variable                  Obs     Mean      Std. Dev.    Min        Max
 By HS6 product
 N Suppliers to US                        3064    10.539     11.321        1        118
 N Suppliers to US at Torquay             3064     6.507      5.536        0         36
 Torquay Volume Share                     3064     0.772       0.31        0          1
 HHI of Suppliers (HHI)                   3064     0.652      0.271        0          1
 Supply Absent from Torquay (ABSENT)      3064     0.228       0.31        0         1
 Undi¤erentiated (UNDIFF)                 3064     0.322      0.467        0          1
 log(!)                                   2694      .385      2.165      -5.63     7.134
 UK Preferences (PTA)                     3064     0.531      0.499        0         1
 Requested Product (REQ)                  3064    0.677      0.468         0         1
 Annecy Binding (PRVBND)                  3064     0.125      0.331        0         1
 By Country
 Total Volume                              134   52415364 1.53E+08  15    1.55E+09
 Total Volume at Torquay                    36   1.3E+08 2.68E+08 1561595 1.55E+09
 By HS6 product that US made an o¤er on or received a request for at Torquay
 Torquay Volume Share                2423           0.78      0.292        0         1
 HHI of Suppliers (HHI)              2423          0.625      0.262        0         1
 Supply Absent from Torquay (ABSENT) 2423           0.22      0.292        0         1
 Undi¤erentiated (UNDIFF)            2423          0.291      0.454        0         1
 log(!)                              2177          0.425      2.217      -5.63     7.134
 WANT (O¤er Stage)                   1636          2.757      7.594      0.713      185
 WANT (Failure Stage)                2423          1.722      4.908      0.000     61.667
 UK Preferences (PTA)                2423          0.529      0.499        0         1
 Requested Product (REQ)             2423          0.856      0.351        0         1
 Annecy Binding (PRVBND)             2423          0.131      0.338        0         1

Table 8: Trade Data Summary Statistics. log(!) is the log inverse foreign export supply
elasticity as estimated by Broda, Limao, and Weinstein (2008) for the US at the HS4 level.




                                           65
                                    US     O¤ers       US Requests
                   Torquay Rank N HS6       Fraction N HS6 Fraction
                               1   709        0.4334  1102    0.5311
                               2   344        0.2103    721   0.3475
                               3   179        0.1094    485   0.2337
                               4    98        0.0599    298   0.1436
                               5    57        0.0348    208   0.1002
                               6    33        0.0202    140   0.0675
                               7    26        0.0159     81   0.0390
                               8    22        0.0134     54   0.0260
                              >8    38        0.0232     78   0.0376
                                    US     O¤ers       US Requests
                    Overall Rank N HS6      Fraction N HS6 Fraction
                               1   828        0.5061  1348    0.6496
                               2   518        0.3166    876   0.4222
                               3   300        0.1834    649   0.3128
                               4   196        0.1198    482   0.2323
                               5   139        0.0850    358   0.1725
                               6   103        0.0630    276   0.1330
                               7    62        0.0379    202   0.0973
                               8    42        0.0257    152   0.0733
                              >8   205        0.1253    588   0.2834

Table 9: Number and fraction of o¤ers and requests not going to a supplier by supplier rank
in US imports for HS6 code. The top panel uses the rank amongst Torquay participants. The
bottom panel uses the rank amongst all suppliers.




                                            66
                                    US    O¤ers       US Requests
                   Torquay Rank N HS6      Fraction N HS6 Fraction
                               1   927       0.3745    976   0.2670
                               2   561       0.2267    604   0.1653
                               3   343       0.1386    473   0.1294
                               4   238       0.0962    444   0.1215
                               5   127       0.0513    308   0.0843
                               6    93       0.0376    261   0.0714
                               7    48       0.0194    201   0.0550
                               8    36       0.0145    134   0.0367
                              >8   102       0.0412    254   0.0695
                                    US    O¤ers       US Requests
                    Overall Rank N HS6     Fraction N HS6 Fraction
                               1   808       0.3265    727   0.1989
                               2   461       0.1863    633   0.1732
                               3   338       0.1366    386   0.1056
                               4   231       0.0933    350   0.0958
                               5   170       0.0687    311   0.0851
                               6    97       0.0392    247   0.0676
                               7    93       0.0376    185   0.0506
                               8    58       0.0234    164   0.0449
                              >8   219       0.0885    652   0.1784

Table 10: Number and fraction of o¤ers and requests by supplier rank in US imports for HS6
code. The top panel uses the rank amongst Torquay participants. The bottom panel uses the
rank amongst all suppliers.




                                           67
                                               OLS        OLS     Probit      Probit        OLS           OLS         Probit       Probit

                     U SOf f U KAU N Zi     0.0623**   0.0700**    0.314*   0.485***      0.0564*     0.0666**         0.294*    0.449***
                                            (0.0283)   (0.0282)   (0.168)     (0.147)    (0.0274)      (0.0271)       (0.161)      (0.136)
                        log(1 + U SImpi )                                                0.0122**     0.00690*     0.0591***      0.0475*
                                                                                        (0.00485)    (0.00347)       (0.0194)    (0.0258)
                      log(1 + U SImpi;f )                                               -0.0112**   -0.00899**    -0.0517***    -0.0594**
                                                                                        (0.00478)    (0.00355)       (0.0183)    (0.0237)
              log(1 + U SImpU KAU N Zi )                                                 -0.00195      9.41e-05       -0.0113    -0.00299
                                                                                        (0.00295)    (0.00135)       (0.0154)    (0.0122)




68
                            Observations       1,815      1,815    1,815       1,668        1,815        1,815         1,815        1,668
                              R-squared        0.009      0.293                             0.027        0.302
                            Country FE            No        Yes      No          Yes           No          Yes           No           Yes
                                HS1 FE           No         Yes      No          Yes           No          Yes           No           Yes
                             Cluster SE          Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

     Table 11: Regression of whether an HS6 product - country pairing o¤ered by the US was added after 2/18/1951 (after the
     breakdown of US and UK bilateral negotiation) on whether the product in question was o¤ered by the US to the UK. A
     positive coe¢ cient implies that a product is more likely to be o¤ered by the US following the US-UK bilateral breakdown
     if the US was o¤ering a concession on this product to the UK before the negotiation failure. SE’s clustered by negotiating
     partner. *, **, and *** denote signi…cance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% con…dence levels, respectively.
                    O¤er        Failure      Failure         Failure       O¤er         Failure      Failure       Failure
                   Probit         OLS          OLS             OLS        Probit          OLS          OLS           OLS

         HHI         0.774     0.990***     1.019***      0.842***           0.830     0.831***     0.891***       0.636**
                   (0.474)       (0.250)      (0.272)       (0.257)       (0.515)        (0.267)      (0.286)      (0.278)
       HHI 2      -0.976**    -0.616***    -0.651***     -0.531***       -1.045**       -0.467**    -0.543**         -0.337
                   (0.372)       (0.196)      (0.234)       (0.204)       (0.401)        (0.209)      (0.242)      (0.219)
      WANT      0.0245***     -0.00257*     -0.00232      -0.00164     0.0277***        -0.00248    -0.00193      -0.00197
                (0.00753)    (0.000978)    (0.00126)    (0.001000)     (0.00864)     (0.000949)    (0.00123)     (0.00110)
    ABSENT        -0.192**     0.0922**      0.0852*       0.0834*          -0.167     0.0990**      0.0863*       0.0852*
                  (0.0963)      (0.0485)    (0.0546)      (0.0471)        (0.103)       (0.0511)    (0.0553)      (0.0495)
        PTA      0.318***     0.0826***     0.0935**      0.0609**      0.363***      0.0718***     0.0968**        0.0371
                  (0.0602)      (0.0261)    (0.0442)      (0.0273)       (0.0646)       (0.0277)    (0.0463)      (0.0301)
        REQ      0.552***         0.0128       0.0363                   0.504***          0.0368       0.0803
                  (0.0554)      (0.0274)    (0.0819)                     (0.0605)       (0.0292)    (0.0715)
  PrevBound      0.215***     -0.0719**     -0.0647*    -0.0845***        0.207**       -0.0571*      -0.0433    -0.0844**
                  (0.0739)      (0.0297)    (0.0383)       (0.0291)      (0.0799)       (0.0316)    (0.0375)       (0.0316)
    UNDIFF          0.0457    -0.105***    -0.103***     -0.118***         0.0560     -0.124***    -0.120***     -0.152***
                  (0.0608)      (0.0270)    (0.0276)       (0.0231)      (0.0666)       (0.0306)    (0.0315)       (0.0266)
       log(!)                                                          0.0539***      -0.0122**     -0.00853    -0.0271***
                                                                         (0.0131)     (0.00569)    (0.00787)     (0.00563)
           ^                                  0.0626         -0.0171                                    0.127       -0.0847
                                                             (0.209)    (0.0586)                                    (0.193)
 Observations       3,064         1,636        1,636           1,636       2,694          1,456        1,456          1,456
   R-squared                      0.109        0.109           0.040                      0.127        0.127          0.053
     HS1 FE             Y            Y            Y                N            Y             Y            Y              N

Table 12: O¤er and failure equations conditional on theoretical predictors. Columns 1 and 5
correspond to the o¤er equation, estimated as a Probit. Columns 2-4 and 6-8 correspond to
failure equations. Columns 2 and 6 do not make any selection correction. Columns 3 and 7
use the inverse Mills ratio from the o¤er equation, but no excluded variables. Columns 4 and 8
exclude REQ and HS1 …xed e¤ects from the failure equation. Columns 1-4 omit !, the market
power measure as it is not available for all products. WANT is de…ned with respect to the
principal supplier in the o¤er regression, whereas it is de…ned with respect to the highest US
import volume (for the good in question) country who received the o¤er in the failure regression.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote signi…cance at the 90%, 95%, and
99% con…dence levels, respectively.




                                                        69
