NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND THE REALTOR COMMISSION PUZZLE
Panle Jia Barwick
Parag A. Pathak
Maisy Wong
Working Paper 21489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21489

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We thank Steven Berry and Peter Reiss for suggestions in the early stage of this project. We also thank
Matthew Backus, Joe Gyourko, Todd Sinai, Nancy Wallace, participants at the Wharton Applied Economics
Workshop and NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. We are grateful for the excellent research
assistance of Ying Chen, Xuequan Peng, and Jeremy Kirk and to Paul Amos for assistance with GIS.
Barwick gratefully acknowledges the research support of the National Science Foundation via grant
SES-1061970. Wong acknowledges financial support from the Research Sponsors Program of the
Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Panle Jia Barwick, Parag A. Pathak, and Maisy Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Conflicts of Interest and the Realtor Commission Puzzle
Panle Jia Barwick, Parag A. Pathak, and Maisy Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 21489
August 2015
JEL No. D4,L1,L8,R2,R3
ABSTRACT
This paper documents uniformity in real estate commission rates across markets and time using a dataset
on realtor commissions for 653,475 residential listings in eastern Massachusetts from 1998-2011. Newly
established real estate brokerage offices charging low commissions grow more slowly than comparable
entrants with higher commissions. Properties listed with lower commission rates experience less favorable
transaction outcomes: they are 5% less likely to sell and take 12% longer to sell. These adverse outcomes
reflect decreased willingness of buyers' agents to intermediate low commission properties (steering)
rather than heterogeneous seller preferences or reduced effort of listing agents. While all agents and
offices prefer properties with high commissions, firms and agents with large market shares purchase
a disproportionately small fraction of low commission properties. The negative outcomes for low commissions
provide empirical support for regulatory concerns that steering reinforces the uniformity of commissions.

Panle Jia Barwick
Department of Economics
Cornell University
462 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
panle.barwick@cornell.edu
Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E17-240
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu

Maisy Wong
Real Estate Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1464 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA 19104-6302
maisy@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Buyers are routinely advised by salespeople or intermediaries who are compensated by sellers. In many
settings, there are concerns that buyers are steered towards products that may not be in their interest.1 We
study this phenomenon for residential real estate, where intermediaries play an important role. In 2014,
there were 4.94 million existing home sales valued in aggregate at $1.26 trillion dollars, and real estate
agents assisted in 88% of sales (NAR, 2014a,b).
A puzzling aspect of the residential brokerage industry is the relative uniformity of commission rates,
despite low entry barriers and advances in technology that have reduced search costs for buying and
selling properties. In the conventional compensation arrangement where sellers pay for the commissions
of their listing agents and potential buyers’ agents, the latter have an incentive to prioritize properties
that offer higher commissions. This kind of steering is thought to lead to uniformly high commissions.2
According to a 1983 report by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), “(s)teering ... may make price
competition a potentially unsuccessful competitive strategy, and it is our belief that this is the most
important factor explaining the general uniformity of commission rates” (FTC, 1983, p. 12). The lack
of variation in commissions remains an important subject of policy debate and regulatory concern today
(GAO, 2005; FTC, 2007).
Our analysis examines the consequences of listing with a low commission and sheds light on the
realtor commission puzzle by exploiting rich variation in a dataset that includes 653,475 listed properties
in eastern Massachusetts from 1998 to 2011. Importantly, we observe the commission rates offered to
buyers’ agents, in addition to detailed information on property attributes, agents, and brokerage offices
that are involved in each transaction. Ninety percent of properties in our sample have a buying commission of 2.0 or 2.5 percent,3 corroborating the common perception that commission rates are uniform.
In addition, even in periods with substantial turnover among real estate brokerage firms and agents, the
average commission rate exhibits only modest fluctuation.
After documenting limited commission variation in our sample, we track the performance of offices
with different commission rates. We find that offices charging lower commission rates are much less
likely to become the top 25% firms in terms of commission revenue, relative to comparable offices that
charge higher commissions. Standard competitive forces, whereby a firm competes with rivals using
lower prices, do not seem effective under the current commission arrangement.
This finding motivates our core analysis that examines the sales outcomes of properties listed with
different buying commission rates. Consistent with real estate agents steering buyers to properties with
1 See

Cummins and Doherty (2006) for a discussion on insurance products, Chan et al. (2015) for mortgages, Inderst and
Ottaviani (2012) for financial advice, Christoffersen et al. (2013) for mutual funds, Jiang et al. (2012) for bond ratings, and
Shapiro (2015) for the health sector.
2 Steeering is known as “sell to the commission” in the industry (The Washington Post, 2015). Agents can influence buyers’
decisions in several ways, including which properties to show, how to present each property, and how much effort to exert
during the offer and negotiation stages.
3 These correspond to a total commission of 4% or 5%, respectively, if commissions are equally split between listing agents
and buying agents.

1

high commissions, we find that if a property has a buying commission rate less than 2.5 percent, it is
5% less likely to be sold and takes 12% longer to sell. There is little effect on the sale price. While it is
possible that lower commission rates are associated with less desirable property attributes, our estimates
are robust to specifications that include a rich set of property level measures that control for time-varying
attributes and property fixed effects that control for time-invariant attributes.
We address two additional threats to our empirical analysis. First, the poor performance of low commission properties may reflect reduced listing agent effort, rather than an unwillingness of buyers’ agents
to be involved in low commission properties. To investigate this possibility, we report specifications
focusing on properties that are more homogenous and relatively easier to sell. Then we control for timeinvariant agent attributes using listing agent fixed effects. Third, we construct ‘pairs’ of properties that
are listed by the same agent in the same year with listing commission revenues within a $500 bin, but
offer different commission rates to the buying agent. Since these properties have the same payoff for the
listing agent, they should induce the same level of effort from the listing agent, but may attract different
number of buyers given the difference in buying commission rates. In this demanding analysis that exploits variation within an agent, property type, year, and commission bin, we continue to find that listings
offering lower commission rates are associated with lower sales probabilities. All three investigations
suggest that unobserved listing agent effort is not driving our main results.
The second threat we examine is that the adverse sales outcomes do not simply reflect behavior of
buying agents, but the preferences of sellers. Some sellers might be more patient and willing to trade off
a low sale probability with a high sale price. If these sellers are more likely to work with firms charging
low commissions, then our results would be confounded by seller heterogeneity. We tackle this issue in
several steps. First, we control for seller urgency using list price as a proxy. Next, we construct a patienceindex, which is the ratio of the observed listing price to the predicted price from a hedonic regression.
More patient sellers have higher index values. Sellers are divided into ten or a hundred groups according
to this index. We use these group dummies as controls for seller patience. Finally, we merge our data
with property deeds that record seller and buyer names and estimate models using seller fixed effects.
Our analysis continues to report negative sales outcomes associated with lower commission rates, even
accounting for seller preference.
After ruling out these alternative explanations, we show that properties that are more susceptible to
steering suffer worse outcomes. For example, low commission listings in neighborhoods with a larger
fraction of high commission listings experience more negative outcomes. In addition, low commission
listings by entrants have worse outcomes than other low commission listings, as well as listings by offices
that used lower commission rate policies in the past.
We next turn to examining how dominant agents and offices interact with low commission listings.
Firms with higher market shares buy a smaller fraction of low commission properties. The same pattern
holds true at the agent level. While our core analysis at the property level demonstrates that all agents
prefer properties with high commissions, these results illustrate lower propensity of dominant firms to
intermediate low commission properties. If we assume that dominant firms’ diminished willingness to
2

purchase low commission properties leads to a reduced number of potential buyers, this finding can
explain about forty percent of the adverse sales outcomes reported above.
These negative consequences for properties offering low commission rates provide a lens to interpret
sellers’ reluctance to list at low commission rates, which in turn reinforces the existing commission structure. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that on average, sellers offering high commission rates
are paying $4,455 more in commissions in exchange for 20 fewer days on the market. Our calculation
implies an annual discount rate for sellers that is consistent with the housing literature.4
Our results illustrate that when a seller and her listing agency have to rely on a high commission
rate to induce cooperation from buying agents, a low commission strategy becomes less viable. These
results also rationalize our finding that offices charging low commission rates do not grow and that the
average commission rate exhibits surprisingly modest variation in response to a huge influx of real estate
brokerage offices in our sample period.
This paper makes several contributions. First, we construct a large dataset that documents individual buying commissions for about half a million properties and spans an entire housing business cycle.
Second, to our best knowledge, we provide the first causal analysis of the consequence of buying agent
commissions on economic outcomes and present evidence that steering contributes to the commission
uniformity. Third, our paper highlights distortions when incentive schemes serve a dual role of eliciting
agent effort and matching buyers and sellers. Our findings lend support to the argument that unbundling
the existing compensation structure could be socially beneficial.
Our paper contributes to several literatures. The first literature studies implications of the fixed percentage commissions in the real estate brokerage industry (such as, Levitt and Syverson (2008), Hsieh
and Moretti (2003), Hendel et al. (2009), and Han and Hong (2011). See Han and Strange (2015) for
a review).5 None of these papers analyzes the direct consequences of the commission compensation
structure, which is our focus in this paper.
A second related literature examines whether incentive schemes have adverse consequences on agent
performance. Oyer (1998) investigates the implications of non-linear incentive schemes on fiscal targets.
Larkin (2014) uses data from an enterprise software vendor to demonstrate the gaming of the deal closure
time by salespeople in response to the vendor’s accelerating commission schedule. The negative consequences of low commissions reported here arise from the fact that sellers have only one instrument for
two distinct purposes: to incentivize effort and attract buyers’ agents.
A small but growing literature documents that consumers often receive advice from experts that are
not in their interest. Mullainathan et al. (2012), Christoffersen et al. (2013), and Guercio and Reuter
(2015) study financial advisers and broker recommendations for mutual funds, Jiang et al. (2012) analyzes bond ratings, Schneider (2012), Anagol et al. (2013), and Shapiro (2015) examine the auto repair,
insurance, and health industries, respectively. Our results suggest housing transaction costs (about $130
4 See,

for example, Genesove and Mayer (1997) and Hendel et al. (2009). We discuss this in greater detail in Section 6.
recent work on real estate agents includes Rutherford et al. (2005), Bernheim and Meer (2012), Jia and Pathak (2010),
and Barwick and Pathak (2015).

5 Other

3

billion per year) are higher when agents steer buyers to properties with high commissions.6
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional background, while
Section 3 presents a model showing how the threat of steering leads to high commissions. Section 4
describes the data and presents descriptive patterns of the housing market and commissions during our
sample period. Section 5 analyzes property level sales outcomes for low commission properties. In
Section 6, we compare the costs and benefits for high versus low commission rates. Section 7 concludes.

2

Institutional background

Real estate agents are licensed intermediaries who provide services to buyers and sellers in real estate
transactions. The licensing requirements for Massachusetts appear modest (see Barwick and Pathak
(2015) for more details). For home buyers, agents search for houses that match their clients’ preferences,
arrange visits to the listings, and negotiate with sellers. For home sellers, agents help to advertise the
house, suggest listing prices, conduct open houses, and negotiate with buyers.
A contract between the seller and the listing agency usually includes the term of the contract,7 the
list price and the total commission the seller is obligated to pay to the listing agency in the event of a
sale.8 Commissions are often quoted as a certain percentage of the sale price. In the greater Boston area,
the norm for this rate is 5%. The National Association of Real Estate Exchanges (the predecessor to
the National Association of Realtors (NAR)) institutionalized a commission rate norm when it adopted
its first Code of Ethics in 1913. It stated that “(a)n agent should always exact the regular real estate
commission prescribed by the board or exchange of which he is a member.” In Boston, agents referred
to the Schedule of Broker’s Commissions published regularly by The Boston Real Estate Exchange. In
the 1920s, the typical commission rate for the city of Boston was 2.5 percent (Benson and North, 1922).9
This rate increased to 5 percent in 1940 and has prevailed ever since as the most common rate for listings
in the area (BREE, 1940).
This paper focuses on the common practice of bundling commissions where a seller pays one commission to her listing agency, who then shares the total commission with the agency who finds a buyer.
In particular, the commission rate paid to the buying agency is specified in the listing agreement prior
to the knowledge of buying agents. When buying agents are informed of properties that come to the
market, they observe the property attributes as well as the buying commission rate that comes with a
property (buyers do not observe the commission rate). This practice began in the early twentieth century
6 The total commissions paid by home sellers and buyers averaged $130 billion per year between 2004 and 2013 (NIPA, 2014).
7 Throughout

this paper, an ‘agent’ is an individual who assists buyers or sellers in housing transactions, an ‘office’ or a ‘firm’
is a broker that an agent works for, and an ‘agency’ refers to an agent and her broker.
8 This is the most common arrangement in the United States. Some markets have For-Sale-by-Owner (FSBO) arrangements.
In most places, the market share for FSBO is low: 9% nationally and 7% in Massachusetts (NAR, 2014c), though it can be
higher in some local markets (up to 20% in Madison (Hendel et al., 2009)).
9 The fee was 2.5 percent up to $40,000 (or $460,000 in 2011 dollars) and one percent on the balance, with a minimum fee of
$100.

4

to minimize the problem of buyers and sellers circumventing the payment of brokerage fees (Davies,
1958).
In many cases, the commission fee is evenly split between the listing and buying agencies. The 1913
Code of Ethics, for example, specifies that the eighth duty of members is to “... always be ready and
willing to divide the regular commission equally with any member of the Association who can produce
a buyer for any client.”10 More recent data suggest this pattern of equal splits persists until today (see
Section 4).
The commission to an agency is further split between agents and their brokers. According to a 2007
survey conducted by the NAR, most agents are compensated under a revenue sharing arrangement, with
the median agent keeping 60% of her commissions and submitting 40% to her firm (Bishop et al., 2007).
Similar to salespeople working in other professions (Joseph and Kalwani, 1998), many brokerage firms
also include built-in ‘accelerators’ that entails proportionately higher earnings with higher gross commission revenue (NAR, 2009). For example, a major franchise, Keller Williams, has a profit sharing
arrangement with “an elaborate seven-step function” that shares more with more productive agents (Inman News, 2014). Such non-linear incentive schemes that are based on revenue further enhance agents’
preferences towards listings with higher commission rates.
Figure B1 in the appendix (from Realtor.com, the official website of the NAR) illustrates how commissions are typically split between agents and brokers. In the example, the commission rate for a
$300,000 property is 6%, with 3% paid to the listing agency and 3% paid to the buying agency ($9000
each). This $9,000 is further split so that the agent gets 60% ($5400) and the broker receives 40%
($3600). Finally, the broker pays a small fraction ($200) to its franchise.

3

Theoretical framework

Here, we develop a stylized model of housing transactions to illustrate how the threat of steering can
generate high commissions and examine the implications of unbundling commissions.
Suppose that there are two identical properties for sale with different owners, each of whom has
decided to work with a particular listing agent.11 The owner is interested in selling her property, provided
that net of transaction costs, the sale price is at least her reservation value vs , which we assume is the
same for both sellers. A listing agent can exert effort e ∈ {e, ē}, with corresponding costs {c, c̄}. There is
one buyer’s agent in the economy, who can also exert effort e ∈ {e, ē} with costs {c, c̄}. The buyer’s agent
decides which of the two properties to show her client, a home buyer with reservation value vb . As in
standard principal-agent models, effort is not observed, although our results remain the same otherwise.
Since effort takes one of two values, we consider commission schemes with two different levels, L and
H. All agents’ outside options (net earnings from other professions) are assumed to be 0. In addition,
10 Emphasis

added by authors.
simplicity, we do not model the matching process between sellers and listing agents or between buyers and buying
agents.

11 For

5

agents are risk neutral.
The setting of two sellers and one buyer means that one property will not sell. This assumption
allows for steering because if all properties sell, then agent steering becomes inconsequential. It is also
consistent with our sample where a third of the properties do not sell.
We make two important simplifying assumptions. The first assumption is about the sales technology.
We assume that a property sells only if the buying agent shows it to her client and both the listing
and buying agents exert at least the minimum effort e. The fact that a buyer’s agent is necessary for a
transaction means that no amount of listing agent effort can substitute for the buyer’s agent. The incentive
scheme, therefore, plays a dual role: to incentivize effort and to attract the buyer’s agent to the property.
The second assumption is that if a property sells, it sells at price p that is exogenously given, regardless of the effort of the listing and buying agent. This assumption is motivated by the empirical evidence
below illustrating little relationship between sales prices and agent commissions. Moreover, it is a convenient simplification since different sales prices simply reflect transfers between sellers and buyers in this
model. We assume p > vs + 4c to ensure that the seller wishes to sell given the anticipated transaction
costs, and vb > p + c to ensure that the buyer wishes to buy even if she has to pay the buyer’s agent
directly.
We first examine the equilibrium commission structure and effort levels when the home seller must
pay both the listing and buying agent in the event of a sale (bundled commissions). We impose the
restriction that the commission is split evenly between the listing and buying agent. This scenario is
motivated by the industry norm. In equilibrium, the competition for the cooperation of the buying agent
forces both sellers to bid up commissions to the point that they exactly break even between selling their
property and keeping it. Equating the net proceeds of selling a property p − 2H with the reservation value
s
vs delivers H = p−v
2 . The buying agent exerts effort e and shows her client either property with equal
probability. Each listing agent exerts effort e to sell her listing, but recoups her cost only half of the time
when her listing sells. The assumption that p > vs + 4c guarantees that the listing agents are better off
exerting effort than taking their outside options because H2 − c > 0.
The buying agent earns a rent of H − c, which is driven by the threat of steering. This rent exists
because if one of the home sellers deviated and offered a lower commission, her property would not sell.
Since the buyer’s agent earns the same amount from both properties, there is no incentive to deviate from
showing each property with equal probability. This is also necessary because if the buying agent shows
one property more than half of the time, the listing agent of the other property would not find it optimal to
exert effort. Note that the listing agents also earn rents, due to the constraint of evenly split commissions.
Next, consider the equilibrium commission structure when sellers can pay differential commissions
to the listing and buying agent. This allows each seller to pay a lower commission L0 = 2c to her listing
agent and a higher commission H 0 = p − vs − 2c to the buying agent. All agents exert effort e. The listing
agents no longer earn rents, but the threat of steering continues to earn the buying agent a rent of H 0 − c.
Finally, we consider the case where commissions are unbundled, so that each seller only pays her
listing agent and the buyer pays the buying agent. In equilibrium, the home buyer pays c to the buying
6

agent, who exerts effort e, the minimum effort for a successful transaction. The seller offers her listing
agent a commission of 2c in the event of a sale. None of the listing agents nor the buying agent earns a
rent: the absence of the threat of steering makes it unnecessary to offer artificially high commissions.
In summary, in our first and second scenarios, commissions are bundled and serve two purposes:
to compensate agent effort and attract buyers. The resulting threat of steering forces both sellers to
pay a high commission to the buying agent, which creates rent and leads to higher transaction costs.
In contrast, when commissions are unbundled, the transaction costs are lower while other equilibrium
outcomes remain the same.

4
4.1

Data and descriptive patterns
Sample coverage

The data for this study come from the Multiple Listing Service (MLS) network for eastern Massachusetts,
a centralized platform containing information on property listings and sales. This area has a number of
virtues for our analysis: the market experienced a boom-bust cycle during our sample period, with house
prices peaking in mid-2000s and falling thereafter. The market also includes high-priced suburban towns
with single-family homes and more densely populated inner urban areas where condominiums make up
the bulk of transactions.
We collect information on all listed non-rental residential properties. Our sample contains 653,475
listings between 1998 and 2011, covering 85 towns and cities surrounding Boston. We combine 12 small
cities with their closest neighbor. Given the size of Boston, we split it into 15 markets using Zillow’s
definition of neighborhoods and a variable in the MLS (area) that identifies neighborhoods within cities.
This gives us a total of 87 markets. The appendix provides more details on the sample construction and
market definition.
For each listed property, we observe listing details (the listing date and price, the listing office and
agent, the commission offered to the buyer’s agent, and so on), a rich set of property characteristics,
and transaction details when a sale occurs (the sale price, date, the purchasing office and agent). The
number of days on the market is measured by the difference between the listing date and the date the
property is removed from the MLS database. We complement the MLS data with a deeds data set from
a commercial vendor that records seller and buyer names for all properties that change ownership during
1998 to 2008. This allows us to track home buyers and sellers overtime. We also merge in data from the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) which includes information on the income of buyers.
Our sample comprises three property types: condominiums (35%), single family homes (52%), and
multifamily properties (13%). The average listing in our sample has 1840 square feet, 3 bedrooms, 2
bathrooms, and is 62 years old. The median list price is $420,000 and the median sale price is $398,000
(both in 2011 dollars). The properties in our sample are comparable in size, but are older and more
expensive than the average home purchased in the United States between 2013 and 2014 (NAR, 2014c),
7

which has 1,870 square feet, 3 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, is 20 years old with a median sale price of
$235,000.

4.2

Commission fees

There is surprisingly little information on commissions charged by real estate agents at the property level.
The only exceptions that we are aware of include Schnare and Kulick (2009) that documents variation in
buying commissions across seven real estate markets but does not examine the consequences of buying
commissions on sales outcomes. Goolsby and Childs (1988) and Zietz and Newsome (2001) report on
buying commissions for a few hundred transactions.
Critically, we observe the commission rate offered to buyers’ agents for each of our 653,475 listings.
The histogram in Figure 1 establishes that a lion’s share of listings offer either a 2.5 percent or a 2 percent
commission rate to the buyer’s agent, with the rest scattering between 2 and 3 percent. Specifically, the
most commonly observed rates are 2.5 percent (59% of listings), 2 percent (31% of listings), 3 percent
(5% of listings), and 2.25 percent (3% of listings). Throughout our analysis, we define a low commission
rate listing as one with a buying commission rate strictly below 2.5 percent and a high commission rate
listing one with a rate at or above 2.5 percent.
Figure 2 displays geographical variation in commission rates. In markets such as Cambridge and
Newton that are characterized by high household income and high house prices, less than 15% of their
listings have buying commissions below 2.5 percent. On the other hand, in Revere, East Boston, and
other markets characterized by low household income and low house prices, more than three-fourths
of listings have low commission rates. Besides the cross-sectional variation in commission rates, our
analysis also takes advantage of the time series variation in our sample. The average commission rate
displays a modest U-shape over time, varying from 2.49 percent in 1998 to a low of 2.27 percent in 2005
before reverting back to 2.39 percent in 2011. This modest variation masks a relatively large change in
the fraction of listings at 2.5 percent: about 74% in 1998, 49% in 2005 (a period with a large influx of
entering agents and offices), and 62% in 2011.
Most brokerages have commission rate policies or norms. There appears to be systematic differences
in commission rates charged by different offices. Among the six dominant chains – Coldwell Banker,
Century 21, Remax, Hammond, Prudential, and GMAC – only Century 21 has a majority of listings at
rates below 2.5 percent. Coldwell Banker, the largest chain that accounts for about 20% of all listings
in our sample, rarely lists properties at rates below 2.5 percent. In contrast, about 48% of independent
offices and smaller chains have a majority of listings at rates below 2.5 percent. Some of the firm level
variation could reflect differences in costs, such as overhead, insurance charges, and technology and
marketing costs. It could also come from brand premium or prestige. In addition, commission rates may
vary depending on property attributes (condominiums usually list at high commission rates) and market
conditions.
While our dataset does not contain commissions paid to listing agents, the typical split is 50/50.
8

To investigate the commission split between listing and buying agencies, we collect a random sample
of 70 HUD-I housing settlement statements that report final compensations paid to agents, including
commission rates and rebates. These commission rates are reasonably representative: the properties are
listed by 39 offices in 37 of the markets in our sample from 2007 to 2012. The average sale price (not
deflated) is $483,000, which is comparable to our sample average of $479,000 in 2011 dollars.12 Our
calculations suggest that 90% of transactions in our random sample have even splits of commissions.
For the remaining 8 transactions, half pays more to the listing agency, and half pays more to the buying
agency.

4.3

Brokerage firms and agents

There are a total of 8,888 offices and 35,129 agents in our data set. The ability to observe agent and
office identifiers as well as their past transactions allows us to construct detailed measures of office and
agent quality, including experience, various sales performances (such as the fraction of listings that are
sold each year, the average days on market), and property portfolio (the fraction of condominiums or
single-family houses). For offices, we also observe the size and quality of their agents. We collect
each office’s street address from a variety of data sources and use this information to construct distance
between offices. Tables C1 and C2 in the appendix describe our variables in detail.
A large number of offices and agents have only a few listings throughout our sample period. Our
analysis focuses on offices (agents) whose average annual listings is above 5 (2).13 These offices (agents)
are responsible for 95% (92%) of the listings.
There is substantial turnover of brokerage offices and agents that coincides with the latest housing
boom and bust, as illustrated in Figure 3. The annual number of listings (the dashed line) remains around
40,000 through 2002 and increases steadily to 65,000 in 2006 before declining to 40,000 by 2011. The
solid line illustrates entry and exit of offices over time that also appears to be correlated with the housing
cycle. The number of offices nearly doubles from 1,700 in 1998 to 3,200 in 2011, with newly established
offices accounting for four-fifths of the sample near the end of our sample period.

4.4

Growth paths of low commission firms

Figure 4 shows that entrants (brokerage firms established in 1999 or later) that offer low commissions in
the past are much less likely to reach the top tier of the market in terms of revenue than entrants with high
commissions. This is counterintuitive: firms charging low prices are less likely to grow. One possible
explanation for this pattern is that entrants are not identical. Firms that are able to recruit talented agents
or with more connections might charge a high commission rate and do well at the same time.

12 Our

sample comes from a real estate brokerage firm in one of our sample cities.
average annual number of listings is the ratio of the total number of listings by an office or agent over the total number
of years that office or agent spans our data (the last year minus the first year plus one).

13 The

9

We refine the comparison in Figure 4 by controlling for firm attributes in the following regression:
1(TopRevlmt ) = γ f rcRtL25lm,t−1 + Xlm,t−1 β + µmt + εlmt ,

(1)

where 1(TopRevlmt ) is 1 if office l’s revenue is in the top quartile in market m and year t, X represents
office controls and µ represents market-year fixed effects. The key regressor is f rcRtL25lmt , the fraction
of office l’s listings that is below 2.5 percent in the most recent three years t − 2 to t.14 The one-year lag
of f rcRtL25lmt alleviates concerns that it might be jointly determined with the dependent variable.15
Table 1 reports estimates of γ for entrants (Panel A) and all offices (Panel B). Column 1 includes
market-year fixed effects. Column 2 adds office quality (experience, performance of listings, composition of agents, etc.). Column 3 controls for the composition of an office’s listings (average number of
bedrooms, average square footage, etc.), mitigating concerns that the weak performance of low commission entrants is driven by their tendency to list properties that deliver lower commission revenues.
Column 4 adds office fixed effects. Firms’ top-quartile status tends to be persistent over time, thus we
control for a one-year lagged top status in all columns except in the specification with office fixed effects.
Results without the lagged status are more pronounced. See Table C1 for a full list of controls.
Across the columns, low commission entrants are significantly less likely to be top-revenue firms,
even after adjusting for observable differences among them. Our most conservative estimate suggests
that an entrant that specializes in low commissions ( f rcRtL25 = 1) in the past is 5 percentage points
(p.p.) less likely to report top-quartile revenues than an entrant that specializes in high commissions
( f rcRtL25 = 0). This effect is considerable given that the mean of the dependent variable is only 17%.
When we repeat the analysis using all offices in Panel B, we continue to find much weaker performance
for low commission offices.
Although not shown, we have estimated regressions using many different measures of dominance
and different sample cuts. We find a large negative consequence of low commission policies across all of
these specifications. These findings are thought provoking: competitive behavior, where offices charge
low prices for comparable services, does not lead to successful outcomes. Instead of growing bigger,
these offices are more likely to remain small.

5

Results

Motivated by the patterns discussed above, our core analysis tests whether a low commission rate offered
to the buyer’s agent affects the sale performance of a listing. We first show that listings offering high
versus low commission rates appear to be comparable, on average. We then present robust evidence that
the effect of commission rates on sales outcomes survives a rich set of controls for market conditions,
property characteristics, seller, agent and office attributes, as well as an instrumental variable strategy.
14 Results

using a one-year window instead of a three-year window are similar but noisier because some entrants have few
listings in a year.
15 A two-year lag of f rcRtL25
lmt leads to similar results.

10

5.1

Effect of commission rate on transaction outcomes

Our main listing level regression is of the following form:
yipklmt = β1 RL25ipklmt + PROPipt β2 + AGTkmt β3 + OFFICElmt β4 + µmt + τmonth + π p + εipklmt

(2)

where yipklmt is the sale outcome for the i’th listing of property p, by agent k and office l in market m
and year t. The key regressor is RL25, a dummy that is 1 if a listing offers a commission rate that is
strictly below 2.5 percent. There are many sources of confounders in our context because houses are
differentiated along multiple dimensions and many parties are involved in a housing transaction. We
include controls for property characteristics (PROP), attributes of listing agents (AGT ) and listing offices
(OFFICE), market by year fixed effects (µmt ) for time-varying market conditions, month fixed effects
(τmonth ), and property fixed effects (π p ). To conserve space, we reserve a detailed description of all
controls in Table C2 in the appendix.
We examine three performance measures of a listing: the sale probability, as well as the days on
market and the sale price if a listing is sold. The parameter of interest is β1 . In an ideal setting, where
commission rates are randomly assigned and buying agents fully internalize interests of their clients, how
much agents are compensated should not affect the sale outcome (β1 should be 0). On the other hand, if
buying agents steer their buyers towards high commission properties, β1 will reflect negative outcomes
for low commission properties. A key empirical challenge is that listings offering low commission rates
may have less desirable attributes that lead to adverse outcomes (β1 may be downward biased). Our
assumption is that RL25 is plausibly uncorrelated with the residual of sales outcomes, conditional on our
controls.
Table 2 demonstrates that observable differences between listings offering high versus low commission rates are modest. Each row reports an OLS regression at the listing level where the dependent
variable is a property characteristic and the regressor is the RL25 dummy. These tests only have one
regressor but the results are similar if we add market by year fixed effects and month fixed effects to
control for market conditions. We choose a list of property characteristics that are commonly included in
hedonic regressions in the housing literature.16 Columns 1 and 2 report the mean and standard deviation
of each dependent variable. Columns 3 and 4 report the coefficient on RL25 and the p-value. On average,
low commission rate listings are 10 square feet larger, have 0.1 acre smaller lotsizes, are 8% less likely
to be condominiums, 1% less likely to be single-family homes, one year older, have 0.2 more bedrooms,
0.07 fewer bathrooms, and 0.07 more other types of rooms.
Table 3 presents estimates of β1 , the causal effect of offering a low commission rate on the probability
of sale. The dependent variable is a dummy that is one if the listing is sold within our sample period (the
mean is 65%).17 Standard errors are clustered at the market by year level (columns 1 to 2) and at the
16 This

small set of characteristics explains 47% of the variation in ln(List price) and up to 78% of the variation if we include
market by year fixed effects and month fixed effects.
17 The MLS data reports whether a listing was sold, cancelled, expired, or withdrawn. We code a listing as sold if its status

11

property level (columns 3 to 7). We include the full sample of 653,475 listings.
Across all specifications, low commission rate listings are significantly less likely to sell than high
commission rate listings. We begin with a parsimonious specification in column 1 that controls for market
conditions since commission rates tend to be correlated across markets and time, as discussed in Section
4. Conditional on market by year and listing month fixed effects, low commission rate listings are 9 p.p.
less likely to sell compared to high commission listings.
Next, we show that the lower sales probability survives controls of property attributes. We find a
weaker effect in column 2 but the change is modest (- 7 p.p. compared to - 9 p.p. in column 1), even after
adding 148 property controls that explain 62% of the variation in ln(List price) and up to 85% with market
by year and month fixed effects. The smaller coefficient suggests that some of the effect in column 1 is
driven by unobserved property attributes that make low commission rate listings harder to sell. However,
the change in the β1 estimate is not large, which is expected given the modest differences in observed
property attributes reported in Table 2.
Furthermore, the estimate remains similar when we add more than 133,000 property fixed effects in
column 3 to control for time-invariant property characteristics. This restricts the sample to properties
with multiple listings during our sample period.18 Here, the model is identified by comparing the same
properties that switch between low and high commission rates (which applies to 36% of properties).
Notably, the R-squared increases from 10% to 46% but the effect (- 9 p.p.) remains similar.
Property fixed effects do not address time-varying property attributes, such as unobserved upgrades.
We therefore construct keywords related to maintenance and renovations from property descriptions and
include them as part of the 148 property controls from column 2 onwards.19 Admittedly, regardless of
how many controls are included in the regression, one can never completely eliminate the concern of
unobserved attributes. However, as documented in Table 5, the same set of controls explains 97% to
99% of variation in sales prices. It is difficult to imagine unobserved property attributes that affect the
probability of sale but not the sale price. Hence, we conclude that unobserved housing attributes are
unlikely to be a major concern here.
Lower sales probabilities for low commission listings might be driven by seller preferences. In particular, we are concerned that patient sellers who are more likely to trade off higher sales prices against
lower sales probabilities are also more likely to list at low commission rates (to maximize their proceeds
net of commission). In column 4, we proxy for seller patience using the idea that patient sellers will list
their properties at higher prices, relative to prices predicted from observed attributes. This also builds on
the notion of using the list price as a proxy for the seller’s reservation price (Genesove and Mayer, 2001).
Patient sellers tend to have higher reservation prices than motivated sellers. We first calculate the ratio of
is sold and zero otherwise. Later, we show that our results are not driven by right-censoring issues for the sold dummy
(listings close to the end of the sample period may sell after the sample ends).
18 Restricting the sample might introduce a sample selection bias as properties that are listed multiple times could be properties
with lower quality. However, this difference appears to be small. When we repeat the specification in column 2 for the
sample of repeat listings, the effect is -8.5 p.p.
19 We create dummies for common keywords such as “Renovated”, “Remodeled”, “Maintained”, “Needs updating”. These
dummies are part of the 148 property controls. See Table C2 in the appendix for the full list of keywords.

12

the observed list price to a predicted hedonic price, then construct decile dummies for this ratio.20 These
decile dummies constitute our seller patience controls. With these controls, the effect becomes slightly
less negative (- 6 p.p.). We explore other controls for seller patience and seller preferences in Table 7 (see
Section 5.2.2 for details) and reach similar conclusions.
We further probe the robustness of these results by adding measures of listing office and agent quality.
These additional controls alleviate concerns that lower quality offices or agents are more likely to list at
low commission rates (columns 5 and 6). For agents, we control for their experiences over time and
also whether they are star agents (ranked in the top decile using agents’ average annual listings). For
offices, we control for the composition of agents in the office, the performances of listings by the office
in each year (such as the fraction of listings that were sold, the average days on market for sold listings)
and whether an office is the dominant office in a market in terms of average transaction volume. Higher
quality offices and agents have higher sales probabilities through two channels. First, they are better
at selecting properties that are easier to sell. Second, they are more knowledgable about local market
conditions, have better social skills, and are better at selling.
Our most saturated OLS specification implies that low commission listings are 5 p.p. less likely to
sell than observably identical high commission listings (column 6). Interestingly, the estimate remains
relatively stable after adding office and agent controls. This could be because the first (selection) channel
has been controlled for using property controls and property fixed effects. While office and agent quality
naturally affect the probability of sale, most of the variation seems to have been absorbed in our previous
specifications. Additionally, our results survive more flexible controls for agent and office quality such
as office fixed effects or agent fixed effects (see Section 5.2.1 for details).
While the stable estimates across the different OLS specifications above are encouraging, we reinforce
our causal interpretation by implementing an instrumental variable strategy (column 7). We begin with
the observation that some chains appear to have different preferences for high versus low commission
rates, based on our examination of the data and discussions with realtors. Among the three largest chains
in our data, Coldwell Banker, Century 21, and ReMax,21 Coldwell Banker has the lowest fraction of low
commission listings (9%) and Century 21 has the highest fraction (53%). ReMax is in the middle (36%).
There is suggestive evidence that customers of Coldwell Banker are less price-sensitive than those of
Century 21. For example, the median income amongst buyers who are represented by Coldwell Banker
is $105,000 compared to $80,000 for buyers represented by Century 21.22
Our instruments include the distances between the listing office and the nearest Coldwell Banker and
20 The

hedonic regression uses our most saturated set of controls in column 6 (but drops the dummy for low commission
rate) on the full sample of listings. We construct an index of seller patience associated with each listing in the full sample
of 653,475 listings. We estimate property fixed effects for all properties with repeat listings. We group properties with
non-repeat listings and estimate a common constant for these listings.
21 Each of these three chains have more than 60,000 listings in our data. The next large chain (Hammond) has fewer than
20,000 listings.
22 We obtained this data by merging our listings data with data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) through
2008. We have income data for about 25% of purchases. For Coldwell Banker, we have income data for 15,470 purchases
out of 58,424 purchases. For Century 21, we have income data for 10,762 purchases out of 42,975 purchases.

13

Century 21 offices in each year, respectively. If prices are strategic complements, higher prices by rivals
lead to higher prices by the listing office. As a result, listing offices near Coldwell Banker (Century 21)
are more (less) likely to charge high commission rates. Our first stage analysis confirms this hypothesis.
We regress RL25 on the distance from listing office l to the nearest Coldwell Banker office in year t and
the distance to the nearest Century 21 office in year t, while maintaining the same set of controls as in
column 6. Time series variation in our distance measures is driven by changes in the listing office and
entry and exit of Coldwell Banker and Century 21 offices. The t-statistics for the distances to the nearest
Coldwell and Century 21 offices are 34 and -11, respectively. The F statistic for the joint test of excluded
instruments is 570.
The thought experiment behind the IV strategy is to contrast the sale performance for the same property that is listed in year t by an office close to Coldwell Banker and also listed in year t 0 by an office
close to Century 21. The distance instruments give rise to quasi-exogenous variation in RL25 because
the listings in years t and t 0 would have high and low commission rates, respectively. The exclusion
restriction requires that distances to Coldwell Banker and Century 21 offices only affect sales outcomes
through their impact on the pricing strategy of the listing office. One concern is that distances could be
correlated with other determinants of sale outcomes, perhaps due to endogenous entry and exit decisions
of firms. For example, higher quality firms could sort into locations closer to properties that have desirable attributes and are easier to sell. Our identification assumption is that these distances were chosen
before the listing date and that predetermined factors that jointly affect firm location choice and sales
outcomes (such as property attributes and market conditions) are controlled for.
Reassuringly, the IV estimate continues to imply that low commission listings are less likely to sell.
The estimate in column 7 is - 8 p.p., slightly more negative but not statistically different from that in
column 6. The stability of the estimates across columns 6 and 7 is encouraging as these estimation
strategies (OLS vs. IV) leverage different sources of variation in the key regressor and are presumably
identified from different sets of properties. We find similar results when we repeat the IV estimation but
drop listings by Coldwell Banker and Century 21 offices.
Table 4 reports the results for the number of days on market for sold properties. The dependent
variable is ln(Days on market), where the number of days on market is censored above at 365 days. A
total of 6428 listings took a year or longer to sell. The average (median) time on market is 71 (44) days.
The specifications across the columns are analogous to those in Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 include all sold
listings.23 Column 3 onwards includes properties with repeat sales and controls for property fixed effects
(33% of properties switch between high and low commission rates).
We find that low commission rate listings take 12% longer to sell, or 8 days for the average sold
listing (column 6). The results are relatively stable between 12% and 14% across specifications. The IV
estimate is larger (33%) but the standard errors are also large (12%). The test of whether the IV estimate
in column 7 is different from the OLS estimate in column 6 has a p-value of 0.08.
23 We

have 421,329 sold listings. We drop 2,207 sold listings with zero days-on-market and 6 sold listings with negative
days-on-market, leaving us with 419,116 sold listings for our estimation sample.

14

Table 5 provides results for our final transaction outcome, the sale price. The average (median) sale
price is $479,000 ($398,000) in 2011 dollars. The dependent variable is ln(Sale price). Our estimation
samples include all sold listings (columns 1 and 2) and repeat sales with property fixed effects (columns
3 to 7).
When we only control for market conditions (column 1), low commission listings sell at higher sales
prices. Adding property controls and property fixed effects in columns 2 and 3 dampens the effect. If low
commission rates are associated with lower property quality, adding property controls should mitigate
the downward bias and increase the coefficient from column 1 to columns 2 and 3. The patterns reported
here alleviate concerns over unobserved low property quality and echo our earlier discussion that patient
sellers prefer high sales prices and low commission rates. Accordingly, controlling for seller patience
(column 4 onwards) offsets this upward bias and reduces the effect of low commission on the sale price
to be statistically insignificant.
The results from Table 5 indicate that offering high versus low commission rates has no statistically
significant impact on the sale price. This supports the assumption in our stylized model (Section 3) that
the sale price is exogenously given (determined by market forces). It is possible that sellers pass through
part of the agency commissions to buyers, but our sample does not have enough power to detect this,
probably because the implied pass-through due to the one p.p. difference in commission rates is small.
Overall, our results provide compelling evidence that listings offering low commission rates experience adverse sales outcomes compared to high commission listings. We find that low commission rate
listings are 5 p.p. less likely to sell, a sizable effect considering the sample average of 56% for repeat listings (and 65% for the full sample). In addition, conditional on a sale, low commission listings take 12%
(8 days) longer to sell, but sell at comparable prices to those with high commission rates. Similarly, Hendel et al. (2009) find no indication that MLS listings deliver a higher sale price than FSBO transactions,
after controlling for house and seller heterogeneity. Levitt and Syverson (2008) report that agent-owned
homes sell for 3.7% higher prices but take 9.5 days longer to sell compared to non-agent-owned homes.
Our estimates are remarkably stable. They are similar across different samples (Boston versus outside
of Boston, condominiums versus single family houses, big versus small offices, as reported in Table C3
in the appendix) and survive a battery of robustness checks. They are robust to market condition controls
that use zipcode fixed effects, census tract fixed effects, market plus year fixed effects instead of market
by year fixed effects. They are consistent across different combinations of property, agent, and office
controls and are robust to using two-way clustering of standard errors (by property and year).24 In
Table C4 in the appendix, we address concerns that our probability of sale regression is affected by right
censoring in our sold dummy (some listings in 2011 are sold after our sample period ends). We repeat our
probability of sale analysis using whether a listing is sold within 30, 60, 90, and 180 days of the listing
date as alternative dependent variables. We also experiment with dropping properties that are listed after
2009 and are more likely to be subject to right censoring. Our conclusions are similar in all cases.
24 All

results referenced in this paper are available upon request.

15

Compared to the existing literature, our analysis has several advantages. Our sample is large with
ample variation. Since the typical property only transacts every four years in our setting, a long panel
has the benefit of having more properties and sellers with repeated listings and sales. We have 133,903
properties with 344,832 repeat listings and 62,843 properties with 137,085 repeat sales. Our controls
have a high explanatory power: the most saturated specification (column 6 in Tables 3, 4, and 5) has
an R-squared of 51% for the probability of sale, 57% for days on market, and 99% for the sale price.
Moreover, we control for observed attributes for all parties involved in listing a property: the listing
office, listing agent, and seller. Their time-invariant attributes are controlled in a flexible manner by fixed
effects (discussed below).
Next, we discuss findings from tests that address two remaining identification threats. We focus on
the sale probability. Our results are similar for the other two outcomes (days on market and sale prices).

5.2
5.2.1

Potential threats
Unobserved effort by listing agents

The findings above that listings offering low buying commission rates experience worse outcomes are
consistent with buying agents steering their buyers towards high commission listings. However, the worse
outcomes can also reflect diminished effort from listing agents who receive less commission revenues
from lower commission rates.25 To address this issue, we first examine properties where listing agent
effort is less likely to be crucial and then proxy for listing agents’ effort. If the lack of listing agent effort
drives the negative sales outcome, then we should expect a less negative estimate for these specifications.
We continue to find that properties that are relatively homogeneous and easy to sell suffer worse
outcomes when they are listed at low commission rates, and the magnitude is remarkably similar to what
we report above for the full sample. Column 1 of Table 6 shows that new properties with low commission
listings are 5 p.p. less likely to sell. We obtain the same effect restricting to 11% of the listings built within
five years (the median age is 63 years and 60% of the properties was built before 1960s). In addition, the
coefficient is the same for condominiums, which are more homogeneous than other property types.
Next, we show that our results survive listing agent fixed effects. We add more than 9,000 agent fixed
effects to the same specification in column 6 of Table 3 to flexibly control for the time-invariant quality of
listing agents.26 This is a demanding exercise with 305,000 observations and more than 142,000 controls.
The effect of low commission rates on the sale probability is -3 p.p. and precisely estimated. The estimate
is slightly weaker than our base case, which is likely driven by the attenuation bias exacerbated by the
large number of fixed effects.
Our final strategy is to augment our empirical model to proxy for listing agents’ effort using potential
25 We

do not observe commissions to listing agents. However, the commission rates offered to listing and buying agencies are
usually the same (see Section 2)
26 We restrict our analysis to agents with eight or more listings. This drops 40,212 listings with the benefit of saving 15,000
fixed effects for agents with few listings in our sample.

16

listing commission revenues. Assuming the buying and listing commission rates are the same, the listing
commission revenue is the product of the observed commission rate and the list price. If two different
properties offer the same listing commission (for example, a $500,000 property at 2% vs. a $400,000
property at 2.5%), then the agent is likely to exert the same effort in selling both properties. On the
other hand, if the two properties offer different buying commission rates, then they might attract different
numbers of buying agents and hence have different sales outcomes, holding constant effort by the listing
agent.27
To implement this idea, we create bins of listings that deliver similar commission revenues for a
listing agent in a given year and property type. For example, one bin could be all condominiums that
are listed by Mary Smith in 2000 that generate gross listing commission revenues that differ by at most
$500. Given that an agent typically keeps 60% of the gross commission revenues, the actual difference in
the net commission revenues across different properties in the same bin is even smaller. We restrict each
bin to the same property type to limit the extent of heterogeneity. These bins are comparable to agent
by property-type by year fixed effects. Column 3 of Table 6 illustrates our result when we restrict the
commission difference to a maximum of $500. We have a total of 92,191 bins, accounting for 231,550
listings. We include bin fixed effects from column 3 onwards. Our coefficient is identified from 15% of
the bins with within bin variation of RL25. We include the same set of controls as those in column 2,
with the exceptions of agent fixed effects and agent-year controls (which are absorbed by the bin fixed
effects) and property fixed effects (since few properties are listed and sold more than once by the same
listing agent within a year).
We find a similar negative impact of low commission rates on the sale probability, when comparing
listings offering high versus low buying commission rates within the same bin, holding constant listing
agent effort (column 3). While this result is reassuring, one might be concerned that without property
fixed effects, we are essentially comparing outcomes across different properties. To the extent that unobserved property attributes that affect ease of sale are correlated with commission rates, our parameter
estimates will be biased. First, note that even though we do not include property fixed effects, the fitness
for column 3 is as good as that in our main specification in Table 3: the R-squared is 0.57, versus 0.51 in
the main specification. The bin fixed effects, as well as the remaining set of controls, appear adequate to
explain the variation of sale probability at the property level. Second, replacing the full set of property
controls with a sparse set of eight attributes as those reported in Table 2 delivers roughly the same coefficient. If unobserved property attributes bias our results, then controlling for a richer versus a more sparse
set of property controls should lead to different estimates. Columns 4 and 5 repeat the same analysis,
with slightly wider bins: the maximum difference in the gross listing commission revenues is $1000 and
$1500, respectively. The coefficient of RL25 is stable across different bin sizes.
Finally, our conclusions should hold even if the listing and buying commission rates are not equal. As
discussed in Section 2, a majority of listings have a 50/50 split. If the listing and buying commission rates
27 For

example, if a buyer is looking for a three-bed single-family that is worth $500,000, her buying agent has an incentive to
steer her to comparable properties at around the same price range but offer high commission rates 2.5%.

17

are positively correlated, our measure of the potential commission revenue will be positively correlated
with the true commission revenue received by the listing agent and should still proxy for listing agent
effort. If they are negatively correlated, then properties with low buying commission rates have high listing commission rates and should elicit more effort from the listing agent. The higher effort levels cannot
explain the worse outcomes that we find. We conclude that our results are not driven by unobserved
listing agent effort.
5.2.2

Seller preferences

Table 7 addresses the threat that comparisons of high versus low commission listings could reflect differences in seller preferences. For example, the lower sale probabilities for low commission rates could be
driven by downward biases from contrasting patient sellers (who choose to offer low commission rates
and are less likely to sell) against impatient sellers.
First, we present evidence that our results are robust to alternative proxies for seller preferences.
This mitigates concerns that the decile dummies in our main specification may not be fine enough and
there may be residual correlation between seller attributes and the low commission dummy. In column
1, we directly control for ln(List price) instead of using our decile dummies. The list price proxies for
the reservation price of a seller (Genesove and Mayer, 2001) and has been shown to affect bargaining
and search behavior (Han and Strange, 2014). While the list price may reflect unobserved agents or
property attributes, it also reflects seller patience. Therefore, augmenting our regression model with the
list price allows us to assess wheter our estimates are affected by seller urgency. Next, we replace the
decile dummies with one hundred percentile dummies, which constitute a finer set of patience controls.
Reassuringly, we find similar results when we control for list price directly (-6 p.p.) and when we control
for the percentile dummies (-5 p.p.).
Besides exploring different controls for time-varying seller attributes, we also show that our results
survive the addition of seller fixed effects to control for time-invariant seller attributes (columns 3 and 4).
We obtain seller names by merging our MLS data with county records that include price, transaction date,
address, and seller and buyer names. We restrict the analysis to 31,407 listings by sellers with multiple
listings. We include 14,213 seller name fixed effects (29% of listings switched between high and low
commission rates). Standard errors are clustered at the seller level.
The specification with seller fixed effects and seller patience controls delivers a similar effect on the
sale probability (-7 p.p.) compared to the -5 p.p. effect we find above. This model is identified by comparing listings by the same seller offering different commission rates, conditional on all of the controls in
column 6 of Table 3 (except property fixed effects). Since some common names might represent different
sellers, we drop seller names that occur more than five times in column 4 and obtain a similar estimate.
In addition to specifications reported in Table 7, our results are robust to a variety of tests: whether a
sparse or a full set of property controls, with or without seller patience proxies, etc.

18

5.3

Why do low commission listings experience adverse outcomes?

So far, our results demonstrate that the worse outcomes for listings offering low commission rates are
not driven by common property, seller, listing office, and listing agent confounders. Rather, they point
to buying agents best responding to commission rate incentives. Next, we provide further support to this
argument by examining why listings offering low commission rates experience adverse outcomes. We
first document heterogeneous effects on the probability of sale. Then, we provide direct evidence that
dominant offices and agents have a lower propensity to purchase low commission rate listings.
5.3.1

Outcomes for properties more susceptible to steering

We first examine low commission listings in neighborhoods with a large fraction of high commission
listings. All else equal, it is conceivable that buying agents are less likely to visit low commission listings
that are surrounded by similar properties with high commission rates.28 The key variable of interest is
the interaction between the low commission rate dummy for listing i and the fraction of high commission
listings in the same census block group and same listing year. We demean this fraction so that the
coefficient for the low commission dummy reflects the effect for the average census block group-year.29
We include block group-year fixed effects but exclude property fixed effects.
Our results confirm that low commission listings are harder to sell if they are surrounded by more
high commission listings in the same year. The -0.03 coefficient in column 1 of Table 8 implies that
a one standard deviation increase in the fraction of high commission listings nearby translates to a 1
p.p. decrease in the probability of sale (relative to the direct effect of - 5 p.p.). One concern is that
low commission listings surrounded by high commission listings reflect a selected sample of relatively
lower quality listings that are harder to sell. If this is the case, then the effect should change when we
add more controls that affect the probability of sale. However, this effect is stable whether we use a
sparse or a full set of property controls. Column 2 shows that this effect is larger for condominiums.
Condominiums within a census block group are more homogeneous, and thus, the incentive to show a
high commission condominium listing against a low commission listing within the same census block
group is more pronounced.
We next demonstrate that low commission listings offered by independent entrants (firms that do
not belong to top six chains) suffer worse outcomes. Entrants have little market power, possess few
contacts, and are more dependent on other agents and brokerage offices to cooperate with them. Hence,
they are more vulnerable to steering. In column 3, we extend our main specification with two additional
28 For

example, an agent asks:“Why would I sell my buyer a home for half the commission when I can take them elsewhere?”
(Denver Post, 2013)
29 That is, we augment equation 2 by keeping the direct effect of the low commission dummy for listing i in block group g in
year t, β1 RL25igt , and adding an heterogeneous effect, ρ1 RL25igt ∗ ( f rcRH25gt − Rgt ). Variable f rcRH25gt is the fraction
of listings in block group g and year t that have high commission rates and Rgt is the average of this fraction at the block
group-year level. Therefore, β1 measures the effect of low commission rates for listings in the average block group-year.
The direct effect of ( f rcRH25gt − Rgt ) is absorbed by the block group-year fixed effect. We drop all block group-years that
have fewer than 5 listings to avoid imprecision in f rcRH25 due to small samples.

19

regressors: a dummy if the listing office is an entrant not affiliated with the six dominant chains and
its interaction with the low commission dummy.30 The coefficient on the interaction term suggests that
low commission listings by independent entrants are an extra 2 p.p. less likely to sell, in addition to
the -5 p.p. direct effect of RL25 for all low commission listings. This effect is unlikely to be driven by
the worse quality of entrants because the direct effect of entrants is small and insignificant (-0.003, s.e.
0.01) and we maintain the same set of office controls as in Table 3. Additionally, we find even more
negative consequences for low commission listings by these entrants in their first three years (-3 p.p. for
the interaction term), when they have even less market presence than in later years.
Our final heterogeneous analysis is motivated by accounts of retaliatory behavior by traditional agents
against those who deviate from the norm and charge low commissions (column 4 of Table 8).31 We
implement this idea by investigating the dynamic consequences on offices that adopt a low commission
pricing strategy in the past. In column 4, we add a proxy for an office’s past pricing strategy, which is
a three-year cumulative fraction of low commission listings up to year t for each office. It measures an
office’s propensity to list below 2.5 percent in the past three years. The -0.04 coefficient implies that a
one standard deviation increase in the cumulative fraction in the past leads to a 2 p.p. decline in the sale
likelihood today.32 Results are similar when we restrict the sample to listings by active offices whose
average annual listings is at least five.
Overall, these patterns consistently point towards worse outcomes for low commission listings that
are more vulnerable to steering. Moreover, the findings in the last two columns echo our results above
that low commission offices and entrants are less likely to grow (Table 1 and Figure 4).
5.3.2

Dominant offices and agents are less likely to purchase low commission listings

Having documented negative consequences of low commission rate policies, we now describe the purchasing patterns of offices and agents. As shown above, all offices and agents dislike low commission
rate listings. In the analysis below, we ask whether dominant offices with greater market power are even
less likely to purchase listings offering low commission rates. We estimate the following equation:
ln(FrcBL25lmt ) = δ ln(Sharelm,t−1 ) + Xlm,t−1 β + µmt + εlmt ,

(3)

where the dependent variable is log of the fraction of office l’s purchases that has low commission rates
in market m and year t. The key regressor ln(Sharelm,t−1 ) is log of office l’s market share in market
m and year t − 1. An office’s market share is its commission revenue from all of its sold listings in a
30 We

define entrants as offices that first appear in our dataset in 1999 (the results are similar if we use 2000 or 2001).
a recent survey of agents, 50% of the 503 respondents agreed that some brokers do not compete on commissions because
they fear retaliation (Inman News, 2014). Several lawsuits also allege different methods of retaliation against discount
brokers charging low commissions, including “group boycotts” and “blacklisting” discount brokers, offering to pay discount
brokers what the industry calls “punitive splits” instead of the standard 50/50 split (see Hawker (2006) for a discussion of
court cases).
32 The direct effect of RL25 remains similar (- 4 p.p. compared to - 5 p.p. in Table 3).
31 In

20

market and year divided by the aggregate listing commission revenue in the same market and year. To
mitigate potential confounding factors, we exclude buying commission revenues in the calculation of
market share, since an office’s buying commissions in the previous year are likely correlated with the
dependent variable. Office attributes Xlm,t−1 are lagged one year and similar to those in equation (1) (see
Table C1 in the appendix for details). All regressions control for market by year fixed effects µmt . To
reduce measurement errors, we focus on active offices with an average annual number of listings above
5. Standard errors are clustered at the office level. We first run this analysis for offices and then repeat it
for agents.
Dominant offices are less likely to purchase low commission rate listings (Panel A of Table 9). The
specification with office attributes and market by year fixed effects (column 2) suggests that doubling an
office’s market share reduces the fraction of low commission listings it purchases by 14%. One might
be concerned that high quality offices are more likely to work with wealthy clients who prefer desirable
properties, and that desirable properties are listed at high commission rates. To address this, column
3 controls for average attributes of office l’s listings in market m and year t − 1, including the average
square footage, average number of bedrooms and bathrooms, etc.33 The coefficient remains at -0.14.
Controlling for chain fixed effects and office fixed effects (columns 4 and 5) leads to weaker but still
highly significant estimates (-0.10 and -0.04, respectively). The reduction in magnitude suggests that
some of the negative results might be driven by office level policies.
We explore a series of robustness checks for our finding that dominant offices buy a smaller fraction of
low commission properties. It is robust across different sample cuts (e.g., offices with an average annual
number of listings above 7), different definitions of market shares (e.g., using the number of listings
instead of listing commissions), different ways to proxy for dominance (e.g., a three-year average of
market shares), and regressions in levels of shares instead of logs. Our dominant agent analysis parallels
the dominant office analysis with similar findings.
Market shares vary widely in our sample. The average market share for offices that are not affiliated
with top six chains is 6%, while that for offices affiliated with top six chains is 17%. At our most
conservative estimate (column 5), a threefold increase in an office’s market share would translate into a
12% reduction in its fraction of purchases that go to low commission rate properties.
How does a dominant office’s diminished propensity to purchase low commission properties relate
to our main findings above? Under the simplifying assumptions that the matching event between a
potential buyer and a seller is i.i.d. and that the successful match rate is identical across properties, the
reduced purchase propensity from the six dominant chains accounts for 42% to 46% of the negative
consequence of low commission policies.34 While these calculations suffer from the obvious caveats
33 We

exclude office l’s purchases in calculating these attributes to mitigate endogeneity concerns, although including them
leads to almost identical estimates.
34 We use the estimate in column 5 of Table 9 (-0.04) to calculate the reduction in the number of potential buyers visiting a
low commission property. The six dominant chains account for 54% of buyers, and the average market share for offices
affiliated with these chains is 17%, which is 2.8 times bigger than that for non top-chain offices. At an elasticity of 0.04,
this translates to a 6 p.p. reduction (54%*2.8*.04) in the number of potential buyers. Assuming the number of potential

21

associated with our simplifying assumptions, they suggest a potentially important channel through which
dominant offices could sustain the current commission structure.

6

Cost benefit analysis

So far, our analysis has focused on the magnitude of the negative impacts of low commissions. Is it in
a seller’s interest to use a low commission rate? In this section, we provide a simple cost and benefit
analysis for different commission policies. More details can be found in Appendix A.
Not selling a property is costly. While some sellers relist their property and successfully sell the
second time, missing the peak-season and having to sell in the off-peak season (winter time and during
the school year) could lead to a much longer time on the market. Instead of examining days on market
for a particular listing as in the analysis above, here we study the cumulative days on market for sold
properties (days between the first listing date and the sold date).35 We focus on the commission rate
when a property is listed for sale the first time because few properties change commission rates during
the course of a sale. In addition, since risk averse sellers care about the magnitude at the tail in addition to
the mean, we report the effect of commission rate on the entire distribution of cumulative days on market.
As expected, properties that are initially listed at a low commission are more likely to stay on the
market for an extended period of time. Figure 5 plots the percent of sold listings whose cumulative days
on market are 0 to 30 days, ..., 120 to 150 days, and 180 days or more. The darker bars represent properties
that are initially listed at a low commission rate, while the lighter bars are for properties initially at a high
commission rate. The impact of commission rates is most pronounced at the lower and upper tails of the
distribution. At the lower tail, 38% of high commission listings sell within 30 days compared to 32% of
low commission listings. At the upper tail, 14% of high commission listings take 180 days or longer to
sell compared to 17% of low commission listings. This difference reflects the fact that low commission
properties are less likely to sell the first time and re-listings stay on the market longer, due to the seasonal
effects discussed above.
Figure 5 does not control for property attributes. When we control for property characteristics and
listing agency attributes, properties that initially list at low commission rates take on average twenty days
longer to sell compared to those that initially list at high commission rates. The effect is larger at the
upper tail, with a difference of 30 days at the 95th percentile and 38 days at the 99th percentile (Table
C6). In addition, using the same set of controls as in column 6 of Table 4, low commission properties
that are sold are 4.8 p.p. less likely to have a quick sale (cumulative days on market less than 30 days),
and are 5 p.p. more likely to stay on the market for six months or longer.
What is the cost of a typical home staying on the market for six months? We ignore potential cash
constraints or psychological costs this imposes on sellers and apply the user cost of owning a property
buyers varies between five and twenty (the average is ten, according to NAR (2014b)), this acounts for a 2.1 p.p. to 2.3 p.p.
reduction in the sale probability.
35 Among all sold properties, 91% are sold in their first listing and 8% are sold in their second listings.

22

as a conservative estimate. At the 5.3% annual user cost reported in Himmelberg et al. (2005), the sixmonth carrying cost for a $479,000 property would amount to $12,700, about 20% of the median annual
household income of Massachusetts residents.
High commissions lead to a faster sale and a lower probability of a lengthy sale process. Among
sellers who initially list at a high commission rate, 99% stay at a high commission rate and 1% switch
to a low commission rate. Their expected commission fee is $23,902 ($479,000*(0.99*0.05+0.01*0.04))
for a typical home. Sellers who initially list at a low commission rate are more likely to switch to a high
commission rate with a split of 94% vs. 6%. Their expected commission fee is $19,447. The difference
in commissions is $4455.
The calculation above suggests that sellers choosing the high commission rate pay $4455 more
(roughly 1% of the sale price) in exchange for 20 fewer days on the market compared to sellers who
initially list at a low commission rate.36 This is in line with the inter-temporal substitution patterns of
home sellers in the literature. Sellers may prefer a faster sale because they rely on the sale proceeds from
their existing home for the down-payment of their next house. For example, Genesove and Mayer (1997)
report that sellers whose loan-to-value ratios are below 100% forgo a 4% gain in sale price in exchange
for selling 70 days earlier (equivalent to trading off 1% in sale price against 18 days). Similarly, Hendel
et al. (2009) find that FSBO sellers save $1625 (about 0.8% of the sale price) but their properties take 16
days longer to sell.
These patterns rationalize sellers’ reluctance to list at low commission rates, which reinforces the
uniform commission pattern. It is worth noting that our conclusions will be strengthened if sellers are
able to pass through some of the commission fees to buyers, further incentivizing them to choose the high
commission strategy.

7

Conclusion

This paper investigates the consequences of low commission rates in the residential brokerage industry.
Our findings provide empirical support for regulators’ long-standing concern of steering behavior contributing to the lack of variation in commission rates, despite consumers’ increased access to information
and lower search costs due to the internet (GAO, 2005; FTC, 1983, 2007).
Compared to other industrialized countries, commission fees in the United States are high. For example, commission rates average less than 2% in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, compared
to the typical rates of 5% and 6% in the United States (Delcoure and Miller, 2002). As highlighted by
our model, unbundling commissions has the potential to eliminate steering and reduce commission fees.
Given the sheer size of aggregate housing transaction values, even modest reductions in commission fees
could lead to a non-trivial reduction in transactions costs. Moreover, lower commission fees will likely
limit excessive entry into the residential brokerage industry, translating into additional efficiency gains
36 This

calculation does not take into consideration that high commission properties are eventually 5 p.p. more likely to sell.
This is another benefit of the high commission rate strategy.

23

(Hsieh and Moretti, 2003; Barwick and Pathak, 2015). Finally, reduced agency conflicts with unbundled
commissions could also give rise to better matches of buyers to properties.
Current development in the spirit of unbundling commissions includes firms such as Redfin which
provide rebates to buyers, as well as recent efforts to lift rebate bans and relax the minimum service requirements in several states (DOJ, 2015). Understanding the implications of these alternative commission
structures is an important direction for future work.

24

References
Anagol, S., S. A. Cole, and S. Sarkar (2013). Understanding the Advice of Commissions-Motivated Agents:
Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market. Harvard Business School Finance Working Paper No. 12-055.
Barwick, P. J. and P. Pathak (2015). The Cost of Free Entry: An Empirical Study of Real Estate Agents in Greater
Boston. The RAND Journal of Economics 46(1), 103–145.
Benson, P. A. and N. L. North (1922). Real Estate Principles and Practices. New York, Prentice-Hall.
Bernheim, D. and J. Meer (2012). Do Real Estate Agents Add Value When Listing Services are Unbundled?
Economic Inquiry 51(2), 1166–1182.
Bishop, P. C., H. Barlett, and J. Lautz (2007). National Association of Realtors, Member Profile. Available from
National Association of Realtors.
Boston Real Estate Exchange (BREE) (1940). Assessed Values of Real Estate in Boston. Boston, Boston Real
Estate Exchange.
Chan, S., A. Haughwout, and J. Tracy (2015). How Mortgage Finance Affects the Urban Landscape. In Handbook
of Regional and Urban Economics Volume 5, Chapter 15, pp. 987–1045.
Christoffersen, S. E., R. Evans, and D. K. Musto (2013). What Do Consumers’ Fund Flows Maximize? Evidence
from Their Brokers’ Incentives. The Journal of Finance 68(1), 201–235.
Cummins, D. J. and N. A. Doherty (2006). The Economics of Insurance Intermediaries. Journal of Risk and
Insurance 73(3), 359–96.
Davies, P. J. (1958). Real Estate in American History. Public Affairs Press.
Delcoure, N. and N. G. Miller (2002). International Residential Real Estate Brokerage Fees and Implications for
the U.S. Brokerage Industry. International Real Estate Review 5(1), 12–39.
Denver Post (Nov. 3, 2013). Trelora Founder Promises a Real Estate Industry Shake-Up.
Department of Justice (DOJ) (2015).
Rebates.
Accessed online on July 13 2015, available at:
http://www.justice.gov/atr/competition-and-real-estate.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) (1983). The Residential Real Estate Brokerage Industry. Accessed online on 27
May 2015, available at: http://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001831349.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) (2007). Competition in the Real Estate Brokerage Industry. A Report by the
Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice.
Genesove, D. and C. Mayer (2001). Loss Aversion and Seller Behaviour: Evidence from the Housing Market. The
Quaterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1223–1260.
Genesove, D. and C. J. Mayer (1997). Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate Market. The American Economic
Review 87(3), 255–269.
Goolsby, W. C. and B. J. Childs (1988). Broker Firm Competition in Real Estate Commission Rates. The Journal
of Real Estate Research 3(2), 79–85.
Government Accountability Office (GAO) (2005). Real Estate Brokerage: Factors that may Affect Price Competition. GAO-05-947.
Guercio, D. D. and J. Reuter (2015). Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Generate Alpha. The Journal
of Finance 69(4), 1673–1704.
Han, L. and S.-H. Hong (2011). Testing Cost Inefficiency under Free Entry in the Real Estate Brokerage Industry.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(4), 564–578.
Han, L. and W. C. Strange (2014). What is the Role of the Asking Price for a House? Working paper.
Han, L. and W. C. Strange (2015). The Microstructure of Housing Market: Search, Bargaining, and Brokerage.

25

In V. H. Gilles Duranton and W. C. Strange (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5.
Elsevier.
Hawker, N. W. (2006). Overview of AAI’s Real Estate Competition Project: Highlights from the Existing Literature
on Broker Competition. Real Estate Law Journal 35, 69–85.
Hendel, I., A. Nevo, and F. Ortalo-Magné (2009). The Relative Performance of Real Estate Marketing Platforms:
MLS versus FSBOMadison.com. American Economic Review 99(5).
Himmelberg, C., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai (2005). Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(4), 67–92.
Hsieh, C.-T. and E. Moretti (2003). Can Free Entry Be Inefficient? Fixed Commission and Social Waste in the
Real Estate Industry. Journal of Political Economy 111(5), 1076–1122.
Inderst, R. and M. Ottaviani (2012). Competition through Commissions and Kickbacks. American Economic
Review 102(2), 780–809.
Inman News (2014). Underestimate Keller Williams at Your Own Risk. Accessed online on 27 May 2015, available
at:http://www.inman.com/author/bradinmangmail-com/.
Jia, P. and P. Pathak (2010). The Impact of Commissions on Home Sales. American Economic Review, Papers &
Proceedings 100(2), 475–479.
Jiang, J., M. H. Stanford, and Y. Xie (2012). Does it Matter Who Pays for Bond Ratings? Historical Evidence.
Journal of Financial Economics 105(3), 607–621.
Joseph, K. and M. U. Kalwani (1998). The Role of Bonus Pay in Salesforce Compensation Plans. Industrial
Marketing Management 27, 147–159.
Larkin, I. (2014). The Cost of High-Powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise Software Sales. Journal
of Labor Economics 32(2), 199–227.
Levitt, S. and C. Syverson (2008). Market Distortions when Agents are Better Informed: The Value of Information
in Real Estate Transactions. Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 599–611.
Mullainathan, S., M. Nöth, and A. Schoar (2012). The Market for Financial Advice: An Audit Study. NBER
Working Paper No. 17929.
National Association of Realtors (NAR) (2014a). 2014 Existing Home Sales. Accessed online on 24 June 2015,
available at http://www.realtor.org/topics/existing-home-sales.
National Association of Realtors (NAR) (2014b). 2014 Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers. Accessed online,
available at: http://www.realtor.org/reports/highlights-from-the-2014-profile-of-home-buyers-and-sellers.
National Association of Realtors (NAR) (2014c). 2014 profile of home buyers and sellers Massachusetts report. Accessed online, available at: https://www.marealtor.com/docs/default-source/housing-stats/2014-nar-hbs-reportexecutive-summary—massachusetts.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
NIPA (2014). National Income and Product Accounts Table 5.4.5. Private Fixed Investment in Structures by Type.
Oyer, P. (1998). Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effects on Business Seasonality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 149–185.
Rutherford, R. C., T. M. Springer, and A. Yavas (2005). Conflicts between Principals and Agents: Evidence from
Residential Brokerage. Journal of Financial Economics 76, 627–665.
Schnare, A. B. and R. Kulick (2009). Do Real Estate Agents Compete on Price? Evidence from Seven Metropolitan
Areas. In E. L. Glaeser and J. M. Quigley (Eds.), Housing Markets and the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and
Policy. Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
Schneider, H. (2012). Agency Problems and Reputation in Expert Services: Evidence from Autom Repair. Journal
of Industrial Economics 60(3), 406–433.
Shapiro, B. (2015). Informational Shocks and the Effects of Physician Detailing. Chicago Booth Working Paper.

26

The Washington Post (May 20, 2015). Realty Agents May Split When They’re Offered a Sub-Par Commission.
Zietz, J. and B. Newsome (2001). A Note on Buyer’s Agent Commission and Sale Price. Journal of Real Estate
Research 21(3), 245–254.

27

Figures
Figure 1: Distribution of commission rates
80%

59%

Percent of listings

60%

40%
31%

20%

5%

3%

1%

0.3%

0%
Below 2

2

2.25

2.5

2.75

3

Commission rate
Notes: Distribution of commission rates offered to buyers’ agents. The figure reports data for 99.3 percent of listings.
The rest are scattered between 2 and 5 percent.

28

Average Commission Rate by Market

Figure 2: Percent of listings with low commission rates by market

TEWKSBURY

TOPSFIELD-MIDDLETON
NORTH READING DANVERS-WENHAM

BILLERICA

BEDFORD
CONCORD-CARLISLE

WILMINGTON
READING
LYNNFIELD

BURLINGTON

PEABODY
SALEMMARBLEHEAD

WAKEFIELD

SWAMPSCOTT
WOBURN
LYNN-NAHANT
STONEHAM SAUGUS
WINCHESTER MELROSE
LEXINGTON

STOW-ACTON

MALDEN
REVERE
EVERETT
BELMONT
CHELSEA
SOMERVILLE
WALTHAM
WINTHROP
CAMBRIDGE
WATERTOWN
WESTON
B.BAY

MAYNARD

MEDFORD
ARLINGTON

LINCOLN-WAYLAND

SUDBURY

NEWTON
FRAMINGHAM

BROOKLINE
DORCHESTER

NEEDHAM
SHERBORN-NATICK

DOVER-WELLESLEY

DEDHAM

MILTON

QUINCY

COHASSET-HULL

WESTWOOD

MILLIS-MEDFIELD

NORWOOD

HINGHAM

BRAINTREE
WEYMOUTH
CANTON RANDOLPH

WALPOLE
NORFOLK

AVON-HOLBROOK
SHARON

STOUGHTON

ABINGTON

BROCKTON

SCITUATE
NORWELL

HANOVER

HANSON-ROCKLAND

FOXBOROUGH
EASTON
MANSFIELD

Legend
4% - 18%
19% - 39%
40% - 64%
65% - 80%

Notes: Percent of listings in a market with commission rates below 2.5 percent.

29

Number
offices over
time
Figure 3:
Numberof
oflistings
listings and
and brokerage
offices
over time
4000

70,000

60,000

3500

3000

Number of offices

Number of listings

50,000

40,000

2500
30,000

2000
20,000
1500

10,000

0
1998

1000
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Year

Number of listings

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Number of offices

Notes: Number of listings per year (dashed line) and number of offices with listings or purchases per year (solid line). As the number of listings grow, the number of offices grow.
Notes:
NumberSee
ofFig1_Data
listings
per year (dashed line) and number of brokerage offices per year (solid line).
Source:
M250_SummStats.do.
for numbers.

30

Figure 4: Growth paths for high and low commission entrants
Figure 1: Fraction of Entrants in the Top Revenue Quartile by Year

Percent of entrants in the top revenue quartile by market-year

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Low Commission Rate

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

High Commission Rate

Notes: Entrants are firms that first appear in our sample post 1999. We classify entrants into the high commission rate
group and low commission rate group using their commission rates in the first three years. As in Table 1, this three-year
window reduces the measurement error. Entrant i is in the high commission rate group (or low commission rate group) if
its fraction of high commission listings in the first three years is in the top 25% (bottom 25%) among all entrants in the
same market. A firm’s top-revenue-quartile status is defined the same way as in Table 1, where revenue is the total listing
commission revenue in a market and year, and top quartile is defined by market-year.

31

Figure 5: Cumulative days on market for sold listings (initially high versus initially low commission rate)
High
38%

40%

Percent of listings sold within x days

Low
32%
30%

20% 20%

20%

17%
14%
12% 12%
10%

8%

8%
6%

5%

4%

4%

0%
0 to 30

30 to 60

60 to 90

90 to 120

120 to 150

150 to 180

180 or more

Days on market for sold listings
Low commission rate

High commission rate

Notes: Sample includes all repeat sales, to be consistent with the regression sample. The dark (light) grey bars correspond
to properties that initially list at low (high) commission rates. Each bar represents the percent of listings sold within a
30-day bin, except the last bar to the right that indicates the percent of listings sold in 180 days or more.

32

Tables
Table 1: Effect of past commission policy on office success
Dependent variable:

Whether top quartile in market-year
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Panel A: Entrants
Low commission offices
N
R-squared

-0.08***
(0.01)

-0.06***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.12***
(0.04)

6,294
0.53

6,294
0.57

6,294
0.58

6,294
0.69

-0.08***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.10***
(0.03)

13,255
0.62

13,255
0.66

13,255
0.66

13,255
0.72

Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: All offices
Low commission offices
N
R-squared
Market-year FE
Office controls
Portfolio controls
Office FE

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: This table reports the effect of past commission rate policy on the probability of becoming a top quartile revenue firm,
where revenue is total listing commission revenue, and top quartile is defined by market-year. Firm i’s fraction of listings with a
low commission rate at year t, frcRtL25, is the ratio of the total number of listings under 2.5% to total listings in year t-2 to year t.
We use a three-year window because the number of listings is small (and hence the commission rate measure is noisy) for some
firm-year combinations. Our key regressor, past commission rate, is a one-year lag of variable frcRtL25. Firms’ top-quartile
status is persistent, so we also control for its past top-quartile status (lagged one year) except for the last column with office fixed
effects. Results are more significant without past top-quartile status. We only keep firms whose average annual listing is at least
five (these are active firms that represent 95% of listings) and firms with more than one firm-year. Panel A restricts to entrants,
i.e., firms that first appear in our sample post 1999. There are 902 market-year fixed effects in all columns and 1202 office fixed
effects in the last column. Panel B uses all firms. There are 1131 market-year fixed effects and 1898 office fixed effects. Office
controls and portfolio controls are lagged by a year. See Table C1 for a full list of variables used in these regressions. Standard
errors are clustered at the office level.

33

Table 2: Observable differences between high and low commission listings

Dependent variable:
Square footage (’000s)
Lot size (acres)
1(Property is condominium)
1(Property is single family)
Age of the property (years)
Number of bedrooms
Number of bathrooms
Number of other types of rooms
Number of listings

Mean
(1)
1.84
0.33
0.35
0.52
61.73
3.07
1.86
3.67

SD Coefficient
(2)
(3)
1.14
0.01***
0.98
-0.10***
0.48
-0.08***
0.50
-0.01***
41.59
1.10***
1.52
0.21***
0.95
-0.07***
1.81
0.07***

p-value
(4)
[ 0.004]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
[ 0.000]
653,475

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions testing whether high versus low commission rate listings have similar
attributes. Each row reports results from a regression where the dependent variable is a property attribute and the regressor is
a dummy for the commission rate below 2.5%. Columns 1 to 2 report the mean and standard deviation, respectively. Column
3 reports the coefficient on the low commission rate dummy. Column 4 reports the p-value. The full sample includes 653,475
listings. We lose some listings for property age (7324 listings), number of bedrooms (310 listings), and number of bathrooms (9
listings) due to missing values.

34

Table 3: Effect of a low commission rate on whether a listing is sold or not
Dependent variable:
(1)

Probability of being sold
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Low commission listings

-0.09***
(0.003)

-0.07*** -0.09*** -0.06*** -0.05*** -0.05***
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)

-0.08**
(0.03)

N
R-squared

653475
0.08

653475
0.10

344832
0.46

344832
0.51

344832
0.51

344832
0.51

344832
0.51

OLS
Y
N
N
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

IV
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Estimation
Market-year FE, month FE
Property controls
Property FE
Seller patience
Office controls
Agent controls

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Columns 1 to 6 report OLS regressions at the listing level for the effect of low commission rate (a dummy that is 1 for
commission rate below 2.5%) on the probability of sale (a dummy that is 1 if the listing is sold). The full estimation sample
for columns 1 and 2 includes 653,475 listings. Column 1 has 1217 market by year fixed effects. Column 2 adds 148 property
controls. Column 3 onwards adds 133,902 property fixed effects and restricts the sample to properties with repeat listings only.
For seller patience (column 4), we first estimate a hedonic regression of ln(List price) on the full set of controls in column 6
(except the low commission rate dummy). We index sellers by the ratio of their observed list price to the predicted list price
and create dummies for each decile. These dummies constitute our seller patience controls. Columns 5 and 6 add controls for
office and agent quality. Column 7 includes the same set of controls as column 6, but uses an instrumental variable strategy.
The instruments are the distances between the listing office and the nearest Century 21 and Coldwell Banker office in that year.
Standard errors are clustered by market by year (columns 1-2) and by property (columns 3 to 7). See Table C2 for a full list of
controls.

35

Table 4: Effect of a low commission rate on days on the market for sold listings
Dependent variable:
(1)

(2)

Ln(Days on market)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Low commission listings

0.13*** 0.11***
(0.01)
(0.01)

0.14***
(0.02)

0.12***
(0.02)

0.12***
(0.02)

0.12***
(0.02)

0.33***
(0.12)

N
R-squared

419116
0.11

419116
0.14

136624
0.56

136624
0.56

136624
0.57

136624
0.57

136624
0.56

OLS
Y
N
N
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

IV
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Estimation
Market-year FE, month FE
Property controls
Property FE
Seller patience
Office controls
Agent controls

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: The specifications are similar to those in Table 3, but the dependent variable is log of days on market. The sample includes
sold properties (columns 1-2) and properties with repeat sales (columns 3 to 7). We lose 2,207 sales with 0 days on market and
6 with negative days on market after taking logs. All columns include 1217 market by year fixed effects and column 3 onwards
includes 62,841 property fixed effects.

36

Table 5: Effect of a low commission rate on sale price
Ln(Sale price)
(3)
(4)

Dependent variable:
(1)

(2)

Low commission listings

0.06***
(0.004)

0.01***
(0.002)

0.03***
(0.002)

N
R-squared

421329
0.45

421329
0.86

OLS
Y
N
N
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

Estimation
Market-year FE, month FE
Property controls
Property FE
Seller patience
Office controls
Agent controls

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0006
(0.001)

0.0003
(0.001)

0.0003
(0.001)

-0.01
(0.01)

137085
0.97

137085
0.99

137085
0.99

137085
0.99

137085
0.99

OLS
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

OLS
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

IV
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Similar to Table 3, but the dependent variable is log of sale price. The sample includes sold properties (columns 1-2)
and properties with repeat sales (columns 3 to 7). All columns include 1217 market by year fixed effects. Column 3 onwards
includes 62,842 property fixed effects.

37

Table 6: Robustness check, controlling for listing agent effort
Dependent variable:
Specification
Low commission listings

N
R-squared
Market-year FE, month FE
Property, office, seller controls
Property FE
Agent controls
Agent FE
Bin FE

Probability of being sold
(1)
(2)
(3)
New Properties Agent FE $500 bins

(4)
$1000 bins

(5)
$1500 bins

-0.05***
(0.02)

-0.03***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.04***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.005)

30036
0.67

304620
0.58

231550
0.57

302246
0.53

341608
0.51

Y
Y
Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
Y

Y
N
N
N
Y

Y
N
N
N
Y

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: OLS regressions at the listing level for the effect of low commission rates on the probability of sale, with different
specifications to control for listing agent effort. Columns 1 and 2 repeat the most saturated OLS specification in Table 3 (column
6). Column 1 restricts the sample to new properties (built within 5 years). Column 2 adds agent fixed effects and limits the
sample to listings by agents with eight or more listings. This drops 40,212 listings with the benefit of saving 15,000 agent fixed
effects. There are 9146 agent fixed effects. Column 3 groups listings that have the same listing agent, year, and property type,
and offer commission fees within a $500 bin. Commission fee is calculated as the commission rate multiplied by the list price.
Columns 4 and 5 are similar to column 3 but use $1000 and $1500 bins, respectively. We include fixed effects for 92191, 109435,
115550 bins in columns 3 to 5, respectively (agent fixed effects and agent-year controls are absorbed by these bin fixed effects).
Standard errors clustered by property (columns 1-2) and bins (column 3 onwards).

38

Table 7: Robustness check, controlling for seller preferences
Dependent variable:
Specification

(1)
List
price

Probability of being sold
(2)
(3)
(4)
Finer
Seller
No common
patience controls
name
names

Low commission listings

-0.06***
(0.004)

-0.05***
(0.003)

-0.07***
(0.02)

-0.07***
(0.02)

N
R-squared

344832
0.50

344832
0.51

31407
0.48

30120
0.49

Y
Y
Y
N
N

Y
Y
N
Y
N

Y
N
N
Y
Y

Y
N
N
Y
Y

Market-year FE, month FE
Property, agent, office controls
Property FE
Ln(List price)
Seller patience
Seller FE

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: OLS regressions at the listing level for the effect of low commission rate on the probability of sale, with different
specifications to control for seller preferences. Columns 1 and 2 are similar to the most saturated OLS specification in Table 3
(column 6). Column 1 controls for ln(List price) instead of seller patience deciles. Column 2 controls for seller patience using
one hundred percentile dummies. Column 3 includes 14213 seller fixed effects (defined using seller names). This specification
restricts the sample to sellers with multiple listings and seller names that could be identified using the county records. Column 4
is similar to column 3, but drops common names (names that occurr more than 5 times in our data).

39

Table 8: Effect of a low commission rate on properties more susceptible to steering
Probability of being sold

Dependent variable:
(1)
Low commission listings
RL25 × (Fraction of high comm. listings in block group-year)

(2)

-0.05*** -0.06***
(0.002)
(0.004)
-0.03*** -0.04***
(0.01)
(0.01)

RL25 × Entrant

(3)

(4)

-0.05***
(0.004)

-0.04***
(0.004)

-0.02***
(0.01)
-0.003
(0.005)

Entrant
Lagged 3-year cumulative fraction of low comm. listings

N
R-squared
Month FE, property, seller, agent, and office controls
Block group-year FE
Market-year FE
Property FE

-0.04***
(0.01)
612210
0.20
Y
Y
N
N

213372
0.27
Y
Y
N
N

344832
0.51
Y
N
Y
Y

313421
0.54
Y
N
Y
Y

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Similar to Table 3, but examines heterogeneous effects on the probability of sale. Column 1 includes an interaction
between the low commission rate dummy RL25 and the fraction of listings with high commission rates in the same census block
group and year. This latter variable is de-meaned, so that the main estimate of RL25 reflects the effect of low commission rates
on the sale probability for the average block group-year. This specification includes 29,687 census block group by year fixed
effects and drops property fixed effects (market by year fixed effects are absorbed by these block group and year fixed effects).
We drop block group-years with fewer than 5 listings. Column 2 repeats the analysis in column 1 and restricts the sample to
condominiums. Column 3 repeats column 6 of Table 3, but adds two regressors: a dummy for independent entrants (offices that
entered post 1999 and are not affiliated with the six dominant chains) and its interaction with RL25. Column 4 repeats column 6
of Table 3 but adds the three-year cumulative fraction of low commission rate listings for the listing office, up to time t − 1. We
lose 31,411 listings when we include this lagged variable.

40

Table 9: Propensity of dominant offices and agents to purchase low commission listings
Dependent variable:

Ln(Fraction of purchases with low commission rate)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Panel A: Dominant offices
ln(Shares), lagged 1 year -0.14***
(0.01)
N
R-squared

-0.14***
(0.01)

-0.14***
(0.01)

-0.10***
(0.01)

-0.04***
(0.01)

10352
0.66

10352
0.66

10352
0.69

10352
0.81

-0.13***
(0.005)

-0.13***
(0.005)

-0.13***
(0.005)

-0.02***
(0.01)

32844
0.43

32844
0.44

32844
0.44

32844
0.47

32844
0.72

Y
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

10352
0.65

Panel B: Dominant agents
ln(Shares), lagged 1 year -0.12***
(0.005)
N
R-squared
Market-year FE
Office or agent controls
Portfolio controls
Chain FE
Office or agent FE

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Panel A reports OLS regressions at the office-year level for the relationship between an office’s lagged market share
and the fraction of its purchase that are low commission rate listings. The dependent variable is ln(Fraction of purchases in an
office-year that have low commission rates). The main regressor is the log of the one-year lagged market share of an office,
defined using its listing commission revenues in a year. Each office is assigned to one primary market in each year. The sample
includes all offices with five or more average annual number of listings. There are 172 chain fixed effects. The last column
controls for 1852 office fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the office level. Panel B repeats the analysis for agent-year
regressions, including agents with two or more average annual number of listings. There are 9,260 agent fixed effects (column
5) and standard errors are clustered at the agent level. The full list of controls is reported in the Table C1.

41

A
A.1

Online appendix: Sample and variable construction
Housing transactions

We begin with 722,925 non-rental listings for condominiums, single-family, and multi-family properties. We first drop
52,226 duplicate listings, 221 listings with list or sale prices that are below $10,000, and 5,546 listings with problematic
listing office codes. We then keep listings whose status is cancelled, expired, sold, or withdrawn (this removes 4,721
listings) and drop 4,377 listings with missing market information. We lose 1512 listings with 0 commission rates, 540
listings with missing commission rates, and 307 listings with buying commission rates greater than 5 percent (which
implies a total commission rate greater than 10 percent). This leaves us with a final sample of 653,475 listings and
421,329 sold listings. We have geocoded street addresses and property identifiers for 646,460 listings. We are able to
identify 133,903 properties that have repeat listings (for a total of 344,832 listings) and 62,843 properties with repeat sales
(for a total of 137,085 sales).

A.2

Offices

Each office is identified by an office ID. Two big chains (Coldwell Banker and Dewolfe) merged in 2002. Some offices
changed office IDs as a result of this merger but kept the same office location. We recognize them as the same office
and assign them a unique office ID. In addition, offices that use the same office location (e.g., 1000 Mass Ave, Fl 2,
Cambridge, 02138) during the same time period are recognized as the same office and assigned a unique office ID.
We identify 172 chains, representing 486,189 listings (74%) and 316,571 purchases (75%). We first identify offices
that have multiple locations and offices that have at least 100 listings and purchases. Within this group, we group offices
that have similar names as chains. For example, all offices that have “Century 21” in the name are categorized under the
Century 21 chain.
Many agents and offices have only a few transactions in our sample. We determine which offices and agents are active
according to the average annual number of transactions, which is the total number of transactions divided by the number
of years an office or agent spans our data (calculated as the last year the office or agent is in our data minus the first year,
plus one). We use this average to identify active and top offices and agents. Most of our analysis focuses on offices with
five or more average annual number of listings, and agents with two or more average annual number of listings. They
account for 95% and 92% of listings, respectively.
Each office is assigned a primary market in each year. We define a primary market by ranking the total number of
listings and purchases by an office in a market in a year, followed by the total value of transactions. Ties are broken by
the alphabetical order of market names. The primary market for an agent is defined analogously.

A.3

Defining markets

We have a total of 87 markets. Outside of Boston, markets are defined by cities and towns. We combine small markets with a nearby continguous market that account for the most cross-market listings by brokerage offices in these
small markets. The combined markets include Cohasset-Hull, Avon-Holbrook, Lynn-Nahant, Sherborn-Natick, TopsfieldMiddleton, Lincoln-Wayland, Concord-Carlisle, Danvers-Wenham, Stow-Acton, Dover-Wellesley, Millis-Medfield, and
Handon-Rockland. We split the city of Boston into 15 sub-markets according to a GIS shapefile of Boston neighborhoods
defined by Zillow. These sub-markets include Dorchester, Allston-Brighton, Back Bay-Beacon Hill, Charlestown, East
Boston, Fenway-Kenmore, Jamaica Plain, Roslindale, Roxbury, West Roxbury, South Boston, South End, Central, Hyde
Park, and Mattapan. A few thousand listings with missing cities or GIS location are assigned to a market using a variable
called area in the MLS dataset. We end up with 87 markets from 84 cities outside Boston, less 12 small cities plus 15
neighborhoods in Boston.

A.4

Sale outcomes

A listing is sold if its reported status is sold or under agreement. There are 2,649 sold listings with missing sales prices.
We replace these missing values with their listing price. Listing and sales prices are winsorized at the top 1 percent. We
winsorize days on market at 365 days for 6,428 listings that take a year or longer to sell.

42

A.5

Distance instruments

We have two distance instruments: distance to the nearest Coldwell Banker office in each year and distance to the nearest
Century 21 office in each year. We geocode office locations to obtain latitudes and longitudes. We calculate the distance
between an office centroid and the nearest Coldwell or Century 21 office. An office’s centroid is the geographic center
of its listings and purchases. Eighteen Coldwell offices and ten Century 21 offices have missing latitudes and longitudes.
We winsorize distances at the top percentile and replace missing distances with the median distance. The IV coefficients
are similar if missing distances are not replaced with the median.

A.6

Seller fixed effects

We obtain seller names for sold listings from county deed records up to 2008. We merge MLS and deeds data using
property address, sale date (within 28 days), and sale price (within $10,000). We are able to fill in seller names for
listings that are not merged by tracing the chain of ownership. We assume that when a property is sold, the buyer in
that transaction becomes the seller of subsequent MLS listings of the same property, until the next change in ownership.
Likewise, the seller of a property remains the same through different listings until the property is sold.

A.7

Cost benefit analysis

We define cumulative days on market by combining unsold listings for the same property into the same marketing history.
For example, if we see a listing for a property on January 1st 2001 that was withdrawn on June 30th 2001, but re-listed
on November 1st 2001 and sold on February 1st 2002, we combine these two listings and calculate the cumulative days
on market as the difference between the initial listing date and the final date when the property is off the market (the
cumulative days on market is 365 + 31 = 396 days in this example). To belong to the same marketing history, listing
dates have to be less than a year apart. Using the same example, if the property was also listed on January 1st 1998 and
was withdrawn on June 30th 1998, we do not combine this 1998 listing with the 2001 listing. In short, each sale has a
marketing history that connects all unsold listings for the same property that are listed within a year. We repeat our cost
and benefit analysis combining all unsold listings (grouping the 1998 listing with the 2001 listing in the example above)
and reach the same conclusions, partly because these instances are rare.

43

B

Appendix: Figures
Figure B1: An illustration of how commissions are split

Source: Realtors.com

44

C

Appendix: Tables
Table C1: Control variables for Tables 1 & 9
Variables
Panel A: Controls for Table 1
- Top quartile status in market m at time t, lagged by one year
- Office controls (lagged a year): Fraction of listings that are sold at time t, average days on market for sold listings,
fraction of agents who are top ten percent highest performing agents, log of the number of active agents, age of the
firm
- Portfolio controls (lagged a year): Fraction of listings in a year that are condos, fraction that are single family;
square footage, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, age of the property, list price, averaged among an
office's listings at time t
Panel B: Office controls for Table 9
- Office controls (lagged a year): Fraction of listings that are sold at time t, average days on market for sold listings,
fraction of agents who are top ten percent highest performing agents, entrant dummy (1 if office appears after 1998),
age of the firm interacted with entrant dummy, 1 if office location is in our list of cities, 0 if office location is out of
town
- Portfolio controls (lagged a year): Fraction of listings in a year that are condos, fraction that are single family;
square footage, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, age of the property, averaged among an office's listings
at time t
Panel C: Agent controls for Table 9
- Lagged fraction of listings sold by an agent in a year
- 1 if agent first appears after 1998
- Entrant interacted with years in MLS
- Portfolio controls (lagged a year): Fraction of listings in a year that are condos, fraction that are single family,
fraction of listings that are in Boston; square footage, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, age of property,
number of other types of rooms, averaged among an agent's listings at time t

45

Table C2: Control variables for Tables 3 to 8
Variable
Panel A: Property controls
- Square footage in thousands of square feet (0 to 40+)
- 10 dummies for number of bedrooms, including a dummy for missing values
- 14 dummies for number of bathrooms in half bath increments
- 9 dummies for number of other types of rooms
- 9 dummies for groups of years (6-10 years, 11-25 years, and so on up to 151+ years, plus a dummy for missing age
values. The omitted group is 0 to 5 years
- 1 if property type is multifamily, 0 otherwise. The omitted group is condominiums
- 1 if property type is singlefamily, 0 otherwise. The omitted group is condominiums
- Lot size in acres
- Master bathrooms: 1 if yes, 0 if no
- Finished basement is included in sqft estimation
- Beach front
- Water front
- Availability of adult community
- Basement: 1 if yes, 0 if no
- 4 dummies: 0, 1, 2 or 3 fireplaces, 99 (missing)
- Entry only: Listing agent's only service is to enter property info into MLS
- Lender owned
- Seller disclosure
- Short sale w/ lender approval required
- Sub-agency relationship offered
- 9 dummies for types of listing agreement, including Exclusive Right to Sell with Named Exclusion, Exclusive Agency,
Exclusive Right To Sell With Variable Rate of Commission, Exclusive Right To Sell With Dual Rate of Commission,
Facilitation/Exclusive Right To Sell, Facilitation/Exclusive, Facilitation/Exclusive Right To Sell With Variable Rate of
Commission, Missing information
- 14 dummies for different types of showing methods
- Dummies for the following phrases: Needs Updating, Estate Sale, Foreclosure, Handyman, As-Is, Needs Tlc,
Rehabber’S, Bank-Owned, Priced For A Quick Sale, Motivated, Potential, Youthful, Close, !, New, Spacious,
Elegance, Beautiful, Appealing, Renovated, Remodeled, Vintage, State-Of-The-Art, Maintained, Wonderful,
Brandnew, Fantastic, Charming, Stunning, Amazing, Granite, Immaculate, Breathtaking, Neighborhood, Spectacular,
Landscaped, Art Glass, Builtin, Tasteful, Must See, Fabulous, Leaded, Delightful, Move-In, Gourmet, Copper, Corian,
Custom, Unique, Maple, Newer, Hurry, Pride, Clean, Quiet, Dream, Block, Huge, Deck, Mint, Stately, Priced To Sell
Panel B: Listing office controls
- One year lagged fraction of listings sold in a year by an office
- ln(number of active agents in the Office+1), lagged by one year
- Lagged fraction of agents who are in the top 10 percentile of average annual listings and purchases
- Top 4 office in a market, by average annual number of listings
- 1(office has - 2 entry-only listings or share of exclusive right to sell listings is less than 1%, by office/market)
Panel C:Listing agent controls
- Whether among top decile of all agents, by average number of listings
- Agent's average annual number of listings is at least the median amongst listing agents (the median is 2)
- ln(Cumulative number of listings/purchases by a listing agent, up to the last year)
- Agent's experience in years

46

Table C3: Robustness checks across different samples for all sales outcomes
Boston
(1)

not Boston
(2)

Condos
(3)

Houses
(4)

Multifamily Big Offices Small Offices
(5)
(6)
(7)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.004)

-0.06***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.005)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.05***
(0.01)

-0.04***
(0.01)

58474
0.52

286358
0.51

105306
0.53

191059
0.51

48467
0.53

172317
0.66

172515
0.66

0.14***
(0.05)

0.11***
(0.02)

0.09***
(0.03)

0.13***
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.05)

0.14***
(0.04)

0.11***
(0.04)

18443
0.57

118181
0.57

38979
0.59

82196
0.58

15449
0.59

77366
0.71

59258
0.76

Low commission listings

0.0005
(0.003)

0.0003
(0.001)

0.0009
(0.002)

-0.0009
(0.001)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.00004
(0.002)

0.0009
(0.003)

N
R-squared
Controls in
Table 3 Column (6)

18548
0.99

118537
0.99

39197
1.00

82356
0.99

15532
0.98

77590
1.00

59495
0.99

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Panel A: Probability of sale
Low commission listings

N
R-squared
Panel B: Days on market
Low commission listings

N
R-squared
Panel C: Sale price

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: The effect of low commission rates on all three outcomes, by sub-samples. The sub-samples are: Boston only (column 1), outside Boston
(column 2), condominiums (column 3), single-family (column 4), multi-family (column 5), big and small offices (columns 6 and 7, respectively).
Big (small) offices have average annual number of listings above (below) 80. This cutoff is chosen to split the sample evenly. Panel A repeats
column 6 in Table 3 for the effect on the sale probability. Panels B and C repeat column 6 in Tables 4 and 5, for the effect on days on market
and the effect on sale price, respectively.

47

Table C4: Probability of being sold within 30, 60, 90, 180 days
Dependent variable:

30 Days
(1)

Sold within:
60 Days 90 Days
(2)
(3)

180 Days
(4)

Low commission listings

-0.03***
(0.003)

-0.05***
(0.003)

-0.06***
(0.003)

-0.06***
(0.003)

N
R-squared
Dependent variable mean

344822
0.51
0.21

344822
0.52
0.33

344822
0.53
0.40

344822
0.52
0.50

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: The controls are the same as in column 6 of Table 3. The dependent variable
for each column is whether the listing is sold within 30 days, 60 days, 90 days, and
180 days, respectively. The bottom row reports the sample mean for the dependent
variable.

Table C5: Seller fixed effect regressions, 1998-2008
Dependent variable:
Specification:
Low commission listings

N
R-squared

Probability of being sold
(1)
(2)
Seller name No common names
-0.07***
(0.02)

-0.07***
(0.02)

30581
0.48

29316
0.49

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Repeat seller fixed effect regressions in columns 3 and 4 in Table
7, but drop MLS listings from 2009 to 2011 (because the deeds data we
use to track seller names end in 2008).

48

Table C6: Quantile regression for cumulative days on market
Dependent variable:
(1)

Cumulative days on market
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

Initially low commission 20.22***
(1.58)

2.71*** 6.68*** 13.21*** 23.92*** 29.78***
(0.19)
(0.36)
(0.72)
(1.33)
(1.96)

Statistic
N

25th
417887

Mean
137081

50th
417887

75th
417887

90th
417887

95th
417887

(7)
38.42***
(5.00)
99th
417887

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: This table reports results on cumulative days on market used in the cost benefit analysis. Column 1 replicates column 6
in Table 4, except the dependent variable is the cumulative days on market in levels and the key regressor is whether the initial
listing (for each marketing history) is strictly below 2.5 percent. We drop three listings with days on market below -90 and
six listings with days on market above 1500 days. Standard errors are clustered at the property level. Columns 2 to 7 reports
quantile regressions for the 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles, respectively. These regressions use all sold
listings (not just repeat sales), except for the nine outliers and 3,433 sales with missing property identifiers (which is needed
for cumulative days on market). The controls are similar to those in column 6 of Table 4, except we use market fixed effects
and year fixed effects instead of market by year fixed effects and drop property fixed effects. We could not get the quantile
regressions to converge with a large number of fixed effects.

49

