                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CORRELATED BELIEFS, RETURNS, AND STOCK MARKET VOLATILITY

                                            Joel M. David
                                           Ina Simonovska

                                        Working Paper 21480
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21480


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2015




We thank Kamil Yilmaz for an insightful discussion, seminar participants at UC Davis and NBER
ISoM for their comments and suggestions, and Venky Venkateswaran for useful conversations. We
thank Luca Macedoni for his research assistance. Ina Simonovska acknowledges financial support
from the Hellman Fellowship Program and the Institute of Social Sciences at UC Davis. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joel M. David and Ina Simonovska. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Correlated Beliefs, Returns, and Stock Market Volatility
Joel M. David and Ina Simonovska
NBER Working Paper No. 21480
August 2015
JEL No. D8,G12,G15,G17

                                              ABSTRACT

Firm-level stock returns exhibit comovement above that in fundamentals, and the gap tends to be higher
in developing countries. We investigate whether correlated beliefs among sophisticated, but imperfectly
informed, traders can account for the patterns of return correlations across countries. We take a unique
approach by turning to direct data on market participants’ information - namely, real-time firm-level
earnings forecasts made by equity market analysts. The correlations of firm-level forecasts exceed
those of fundamentals and are strongly related to return correlations across countries. A calibrated
information-based model demonstrates that the correlation of beliefs implied by analyst forecasts leads
to return correlations broadly in line with the data, both in levels and across countries - the correlation
between predicted and actual is 0.63. Our findings have implications for market-wide volatility - the
model-implied correlations alone can explain 44% of the cross-section of aggregate volatility. The
results are robust to controlling for a number of alternative factors put forth by the existing literature.


Joel M. David
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
3620 South Vermont Ave. Kaprielian Hall, 300
Los Angeles, CA 90089
joeldavi@usc.edu

Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu
1    Introduction
Stock returns exhibit ‘excess comovement’ - that is, comovement, or correlation, above and
beyond what can be explained by fundamentals. Moreover, the extent of excess comovement
differs across countries, and in a systematic way: emerging markets tend to exhibit higher
degrees of comovement than do developed ones. Understanding the determinants of these
patterns is important because the correlation of returns is a key driver of aggregate stock market
volatility, which has implications for investment incentives on the part of firms, portfolio choice
decisions on the part of investors, and ultimately, the efficiency of the allocation of capital.
    In this paper, we take a new look at the drivers of differences in firm-level stock return
correlations across countries. Specifically, we investigate the role of correlated beliefs on the part
of sophisticated, but imperfectly informed, investors. Quantifying this channel is challenging,
since we as the econometricians do not typically observe agents’ information sets. We take a
novel approach to overcoming this hurdle by turning to direct data on market participants’
forecasts of firm fundamentals. We obtain these forecasts from the I/B/E/S Database, which
tracks firm-level forecasts made by security analysts across a number of developed and emerging
markets. We use these data to document a new fact that sheds light on the role of correlated
beliefs: the correlations of analyst forecasts are strongly related to firm-level return correlations
across countries, and both exceed the level justified by fundamentals.
    To reconcile these findings and to investigate their implications for return correlations and
market-wide volatility, we develop a highly parsimonious dynamic model of equity markets un-
der imperfect information. Market participants trade based on their priors and a noisy signal of
the current innovation in fundamentals. There is correlation across firms both in fundamentals
and in the noise in signals, both of which lead to correlated beliefs. The model makes sharp
predictions regarding the correlation in returns and conditions for excess correlation above that
in fundamentals - in fact, the simplicity of our setting leads to a sharp characterization of the
return correlation as a weighted average of the correlation in fundamentals and signal errors.
    We perform a straightforward numerical exercise to assess whether the correlation in beliefs
that we measure leads to patterns in return correlations in line with those observed in the
data. We calibrate the model using the cross-firm correlations of forecasts from I/B/E/S (and
their volatilities) along with readily observable properties of fundamentals. We have several
key findings: first, the calibrated model generates return correlations broadly in line with those
in the data - the correlation between predicted and actual across countries is 0.63. Moreover,
the levels are on par, averaging 0.47 and 0.46, respectively. In other words, the correlation of
information suggested by our data leads to cross-sectional patterns as well as levels of excess
correlations similar to those in the data. This is a rather striking finding given the simplicity


                                                  2
of our setting and empirical approach.
    We perform a series of counterfactual experiments to disentangle the various potential drivers
of return correlations in the model and we find that the non-fundamental component of belief
correlation is key. In particular, setting the correlation of signal errors to the US level for
all countries almost eliminates disparities in return correlations, while setting overall signal
noise and fundamental parameters to their US values yields similar return correlations as the
baseline calibration. This highlights an important and intuitive result from our model: it is not
the overall level of firm-specific information that drives comovement across firms, but rather
the correlated component of that information. Our distinction between the commonality of
information as opposed to its overall quality helps to reconcile an apparent tension in the recent
literature - namely, some studies have found that comovement is higher where stock prices are
more informative, some have found the opposite, and others have found the relationship to
be non-monotonic.1 We find a rather weak relationship, in large part because the extent of
correlation in information is not strongly related to its overall precision.
    We take our analysis one step further and examine the implications of our results for cross-
sectional differences in aggregate stock market volatility. Previous work has shown that cross-
firm return correlations alone explain a substantial portion of variation in market-wide volatility,
and it seems natural to ask if our results have anything to add on this score.2 We find that
the answer is yes: a simple regression shows that our predicted return correlations alone can
explain about 44% of the cross-country variation in aggregate volatility in an R2 sense; for
comparison, in our data, the empirical return correlations explain about 64% of the variation
in volatility. Our finding here is not surprising once we notice that there is a strong direct
relationship between analyst forecast correlations and market volatility. We interpret this result
as suggesting that future work investigating the determinants of stock market volatility should
take seriously the role of correlated beliefs across presumably sophisticated traders.
    We perform a number of additional exercises geared towards understanding the implications
of some important variations on our baseline analysis. First, we demonstrate that excess return
correlation is a robust phenomenon across various frequencies - specifically, while our benchmark
analysis focuses on annual data, the excess correlation of returns compared to fundamentals
features in higher-frequency (quarterly) data as well. Relatedly, we show that excess correlation
of forecasts remains present over the forecasting horizon. In particular, while our baseline
analysis focuses on forecasts made the month following the release of the prior year’s earnings,
the cross-firm correlations of forecasts, although generally declining, remain high even up to
   1
     See, for some examples, Durnev et al. (2003), Hou et al. (2013), Dasgupta et al. (2010), and Lee and Liu
(2011). Dang et al. (2014) contains a useful overview of the state of the literature.
   2
     We review the related literature at the end of this section.



                                                     3
one month prior to the end of the period for which the forecast is made. We show that this is
the case even though informational quality, measured by the precision of investor information,
is generally increasing as the forecast horizon shortens. We also present evidence that analyst
information is a plausible, albeit imperfect, proxy for the information of informed traders more
generally. In particular, we document that many types of investors purchase information from
analysts, that investors react to that information, and lastly, that based on the sources on which
analysts rely to form expectations, we might expect a significant degree of overlap between their
information sets and those of a broader set of informed investors, whether or not they turn to
analysts directly for that information.
    Additionally, we address in detail the potential role of aggregate shocks to discount rates
in driving excess comovement. First, we show that, in our framework, imperfect information
leads to movements in asset prices unrelated to fundamentals - in other words, shocks to beliefs
resemble what the literature would typically ascribe to discount rate fluctuations, and so can
be interpreted as one mechanism behind them. This is true both at the firm and aggregate
level, where the latter depends crucially on the existence of a common component to beliefs.
Further, we show that, across countries, the relationship between return correlations and the
volatility of macroeconomic factors that typically drive discount factors in structural models is
rather weak, suggesting that observable macroeconomic shocks are not a major factor at play.
As a last exercise, we control for the effects of a number of additional risk factors that have
been shown to be important in asset pricing (as well as for fluctuations in the pure rate of time
preference) by regressing firm-level returns on these factors and examining the correlation of
the residuals. Although these factors appear to play some role, excess comovement remains,
further suggesting that an information-based mechanism deserves scrutiny.
    Finally, we examine the robustness of our results to controlling for a number of additional
alternative explanations. Specifically, we perform two sets of regression analyses: first, we
regress the empirical levels of return correlation directly on analyst forecast correlations (and
fundamental corelations) across countries. We find a strong direct relationship. We then control
for a variety of plausible alternatives suggested in the literature, including institutional quality
and firm-level transparency, capital account openness, and the depth of financial markets. The
significance of forecast correlations remains high even after the inclusion of these other factors,
confirming the importance of our mechanism. An analogous exercise with aggregate stock
market volatility as the regressand gives similar results. Note that this is not to say that other
factors play no role; only that the importance of the correlation in beliefs that we measure
does not vanish with their inclusion. Lastly, we show that forecast correlations themselves are
significantly related to some of these measures, with the interpretation that in some sense, many
of these explanations are complementary to ours.


                                                 4
    The paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the related literature next, Section 2
describes our data sources and documents the motivating facts. Section 3 lays out our model of
equity markets with imperfect and correlated information, while Section 4 details our numerical
exercise and results. In Section 5, we demonstrate the robustness of our findings to a number
of variants on our baseline approach and to controlling for plausible alternatives. We conclude
in Section 6. For ease of exposition, tables of country-level data are provided in the Appendix.
All supplementary empirical results discussed but not reported are available on request from
the authors.

Related literature. Our paper relates most closely to the existing literature that examines
firm-level stock return comovement. Particularly relevant is the body of work that specifically
investigates correlated information as a potential cause of return comovement. Veldkamp (2006)
demonstrates that a noisy rational expectations model featuring endogenous information mar-
kets can lead to excess comovement - in equilibrium, investors purchase common information
about a subset of assets that they use to price others. Although our model differs on a number
of dimensions from hers, we are able to draw some parallels in terms of predictions for excess
comovement. Our work builds on hers by directly measuring the correlation in beliefs on the
part of informed investors and investigating further the quantitative significance of this channel
for return comovement, as well as the implications for the cross-section of countries. Addition-
ally, we can look to her theory as one potential micro-foundation for the belief correlation that
we measure in the data.3
    Numerous papers have documented the excess comovement ‘puzzle’. Key examples include
Pindyck and Rotemberg (1993), who show that return comovement among US firms is too high
to be justified by fundamentals, and Morck et al. (2000), who show that excess comovement
tends to be higher in poor and emerging markets. Cross-country variation in comovement has
been linked to a variety of plausible explanations, including differences in the quality of insti-
tutions and the strength of property rights, e.g., Morck et al. (2000), capital account openness,
e.g., Li et al. (2004), a lack of firm-level transparency, or ‘opaqueness’, e.g., Jin and Myers
(2006), and limits to arbitrage, e.g., Bris et al. (2007) and Barberis et al. (2005).4 In contrast
to these papers, we focus squarely on an informational theory of comovement - we identify a
direct measure of beliefs on the part of market participants and use a simple theoretical frame-
work to quantify the implications of this observable moment for return comovement. Further,
   3
     Mondria (2010) proposes an alternative theory in which investors are subject to information processing
constraints and optimally choose to observe combinations of asset payoffs as signals, thus leading to excess
comovement. Although the channels in these papers are different, they have similar implications regarding
comovement. Our model is quite parsimonious and potentially reflects both of these mechanisms.
   4
     For an excellent recent survey of the voluminous literature examining the causes and consequences of return
comovement, we refer the reader to Morck et al. (2013).


                                                       5
we demonstrate that our theory of information-driven comovement is robust to controlling for
a number of these alternative explanations, and in fact, is potentially complementary with
them. This last point is not surprising, given that a common element in much of this work is
uncovering factors that reduce the incentives to gather and trade on firm-specific information.
    Empirically, a number of papers have investigated the role of equity analysts in producing
firm-level or aggregate information and influencing trading behavior. Most find that there is a
sizable aggregate component in analyst information, consistent with our empirical results. For
example, Chan and Hameed (2006) find that firms with greater analyst coverage exhibit more
price comovement, as do Piotroski and Roulstone (2004). Israelsen (2015) also highlights the
importance of correlated information by showing that US stocks with more common analyst
coverage exhibit greater comovement. Relatedly, Hameed et al. (2010) find that analysts tend
to cover firms whose fundamentals correlate more with other firms in their industry and that
information spills over from these firms to the prices of others.5 Our analysis is similar in
spirit to these and builds on some of their findings. Our innovation is to use our simple theory
along with direct data on analyst forecast correlations to quantify the predictions for return
comovement across a broad set of countries.
    Lastly, by linking our results on comovement to aggregate market volatility, we relate to a
broader body of work examining the determinants of differences in volatility across countries.
Similar to the connection we make, Harvey (1995) shows that variation in firm-level return cor-
relations accounts for over 50% of the cross-section of market volatilities across a sample of 20
developed and emerging markets. Bekaert and Harvey (1997) find that a series of explanatory
variables related to stock market concentration, market development/integration, microstruc-
ture effects, and macroeconomic volatility and political risk explain 34% of the cross-sectional
variation in market volatility (60% using the panel dimension). In a recent contribution, Has-
san and Mertens (2011) demonstrate that small, correlated errors in expectations on the part
of investors can lead to high levels of stock market volatility with important consequences for
social welfare. We argue similarly, and focus on a measurable piece of this correlation - namely,
that stemming from the forecasts of sophisticated information producers (security analysts).
Our broader contribution to this literature is to emphasize that, in addition to other factors,
informational-driven excess comovement seems to plays an important role in determining the
cross-section of market volatility across countries, a finding that should be useful for future
researchers in this area.
   5
    It is worth noting that other studies obtain somewhat different findings: for example, Crawford et al. (2012)
show that firm-level return comovement increases with the first analyst to initiate coverage, but declines upon
further coverage. Liu (2011) finds that analyst research contains primarily firm-specific information.




                                                       6
2       Facts
In this section, we describe the various datasets we use for our analysis and establish the stylized
facts regarding the cross-section of firm-level correlations - in returns, fundamentals, and beliefs.


2.1     Data
Compustat Global. We obtain annual data on firm-level stock returns and earnings per
share from Compustat Global. We restrict attention to countries that are classified as either
developed or emerging from the MSCI database. Countries included in MSCI tend to have
reasonably well-established capital markets that are accessible to international investors so
that this seems a reasonable approach to bound our initial set. We focus on the 15 year
period spanning 1999-2013 since comprehensive firm-level data across all of our countries are
not available earlier.6 In order to compute meaningful aggregates, we exclude countries where
data are available for less than 5 firms in a year or with less than 100 total observations over the
15 year period. We further exclude countries from the former Soviet bloc and a small number of
large outliers, where market volatility is more than 2 standard deviations above the mean.7 Our
final sample is quite broad and consists of a total of 31 countries:8 Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Switzerland, Chile, China, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, Great Britain,
Hong Kong, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, New
Zealand, Peru, Phillipines, Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, United States, and South Africa.
    We construct returns as the annual percentage change in the stock price (i.e., ex-dividend),
adjusted for splits. This is the notion of returns we will use throughout our analysis.9 Earnings
growth rates are computed analogously. We convert both series into US dollars using exchange
rates provided by Compustat and deflate them by the US CPI. We trim the 1% tail of each
series to eliminate outliers. We then compute the average pair-wise cross-firm correlation in
each series.10 We restrict our attention to firm pairs with at least 8 years of overlap - this strikes
a reasonable balance between maximizing the number of firms that we are able to include and
    6
      Since we are examining earnings growth rates, we are using data from 1998 on. For the countries that have
data going back further, our results are robust to using data from the unbalanced panel that spans 1993-2013.
We do not examine earlier periods as many of our countries did not have well-developed stock markets. For
example, 5 of the countries were added to the MSCI database in 1993.
    7
      We additionally exclude Taiwan, which imposed unusually strict limits on intraday price movements until
2015 (see, for example, Cho et al. (2003) and http://focustaiwan.tw/news/aeco/201504010008.aspx).
    8
      For example, of our 30 non-US countries, 11 are classified as emerging and 19 as developed by MSCI,
although there is some debate in the financial world about how to classify several of the countries.
    9
      The properties of returns are almost identical cum or ex-dividend. The theoretical analog of returns in the
model will be ex-dividend as well.
  10
      An alternative measure of comovement is the R2 from a market-model style regression, i.e., the regression
of firm returns on market returns. Our measure is clearly related to that one. Quantitatively, the two line up
closely, with a correlation across countries of 0.98.


                                                       7
ensuring that we have a long enough time-series to obtain robust results.11 Table 12 in the
Appendix reports the series for each country, along with the number of observations.

I/B/E/S. We obtain data on earnings forecasts made by security analysts from the I/B/E/S
(Institutional Brokers Estimate System) database. From I/B/E/S, we gather consensus fore-
casts of 1-year ahead annual earnings. For each firm-year cell, we obtain the mean forecast
across analysts and the actual realization of earnings.12 We determine the reporting month of
the previous year’s earnings, and examine forecasts made in the following month. This ensures
that the previous periods’ performance is in the analysts’ information sets, which will be con-
sistent with our model. For foreign firms, we convert all nominal figures denominated in local
currency into US dollars using year-end monthly exchange rates provided by I/B/E/S, and then
deflate them by the US CPI. In cases where there are multiple consensus forecasts for a forecast
month for a single year (e.g., two consensus forecasts both made in February for December
earnings), we keep the observation with a larger number of individual analyst forecasts. We
examine data beginning in 1993, since as already noted, many of our countries did not have
well-developed markets in earlier periods.13 To eliminate the effects of outliers, we trim the 1%
tails of actual earnings growth and forecast errors, where the latter are computed as (the log
of) realized earnings less (the log of) the forecast. Finally, we construct the average cross-firm
correlation in forecasts in exactly the same manner as for returns and earnings growth from the
Compustat data.
    Table 13 in the Appendix reports each of the series and summarizes the extent of analyst
coverage for each country - the number of forecasts and the mean number of analysts per firm.
The number of forecasts ranges from a minimum of 331 in Peru to over 70,000 in the US, with
an average across countries of about 7,200. The average number of analysts ranges from 4
to 13. There is a moderate relationship between analyst coverage and the level of economic
development: for example, the correlations of the number of forecasts and mean number of
analysts with income (1999 log income per-capita) are about 0.20 and 0.32, respectively. Thus,
the degree of analyst coverage is unlikely to be the primary cause of systematic differences in
correlations across countries.
  11
     Our findings are robust to different cutoffs on the degree of overlap, for example, 10 years.
  12
     I/B/E/S also makes available the forecasts on an analyst-by-analyst basis. For the purposes of our analysis,
where there is a single forecast per firm, the summary of these forecasts is sufficient, although it would certainly
be interesting to explore the role of heterogeneity across analysts in future work.
  13
     To maximize the number of observations within each country and the number of countries with sufficient
forecast data to include in our analysis, we compute correlations using firm-level observations from a somewhat
longer time period than from Compustat (1993 vs. 1998). Our results are not sensitive to this choice.




                                                         8
2.2                                 Stylized Facts
We combine our two datasets to establish the main fact motivating our analysis - return cor-
relation is strongly related to correlation in analysts’ forecasts of fundamentals (which we al-
ternatively refer to as beliefs), and both exceed the correlation in fundamentals by a wide
margin.
    To fix ideas, consider a simple framework where log fundamentals for firm i, ait , follow an
AR(1) process. Fundamental innovations µit are iid through time and independent of ait , and
are correlated across firms with correlation coefficient π f , i.e.:

                                                                                        µit ∼ N 0, σµ2 ,                                corr (µit , µjt ) = π f
                                                                                                      
                                                          ait = ρait−1 + µit ,                                                                                                            (1)

If investor beliefs reflect fundamentals, either past or future, i.e., Et [ait ] = ρait−1 or Et [ait ] = ait
(investors have no information or full information regarding the realization of µit ), we have:14

                                                   corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) = corr (∆ait , ∆ajt ) = corr (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]) = π f                                                         (2)

where ∆pit denotes stock returns. In other words, the cross-firm correlations of returns, funda-
mental growth, and beliefs regarding fundamentals are the same.
                         0.8                                                                                                  0.8
                                    CHN                                                                                                                                 CHN
                         0.7                ITA
                                            PER                                                                               0.7                                    ITA
                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                           CHL                                                                                                                      CHL
                                    ISR       NOR                                                                                                              NOR            ISR
                         0.6                                                                                                  0.6
Correlation of Returns




                                                                                                     Correlation of Returns




                                          FIN ESP                                                                                                                  FIN   ESP
                                        NLDSWE                                                                                                     NLD                SWE
                         0.5                PHL
                                             INDBEL                                                                           0.5                            BEL  PHL      IND
                                            AUT                                                                                                                  AUT
                                     KOR DNKZAF                                                                                                          ZAF    KOR
                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                   THA FRA
                                        MEX
                                         CHE                                                                                                                MEXCHE FRADEU
                                                                                                                                                             THA
                         0.4           DEU                                                                                    0.4
                                           NZL                                                                                                     NZL
                                       JPN
                                        AUS                                                                                                            JPN
                                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                     SGP                                                                                                                           SGP
                         0.3                                                                                                  0.3
                                     HKG
                                    MYS                                                                                                                HKG     MYS
                                     GBR
                                     CAN                                                                                                      GBR                    CAN
                         0.2       USA                                                                                        0.2                USA


                         0.1                                                                                                  0.1

                          0                                                                                                    0
                               0       0.1        0.2       0.3     0.4   0.5     0.6    0.7   0.8                                  0   0.1      0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7     0.8
                                                        Correlation of ∆ Earnings                                                                Correlation of Earnings Forecast


                                           Figure 1: Firm-Level Correlations - Returns, Fundamentals and Forecasts

   With that in mind, the left-hand panel of Figure 1 plots firm-level return correlations across
the 31 countries in our sample against the correlation of earnings growth rates, along with the
45 degree line. The first equality in expression (2) suggests that the points should lie on the
45 degree line. Two observations are worth pointing out: first, it is clear that (2) fails to hold:
                         14
                              Full derivations are in Section 3.


                                                                                                9
return correlations exceed fundamental correlations in every country, generally by a substantial
amount. For example, as reported in Table 1, the average return correlation across countries is
0.46 vs only 0.11 for earnings growth, a factor of over 4. Return correlations range from 0.20 to
0.73 across countries; the corresponding values for earnings growth are 0.04 and 0.19. Second,
there is a good deal of heterogeneity across countries in return correlations, but the relationship
with fundamental correlations, while present, is far from perfect - for example, the regression of
return correlations on fundamental correlations shows that variation in the latter explains only
about 25% of variation in the former in an R2 sense (square the correlation between the two
series of 0.51 reported in Table 1), whereas expression (2) implies perfect correlation. In sum,
there is simply not enough variation in fundamental correlations to account for the variation in
return correlations in a quantitatively meaningful way.
    In the right-hand panel of Figure 1, we plot the correlation of returns against the correlation
of analysts’ forecasts of fundamentals. The two variables are strongly related (Table 1 shows the
correlation between the two series to be 0.56, higher even than that of returns with earnings) and
are more closely aligned in magnitudes, though return correlations on average exceed forecasts
(they average 0.46 and 0.36, respectively). Notice that this implies the second equality in
expression (2) fails to hold as well: like returns, the correlation of beliefs exceed the correlation
of fundamentals, in this case by a factor of over 3 (0.36 vs 0.11).15
    To sum up the key insights from Figure 1, we find that the correlations of analyst fore-
casts are strongly related to firm-level return correlations across countries, and both exceed the
level justified by fundamentals. In the next section, we outline a simple theory of imperfectly
informed investors trading on correlated information that can reconcile these patterns. In Sec-
tion 5, we revisit the stylized facts and demonstrate their robustness to a number of important
modifications - specifically, we show that excess comovement is not an artifact of our focus on
annual data and remains present at higher frequencies (e.g., quarterly), that excess comovement
is not simply a result of aggregate shocks to discount rates that would tend to move all stock
  15
     It is important to note that earnings forecasts are computed using I/B/E/S data, while returns are computed
using Compustat. I/B/E/S does not include stock prices and there is not a unique firm identifier common to
both I/B/E/S and Compustat (in the US, a match is possible using CRSP as an intermediate link; outside
the US, firm name would be one possibility, but is notoriously problematic). One concern may be that firms
covered by analysts exhibit different fundamental properties than those which are not, and that this selection
bias drives some part of our results. For example, Hameed et al. (2010) find that analysts tend to cover firms
whose fundamentals correlate more with other firms in their industry. In an important check, we compare
the properties of fundamentals, i.e., correlations of earnings growth across the two datasets, since data on
earnings are present in both. We find that the average correlation is similar in the two (0.11 in Compustat vs.
0.13 in I/B/E/S) and that they are reasonably correlated across countries at 0.48. The correlation is close to
0.60 without Norway, which is an outlier (for Norway, the correlation is actually higher in Compustat than in
I/B/E/S, the reverse of the conjectured bias). Thus, it seems that the properties of Compustat firms line up
fairly well with I/B/E/S firms. This may be because both datasets contain large, generally well covered and
traded firms.



                                                      10
             Table 1: Firm-Level Correlations - Returns, Fundamentals and Forecasts
                                         corr(returns)       corr(∆ earnings)     corr(forecasts)
              Summary Statistics
              Mean                            0.46                 0.11                  0.36
              Max                             0.73                 0.19                  0.52
              Min                             0.20                 0.04                  0.15
              Std. Dev.                       0.15                 0.04                  0.09
              Correlations
              corr(returns)                   1.00               0.51∗∗∗               0.56∗∗∗
              corr(∆ earnings)                                    1.00                  0.23
              corr(forecasts)                                                           1.00
             Notes: Table reports summary statistics of firm-level correlations of returns, earn-
             ings growth, and earnings forecasts across 31 countries. Data on returns and earnings
             growth are from Compustat. Data on earnings forecasts are from I/B/E/S. *** de-
             notes statistical significance at the 1%-level.


prices simultaneously, and that the high correlation of earnings forecasts persists throughout
the forecasting horizon (e.g., for forecasts made one year ahead of the forecast period all the
way up to one month ahead).


3        Model
We consider a parsimonious dynamic model of asset markets under imperfect information. Our
setup is designed to provide a simple mapping between the correlation of beliefs on the part
of imperfectly informed, but sophisticated, investors (equity analysts) and the correlation of
stock returns. Indeed, we will show that conditional on a few readily observable moments of
fundamentals, the correlation of beliefs is a sufficient statistic to predict the correlation of prices
and we will derive a sharp analytic expression linking the latter to the former.
    The economy consists of a continuum of firms of fixed measure one. For each firm i, there
is a unit measure of outstanding stock or equity, representing a claim on the firm’s profits.
For each firm, these claims are traded by a unit measure of imperfectly informed risk-neutral
investors.16
    16
    The assumption of risk-neutrality is a clear simplification, made primarily to maintain analytic tractability.
Veldkamp (2006) shows in a related setting that the presence of risk aversion can generate comovement through
portfolio rebalancing effects, but in a quantitative example, finds this channel to be negligible. Risk aversion
can also lead to comovement through macroeconomic fluctuations that affect the stochastic discount factor.
Interestingly, our results predict correlations on a level similar to those in the data even without these factors,
although that does not rule them out as playing a role. We discuss discount rates in more detail in Section 5.2.
One interpretation of our risk-neutral investors is of large investors who take position limits in each stock so
that they are never exposed to an individual stock’s risk. Think, for example, of large institutional investors or


                                                        11
Fundamentals. Each firm is characterized by a time-varying fundamental Ait and profits
(or earnings) are a constant proportion of fundamentals: πit = ΠAit . Natural interpretations
of Ait include the firm’s level of productivity or demand.17 Fundamentals are exogenous from
the point of view of the market and evolve stochastically through time according to the AR(1)
process in expression (1). As there, ait denotes the (log of the) fundamental of firm i in period t,
                                                         
ρ the persistence of fundamentals, and µit ∼ N 0, σµ2 the innovation in the fundamental. The
innovations µit are independent through time and of ait . Importantly, they are not independent
across firms, so that for two firms i and j, cov (µit , µjt ) = π f σµ2 , where π f ∈ [0, 1] for i 6= j is
the correlation in fundamental innovations between the firms.
    It is straightforward to derive the following properties of fundamentals:

                                                                 σµ2
                                               var (ait ) =                                                   (3)
                                                              1 − ρ2
                                                               π f σµ2
                                           cov (ait , ajt ) =
                                                              1 − ρ2
                                          corr (ait , ajt ) = π f

Information. Investors for each stock observe 2 pieces of information at the beginning of
period t that are useful in forecasting fundamentals in that period: first, they perfectly observe
the history of fundamental realizations. Because of our assumption of a first-order Markov
process, this is equivalent to observing the previous period’s realization ait−1 . Second, they
observe a common noisy signal of the contemporaneous innovation:18

                                                 sit = µit + eit

where eit ∼ N (0, σe2 ) is the noise in the signal. The signal noise eit is independent through time
and of µit , but importantly, not across firms, so that cov (eit , ejt ) = π e σe2 , where π e ∈ [0, 1] for
i 6= j is the correlation in signal errors between the firms.19
international mutual funds (whose managers may be passed information directly from the research analysts we
study).
  17
     Standard models of firm dynamics featuring decreasing returns to scale in production or demand lead to
exactly this relation.
  18
     Because information is identical across investors for each stock, we can also think of there being a single
representative investor for each.
  19
     We have assumed a rather stark degree of market segmentation: traders only receive signals about and
trade a single asset. Moreover, all traders for each asset receive the same signal, so there is no heterogeneity
in information across traders about a particular firm. This keeps the information structure simple: there is no
learning from prices, and other than the aggregate component of all signals, traders do not use signals about firm
j to update their beliefs about firm i. A related setup would be one where traders all receive a common signal
about some aggregate component of fundamentals and a separate signal about an idiosyncratic component.
This would preserve the lack of learning from the prices of other stocks. Recent work has shown that prices,


                                                       12
    Using standard Bayesian arguments, investors’ expectations of µit are given by

                                                       σµ2
                                         Et [µit ] = 2       sit = ψsit
                                                    σµ + σe2

                σ2
                µ
where ψ = σ2 +σ   2 ∈ [0, 1] denotes the weight that investors put on the signal sit . If there is no
              µ   e
information in the signal, i.e., σe2 grows to infinity, ψ goes to zero, i.e., no weight is put on the
signal. If the signal is perfectly informative, σe2 = 0, the investor puts a weight of 1.
    Expectations of the fundamental ait are then:

                               Et [ait ] = ρait−1 + ψsit = ρait−1 + ψ (µit + eit )                               (4)

Stock returns. A standard Euler equation implies

                                             Pit = Et [πit + βPit+1 ]

and a log-linear approximation around the steady state gives:20

                                  pit = ξEt [ait ] = ξρait−1 + ξψ (µit + eit )

where we have suppressed constant terms that do not affect second moments. The stock price is
proportional to investors’ expectations of firm fundamentals, where the factor of proportionality
     1−β
ξ = 1−βρ  depends on investors’ discount factor β and degree of persistence in fundamentals ρ.
Expectations are formed based on the realization of the fundamental from the previous period
as well as the realization of the current signal.
   From here, it is straightforward to derive the following expression for stock returns:

                     ∆pit = ξρ (ρ − 1) ait−2 + ξ (ρ − ψ) µit−1 + ξψµit + ξψ (eit − eit−1 )                       (5)
even in the US, tend to have a low informational content (see, for example David et al. (2014b)). We discuss
the information structure in more detail in Section 5.3.
  20
     A Taylor expansion gives pit ≈ Pπ Et [ait ] + βEt [pit+1 ] where bars denote steady state values. Using the fact
that Pπ = 1 − β, guessing and verifying that pit = ξEt [ait ] + constant gives the result.




                                                         13
Return comovement. We can now derive some properties of returns, specifically, the anal-
ogous moments to those of fundamentals in equation (3):

                                           ρ2
                                                        
                          var (∆pit ) =       + ψ (ψ − ρ) 2ξ 2 σµ2 + 2ξ 2 ψ 2 σe2                                  (6)
                                          1+ρ
                                          2             
                                           ρ
                    cov (∆pit , ∆pjt ) =      + ψ (ψ − ρ) 2ξ 2 π f σµ2 + 2ξ 2 ψ 2 π e σe2
                                          1+ρ

and putting these together,

                                                                 κf π f + κe π e
                                       corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) =                                                       (7)
                                                                    κf + κe
             h 2             i
               ρ
where κf = 1+ρ    + ψ (ψ − ρ) σµ2 and κe = ψ 2 σe2 .
   Expression (7) is the key prediction of the model: the correlation of stock returns is a
weighted average of the correlation of fundamentals and the correlation in beliefs, with weights
κf and κe , respectively. We can characterize the following properties of the return correlation:
                                                  ∂corr(∆pit ,∆pjt )              ∂corr(∆pit ,∆pjt )
  1. corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) ≤ max π f , π e ;               ∂π f
                                                                        > 0 and          ∂π e
                                                                                                        > 0 so long as
     κe 6= 0 and κf 6= 0.

  2. With full information (ψ = 1 and σe2 = 0) or no information (ψ = 0 and σe2 → ∞), κe = 0
     and so corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) = π f .

  3. In intermediate cases (ψ ∈ (0, 1)), corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) = πf if and only if π e = π f .

  4. corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) > π f if and only if ψ ∈ (0, 1) and π e > π f .

   First, returns cannot be more correlated than either fundamentals or beliefs and return
correlation is monotonically increasing in both. With either full information or no information,
the correlation of returns is exactly that of fundamentals.21 With intermediate information,
the return correlation exceeds fundamental correlation when beliefs are more correlated than
fundamentals, and equals fundamental correlation only when belief correlation also equals fun-
damental correlation.
   Although the settings are not the same, the properties of return correlations in our model
parallel those in Veldkamp (2006). That model is static, features investors with CARA prefer-
ences, learning from prices, and takes an explicit stand on the source of common information
(the fundamental of a commonly observed asset, which arises endogenously with information
markets), whereas our model is dynamic, features risk neutral agents, no learning from prices,
 21
      This is reminiscent of expression (2).


                                                          14
and is agnostic regarding the particular source of correlation in beliefs. Despite these differ-
ences, our frameworks yield similar conditions for excess comovement: the correlation in beliefs
must be higher than the correlation in fundamentals.


4     Quantitative Exercise
In the preceding section, we laid out a parsimonious model that makes simple and intuitive
predictions regarding the determinants of the cross-firm correlation of stock returns, and specif-
ically, the role that correlated beliefs can play in leading to excess correlation above and beyond
that of fundamentals. In this section, we perform a simple numerical exercise to ask whether
reasonable levels of correlation in beliefs are able to generate realistic levels of return correla-
tion and the cross-sectional pattern across countries. To do so, we first pass our data on beliefs
and fundamentals through the model to generate predictions of return correlations; second, we
examine whether the predicted correlations line up with the empirical ones on a number of
dimensions.


4.1    Calibration
In general, quantifying information-based models is challenging, as information is seldom di-
rectly observed. We overcome this hurdle by using our data on the forecasts of informed market
participants - in other words, in this instance, we are able to measure agents’ information sets
directly. Specifically, we use the empirical correlation and volatility of forecasts to place values
on the two informational parameters of our model, π e and σe2 .
    Expression (4) gives agents’ expectation of fundamentals, i.e., the forecast. It is straight-
forward to derive the following moments of forecasts:

                                                       ρ2
                                                                 
                              var (Et [ait ]) =             + ψ σµ2                             (8)
                                                    1 − ρ2
                                                    2              
                                                       ρ
                     cov (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]) =          + ψ π f σµ2 + ψ 2 π e σe2
                                                                  2
                                                    1 − ρ2
                                                    2          
                                                     ρ
                                                    1−ρ2
                                                          + ψ π f σµ2 + ψ 2 π e σe2
                                                              2

                    corr (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]) =         2                                  (9)
                                                             ρ
                                                            1−ρ2
                                                                  + ψ σµ2

Rearranging expression (8) gives a relation between the forecast variance and overall informa-




                                                   15
tion, captured by the noise in the signal, σe2 :

                                     1−ψ 2                      var (Et [ait ])     ρ2
                             σe2   =    σµ ,          where ψ =                 −                       (10)
                                      ψ                              σµ2          1 − ρ2

In other words, given the properties of fundamentals, the variance of forecasts pins down ψ (the
weight that investors put on the signal), from which it is straightforward to back out σe2 .
    Similarly, rearranging (9) gives an expression for π e as a function of the properties of fun-
damentals, the signal noise, and the correlation of forecasts:
                                                                               2         
                                    ρ2                                            ρ
                                   1−ρ2
                                          + ψ σµ2 corr (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]) − 1−ρ2 + ψ 2
                                                                                              σµ2 π f
                      πe =                                                                              (11)
                                                                 ψ 2 σe2

    Clearly, (10) and (11) pin down the two information parameters of the model. However, as
we demonstrate next, it turns out that we do not need to explicitly use these equations to iden-
tify the structural parameters so as to generate predictions of return correlations. Specifically,
given the correlation of forecasts, corr (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]), it can be shown that the correlation in
returns is equal to:22

                                                           corr (Et [ait ] , Et [ajt ]) − ρπ f
                                   corr (∆pit , ∆pjt ) =                                                (12)
                                                                        1−ρ

    In other words, given values for ρ and π f , the correlation of forecasts provides all the
information we need to pin down the correlation of returns. This is a particularly attractive
feature of our model, since the correlation of forecasts is precisely the moment we examined in
Section 2. With this result, we need only calibrate ρ and π f and use these values in conjunction
with forecast correlations to generate predicted correlations of returns. We take this approach
to investigate the properties of the model’s predicted returns. In the following subsection, we
use (10) and (11) along with values of σµ2 to infer values of the underlying structural parameters
and perform counterfactual experiments.
    To assign a value to ρ for each country, we perform the autoregression implied by (1) on
a firm-by-firm basis and take the average across firms.23 To pin down π f , we compute the
correlation of fundamentals in the same manner as we did for forecasts - from the last line of
expression (3) this is equal to π f . For both calculations, we use the log of earnings per share
to measure log fundamentals, which is consistent with our theory, where log fundamentals are
equal to log earnings plus a constant. All data for our exercise comes from the set of I/B/E/S
firms for which we have both earnings forecasts and realizations. Moments are reported in
  22
       Substitute for π e σe2 from (11) into (7).
  23
       We additionally control for a linear time trend which seems to be present in the data.

                                                               16
Table 14 in the Appendix (many are also included in Tables 12 and 13 also in the Appendix,
but we rewrite them for the reader’s convenience).


4.2    Results
Return correlations. Figure 2 plots the first main result of our exercise: the predicted
return correlations vs. the actual for our sample of 31 countries. Given the simplicity of our
model, the relationship is surprisingly strong: as reported in Table 2, the correlation between
predicted and actual is 0.63. Moreover, the position of the 45 degree line shows that the levels
are broadly in line as well: the average correlation in the data is 0.46 compared to 0.47 from
the model. Table 2 shows that the properties of predicted returns line up quite closely with the
actual on a number of additional dimensions, i.e., the ranges and standard deviations across
countries. Clearly, correlated beliefs are able to lead to both cross-sectional variation as well
as levels of return correlations in line with those observed in the data. This is not to say that
our mechanism is the only one active in the data; merely that belief correlation seems to play
an important role.

                                                           0.8

                                                                                                  IND                  PER
                                                           0.7
                        Predicted Correlation of Returns




                                                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                          ESP   ISR
                                                           0.6                           FRA            SWE             ITA
                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                 SGP     THA
                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                      CHL
                                                           0.5                          CHE
                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                          DNK                   NOR
                                                                     CAN
                                                                           MYS    AUS            AUTPHL
                                                           0.4
                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                         MEX            NLD
                                                                                   JPN NZL        BEL
                                                           0.3             HKG

                                                                   USA
                                                           0.2       GBR


                                                           0.1
                                                             0.1   0.2       0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6              0.7        0.8
                                                                             Actual Correlation of Returns


                     Figure 2: Return Correlations - Predicted vs. Actual

   That the model predicts correlations on par with those in the data, despite the much lower
correlation of fundamentals, implies that correlated beliefs can lead to realistic levels of excess
correlation. The left-hand panel of Figure 3 shows this to be the case. The figure is exactly the
analogous one to the left-hand side of Figure 1 and plots the predicted correlation of returns
on the vertical axis against the correlation of earnings growth on the horizontal. The plot
looks strikingly similar to the empirical one. Across the board, return correlations exceeds
fundamental correlations, often by a significant amount, just as in the data. Because the levels

                                                                                        17
                                             Table 2: Predicted Firm-Level Correlations - Returns, Fundamentals and Fore-
                                             casts
                                                                                                 \
                                                                                               corr (∆pit )                                                 corr (∆pit )
                                              Summary Statistics
                                              Mean                                                0.47                                                         0.46
                                              Max                                                 0.72                                                         0.73
                                              Min                                                 0.18                                                         0.20
                                              Std. Dev.                                           0.14                                                         0.15
                                                                                               corr (∆pit ) corr (∆ait ) (IBES)                                                          corr (Et [ait ])
                                                                 \
                                              Correlation with corr (∆pit )                      0.63∗∗∗                                                      −0.09                          0.90∗∗∗
                                             Notes: Table reports summary statistics of model-predicted and actual firm-level correlations of
                                             returns across 31 countries. Hats denote variables generated from the calibrated model. Data
                                             on returns are from Compustat. Data on earnings growth and forecasts are from I/B/E/S. ***
                                             denotes statistical significance at the 1%-level.


of predicted return correlations are close to the actual (as shown in Table 2, they average
0.47 and 0.46, respectively), they both exceed the correlation of fundamentals by a factor of
approximately 4.24
                                   0.8                                                                                                            0.8
                                                    PER
                                                      IND                                                                                                                                  PER   IND
                                   0.7                                                                                                            0.7
Predicted Correlation of Returns




                                                                                                               Predicted Correlation of Returns




                                                     CHN                                                                                                                                    CHN
       ISR                                                   ESP                                                                                                                                ESPISR
                                   0.6             ITA
                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                                                  0.6                                    ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                           FRA
                                                 DEU SWE                                                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                              DEU
                                                 THASGP                                                                                                                            THA SGP
                                             CHLFIN                                                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHL
                                   0.5        CHE                                                                                                 0.5                                CHE
                                                  DNKKOR
                                             NORCAN                                                                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                    NORDNK
                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                         AUTMYS
                                                             AUSPHL                                                                                                            AUS MYSAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                       PHL
                                   0.4                                                                                                            0.4
                                                      ZAF                                                                                                                       ZAF
                                                  NLD
                                                    MEX                                                                                                                    NLD     MEX
                                                 BEL NZL
                                                 JPN                                                                                                                       NZLJPN BEL
                                   0.3         HKG                                                                                                0.3                        HKG

                                             USA                                                                                                                      USA
                                   0.2               GBR
                                                                                                                                                  0.2               GBR


                                   0.1                                                                                                            0.1

                                    0                                                                                                              0
                                         0         0.1      0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6     0.7     0.8                                            0     0.1         0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                            Correlation of ∆ Earnings (IBES)                                                                              Correlation of Earnings Forecast


                                         Figure 3: Predicted Firm-Level Correlations - Returns, Fundamentals and Forecasts

   The right-hand panel of Figure 3 plots the predicted correlation of returns against the
correlation of forecasts. This is exactly analogous to the right-hand side of Figure 1. Again,
                                   24
    For this comparison, note that the correlation of fundamentals was computed using Compustat firms to
compare to Compustat return correlations in Figure 1, and using I/B/E/S firms to compare to the model
predictions. However, as discussed in Section 2, the characteristics of fundamentals look similar across the two
datasets. Israel is a clear outlier with a slightly negative correlation in earnings growth in I/B/E/S (-0.07; it is
0.06 in Compustat).


                                                                                                         18
the figures look broadly similar. The predicted return correlations are strongly related to the
correlation of forecasts (a bit more so than in the data; 0.90 compared to 0.56) and generally
are of a similar magnitude. In sum, our theory is able to reconcile the facts from Section 2: the
correlation of returns and forecasts are strongly related, and both exceed the levels justified by
fundamentals.


4.3     Counterfactual Experiments
To hone in on the drivers of high return correlations, we can use our framework to perform
a number of revealing counterfactual experiments. Before doing so, we need now put values
on the underlying structural parameters of the model. Recall that computing the model’s
predictions for return correlations did not require this step, once we measured the correlation
of beliefs. The remaining parameters to calibrate are π e , σe2 , and σµ2 . Expressions (10) and (11)
show that using the variance of forecasts as an additional moment (jointly with the correlation
of forecasts) allows us to identify π e and σe2 , and this is the approach we take. Finally, we
directly follow equation (3) and estimate σµ2 as the average within-firm variance of log earnings
multiplied by 1 − ρ2 . The first 3 columns of Table 15 in the Appendix report the resulting
parameter values.25
    We perform two main exercises geared toward understanding the sources of variation in
return correlations. The goal is to understand whether it is the overall level of information or the
degree of commonality in that information that accounts for the patterns of return correlations
observed in the data. To answer this question, for each exercise, we set a parameter of the
model equal to its US value for all countries and assess the implications for return correlations.
We turn first to π e - the correlation in the non-fundamental component of beliefs - and set it to
its US value for all countries. We next examine the role of the overall precision of information
by setting σe2 - the noise in investors’ signals - to its US value. In both exercises we eliminate
heterogeneity across countries along one dimension of the signal process. The idea is to see
which change goes furthest in eliminating heterogeneity in return correlations.
    We plot the results of these exercises in the top row of Figure 4, along with the baseline
results in the bottom row for ease of comparison. Each plot in the figure displays predicted
return correlations against actual. The corresponding values are reported in Table 3. The
figure clearly shows that the non-fundamental component of belief correlation, π e , is key -
setting this to the US level for all countries reduces the correlation of predicted and actual
return correlations from 0.63 to 0.25 (and is now not significantly different from zero), a fall
  25
    For 2 of the 31 countries, India and Peru, this procedure gives values of π e that slightly exceed one (1.28
and 1.1, respectively). Rather than exclude these countries, we set π e equal to 0.99. This makes little difference
in our results.


                                                        19
of about 62%. Moreover, the magnitudes of return correlations fall dramatically as well, from
an average of 0.47 to 0.28, a fall of about 41%. Finally, there is a substantial compression of
the cross-sectional variation in correlations - as reported in Table 3, the standard deviation
across countries falls from 0.14 in our baseline calibration to only 0.03 in the counterfactual
one. Comparing to the baseline results in the bottom row of the figure sums up the results -
systematic heterogeneity in return correlations almost vanishes and the magnitudes fall to an
average essentially on par with the US.

                         Table 3: Counterfactual Firm-Level Return Correlations
                                           \
                                         corr           \
                                              (∆pit ) corr (∆pit ), π e = πUe S      \
                                                                                   corr (∆pit ), σe2 = σe,U
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                            S

   Summary Statistics
   Mean                                      0.47                 0.28                        0.45
   Max                                       0.72                 0.38                        0.88
   Min                                       0.18                 0.21                        0.19
   Std. Dev.                                 0.14                 0.03                        0.14
   Correlation with corr (∆pit )           0.63∗∗∗                0.25                      0.51∗∗∗
 Notes: Table reports summary statistics of predicted firm-level correlations of returns under various sce-
 narios. Hats denote variables generated from the calibrated model. Data on returns are from Compustat.
 *** denotes statistical significance at 1%-level.


    In contrast, turning to the overall quality of information and fixing σe2 at its US level results
in comparatively small changes in predicted return correlations.26 The correlation of predicted
and actual falls slightly to 0.51. In terms of levels, there is only a small reduction from an
average of 0.47 to 0.45. Comparing the plot for this scenario in the top row of Figure 4 to the
baseline results in the bottom row shows that there is little difference between the two. This
finding is in large part driven by the rather weak relationship between the extent of correlation
in
 information    and its overall precision. For example, the posterior variance of investor beliefs is
             −1
  1
 σµ2 + σ12   . Dividing this by σµ2 and subtracting from 1 gives ψ, the percent of prior variance
         e
that is eliminated by the signal. The correlation of ψ with predicted return correlations is
negative, but mildly so, at -0.35; the correlation with the empirical return correlation is even
lower at -0.19. In other words, overall signal precision does not seem to be the main driver of
return correlations, either as predicted by the model or in the data.
    In sum, differences in the correlation of the non-fundamental component of beliefs would
seem to be a key determinant of the cross-section of return correlations as well as their magni-
tudes. There is a much smaller role for the overall level of information. There is an interesting
economic interpretation here - namely, for partially, but imperfectly informed agents, it is not
  26
       The exception is India, whose predicted return correlation actually jumps from 0.72 to 0.88.



                                                        20
                                            0.8                                                                                                                                                           0.9                                               IND




                                                                                                                                                           Predicted Correlation of Returns, σ2e=σ2e us
Predicted Correlation of Returns, πe=πeus


                                            0.7                                                                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.7
                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6                                        FRA            ESP   ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PERCHN
                                            0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SGP      DEU                             ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    THA           SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHEDNK          FIN
                                            0.4                                                                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                   IND                                                                                                                     AUS             AUTPHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4                       MYS                ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                       ESP                                        ISR                                                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                 PHL                                                                                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                       DEU
                                            0.3         CAN             MEXDNKAUT
                                                                         FRA    BEL SWE                                              CHL                                                                                                          NZLMEX     BEL
                                                            MYS SGP
                                                             HKG AUS
                                                                  JPN
                                                                        CHE
                                                                         THA
                                                                            KOR
                                                                           ZAF                                                   NOR    ITACHN                                                            0.3                       HKG     JPN
                                                                                        FIN                                           PER
                                                      USA             NZL            NLD
                                                         GBR                                                                                                                                                            USA
                                            0.2                                                                                                                                                           0.2             GBR


                                            0.1                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                              0.1     0.2      0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6                                             0.7       0.8                                                      0.1         0.2           0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6              0.7      0.8
                                                               Actual Correlation of Returns                                                                                                                                          Actual Correlation of Returns
                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                                                                               IND                                                       PER
                                                                                                           0.7
                                                                        Predicted Correlation of Returns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ESP              ISR
                                                                                                           0.6                                  FRA                                            SWE                            ITA
                                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                                        SGP     THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                           0.5                                   CHE
                                                                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                                                                                   DNK                                                            NOR
                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                 MYS     AUS             AUTPHL
                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                  ZAF
                                                                                                                                                MEX                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                          JPN NZL             BEL
                                                                                                           0.3                   HKG

                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                           0.2             GBR


                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                             0.1         0.2        0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6                                                         0.7             0.8
                                                                                                                                    Actual Correlation of Returns


                                                  Figure 4: Baseline and Counterfactual Predicted Firm-Level Return Correlations

the overall level of information that matters for return comovement, but rather the extent
of its commonality. This insight goes some way towards resolving a seeming tension in the
literature, where empirical results regarding the relationship between comovement and infor-
mation quality have been mixed. As one example, Durnev et al. (2003) find that US firms and
industries exhibiting less comovement show a greater association between returns and future
earnings, pointing towards higher quality information; in contrast, Hou et al. (2013) find that
lower comovement appears to be associated with fluctuations in investor sentiments, and so
lesser quality information.27 Our analysis demonstrates that this relationship depends crucially
on both the extent of common information as well as its overall precision. Specifically, where
firm-level information is highly correlated - for example, India - increasing its overall accuracy
will lead to more comovement, not less, since agents respond more sharply to the correlated
                   27
                                            Dang et al. (2014) contains a useful overview of the state of the literature and further citations on this topic.


                                                                                                                                                 21
signal. The opposite is true in environments with more dispersed information about firms -
for example, the UK - there, raising signal precision leads to less comovement as agents put
more weight on less correlated information. Thus, that empirical results on this score are mixed
may not be surprising - our findings suggest that it may be useful to put more emphasis on
why agents turn to common sources of information, rather than the overall quality of that
information.
    In results not reported, we have performed similar experiments for the fundamental param-
eters, π f and σµ2 . We find that fixing these parameters to their US levels across all countries
makes very little difference, i.e., predicted return correlations remain quite similar to the base-
line case. This underscores our original observation that properties of fundamentals alone seem
difficult to reconcile with measured levels and patterns of return comovement.


4.4     Comovement and Stock Market Volatility
Previous work has shown that return correlations are a key driver of aggregate stock market
volatility.28 Thus, it seems a natural extension of our main results on return comovement to
assess the implications for market-wide volatility. To do so, we construct measures of aggregate
volatility as the standard deviation of annual returns from an equal-weighted index for the
Compustat firms in our sample.29 The values are reported in Table 12 in the Appendix and
summary statistics are presented in Table 4.
    The left-hand panel of Figure 5 plots the empirical return correlations against market-
wide volatility, along with the line of best fit. Clearly, there is a strong positive relationship:
the regression of volatility on correlation yields an R2 of about 0.64, suggesting that a single
statistic, the average cross-firm correlation, explains about 64% of the cross-section of market
volatility (to obtain this value, simply square the correlation coefficient between the two series
of 0.80 reported in Table 4).30 The right-hand panel of Figure 5 shows the analogous plot using
our predicted correlations. There continues to be a strong positive relationship: a regression of
the empirical volatilities on our model-generated return correlation yields an R2 of 0.44. Thus,
our results suggest that realistic levels of correlation in investor beliefs can explain about 44%
  28
     For example, Harvey (1995) finds that variation in the average cross-firm correlation of returns explains
over 50% of the variation in market volatility across a number of emerging and developed markets, but that a
host of other variables have very little explanatory power, including measures of market size, trading volume,
and concentration.
  29
     We choose to construct our index using these firms as we have already shown that they exhibit fairly
comparable properties of fundamentals to the firms in I/B/E/S. We cannot claim the same for broader market
indices. However, it is reassuring that for the set of countries and time window we study (1999-2013), the
correlation between our constructed measure of market volatility and that reported by MSCI is reasonably high
at 0.64. Going back to 1993, when available, the correlation between our measure and MSCI is even higher,
0.77.
  30
     This is close to the finding in Harvey (1995).


                                                     22
                    0.5                                                                                              0.5

                   0.45                                                              CHN                            0.45                                                    CHN

                                                             IND                                                                                                                   IND
                    0.4                                                                                              0.4
                                                              PHL              PER                                                                      PHL                        PER
Market Volatiliy




                                                                                                 Market Volatiliy
                   0.35                                                 ISR                                         0.35                                                   ISR
                                                       KOR             NOR                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                                                                                                KOR
                                                            SWE                 ITA                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                                                                                        ITA
                    0.3                                        FIN
                                                                                                                     0.3                                          FIN
                                                              ESP                                                                                                         ESP
                                                   ZAFAUT NLD                 CHL                                                                 ZAF    AUT DNK CHL
                                                   DNK
                                                 MEX                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                                                               MEX
                                          SGP                                                                                                                      SGP
                   0.25                          THA    BEL                                                         0.25                      BEL                  THA
                                                DEU                                                                                                                   DEU
                                    HKG          FRA                                                                                        HKG                        FRA

                    0.2       GBRMYS
                                                 CHE
                                           AUS NZL                                                                   0.2      GBR             NZL       AUS
                                                                                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                                                                                                    CHE
                                            JPN                                                                                               JPN
                              CAN                                                                                                                             CAN
                   0.15     USA                                                                                     0.15             USA


                    0.1                                                                                              0.1
                      0.1   0.2      0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6              0.7        0.8                         0.1      0.2          0.3     0.4      0.5     0.6         0.7    0.8
                                     Actual Correlation of Returns                                                                         Predicted Correlation of Returns


                                           Figure 5: Return Correlations and Aggregate Volatility

of the cross-section of market volatility (and almost 70% of the ‘correlation channel’; 0.44 over
0.64). We view these as important implications of our results that future research into the
determinants of aggregate stock market volatility should bear in mind.
    As our last point in this section, Figure 6 plots aggregate volatility directly against the
correlation of analyst forecasts. Once we see the strength of the relationship between the two
(Table 4 shows the correlation between them to be 0.63), the results in Figure 5 should come as
no surprise, since our predicted return correlations generally derive quite closely from forecast
correlations. This may be the most direct evidence that correlated beliefs is an important driver
of aggregate volatility.

                                            Table 4: Return Correlations and Aggregate Volatility
                                                       std(market return)
                     Summary Statistics
                     Mean                                            0.27
                     Max                                             0.45
                     Min                                             0.14
                     Std. Dev.                                       0.07
                                                              corr(returns)                 corr(predicted returns)                                     corr(forecasts)
                     Correlations
                     std(market return)                             0.80∗∗∗                                                0.66∗∗∗                             0.63∗∗∗
                    Notes: Table reports summary statistics of the standard deviation of the market return across 31 coun-
                    tries. Market returns for each country are computed as unweighted average returns across all firms
                    within a country. Data on returns are from Compustat. Data on earnings forecasts are from I/B/E/S.
                    Predicted returns are computed from the calibrated model. *** denotes statistical significance at the
                    1%-level.



                                                                                           23
                                                 0.5

                                                0.45                                                    CHN

                                                                                                                     IND
                                                 0.4
                                                                                                PHL PER




                            Market Volatility
                                                0.35                                                                  ISR
                                                                                        NORKOR
                                                                                                 ITA     SWE
                                                 0.3                                         FIN                ESP
                                                                                 ZAF MEX       CHL
                                                                                              AUT
                                                                     NLD                       DNK
                                                                                               SGP
                                                0.25                                BELTHA
                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                           HKG                         FRA

                                                 0.2     GBR         NZL      AUS         CHE
                                                                                        MYS
                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                CAN
                                                0.15           USA


                                                 0.1
                                                   0.1          0.2            0.3         0.4                      0.5     0.6
                                                                             Forecast Correlation


                       Figure 6: Forecast Correlations and Aggregate Volatility

5        Robustness
In this section, we explore the robustness of our results to some important variations on our
baseline approach, as well as the effects of alternative potential drivers of return comovement.
All country-level data for this section are reported in Table 16 in the Appendix.


5.1      Timing
Thus far, our analysis has focused on data at the annual frequency. Although this choice is in
part driven by data availability (higher frequency earnings and forecast data are not generally
available across countries), it is important to note that there is a good deal of evidence that an
annual frequency is reasonable and relevant on a number of dimensions. In terms of investor
behavior, estimates of typical stock holding periods tend to average somewhat more than a
year. Importantly, this is true both for individual as well as institutional investors.31 In
terms of the impact that market movements may have on firm investment decisions, previous
work has tended to focus on frequencies that even exceed one year (for example, Morck et al.
(1990) and David et al. (2014b) examine three year frequencies), citing the low predictive
    31
    For example, a recent report documents that as of 2014, the average stock on the New York Stock Exchange
was held for 1.92 years (the lowest level since the 1920s), a figure that includes both individual and institutional
investors; the corresponding figure for equity mutual funds is 1.45 years. See “Lengthening the Investment
Time Horizon,” MFS Investment Management, White Paper Series, February 2015, available at https://www.
mfs.com/. Similarly, Gaspar et al. (2005) and Gaspar et al. (2012) find that the typical institutional investor
(median and average, respectively) holds the average stock in its portfolio for 15 to 27 months. The figures in
Barber and Odean (2000) imply a similar horizon of just over 15 months for a sample of individual investors
                                                                                          1
(they report monthly turnover around 6.5% so that the average holding period is 0.065         = 15.4). Chien et al.
(2012) also document the extent of passiveness on the part of individual investors.


                                                                                     24
power of investment growth regressions at higher frequencies and the long lags in planning and
implementing investment projects.
    Despite the relevance of the annual frequency, it is important to understand the sensitivity
of our analysis to our baseline assumptions on timing. Here, we explore two modifications:
first, we assess whether the excess comovement we document in Section 2.2 is an artifact of our
focus on the annual frequency and disappears at higher frequencies; similarly, we investigate
the properties of earnings forecasts over the forecasting horizon, i.e., as the period the forecast
is made approaches the date the fundamental is realized.

Higher frequency comovement. One concern is that the relatively low frequency at which
we analyze stock market data is responsible for the excess comovement that we document.
For example, it might be the case that fundamentals are more highly correlated across firms
at higher frequencies, due perhaps to common shocks that are more short-term in nature,
or that the connection between returns and fundamentals is stronger. To address this issue,
we recompute return and fundamental correlations at the quarterly frequency. Unfortunately,
reported measures of quarterly earnings per share are only available for a small set of the
countries we examine. However, quarterly data on net income and the number of common
shares outstanding are available for all the countries in our sample with the exception of Japan
and Korea. Therefore, we proxy earnings per share by net income per share. According to
the Compustat manual, these two measures should be essentially equivalent, with differences
reflecting preferred dividends and other minor adjustments. To verify that the approximation
is a good one, we compute the correlation of income per share and reported earnings per share
(both in logs) at the firm-level at the annual frequency for the 29 countries for which data are
available. The mean correlation is 0.94, ranging from a low 0.88 in Austria to 0.98 in Finland.
In addition, the levels of fundamental correlations computed using the two measures are at par
- they are generally quite closely aligned across countries, and both average about 0.12.
    We proceed to compute the correlation of returns and fundamentals at the quarterly fre-
quency with the new measure of fundamentals in mind. To maintain consistency with our
baseline approach, we consider firm pairs with at least 32 quarters, or 8 years, of overlap. We
plot the results in Figure 7, maintaining the same axes as in Figure 1 for comparability, and
report the corresponding values in Table 5. The plot shows that the excess comovement puzzle
arises with quarterly data as well and, if anything, is somewhat worsened. Just as at the annual
frequency, return correlations exceed fundamental correlations in every country by a substan-
tial amount. The average return correlation is 0.47, almost identical to that at the annual
frequency, and ranges from 0.20 to 0.62, compared to an average of 0.07 for fundamentals (and
a range of 0.00 to 0.23), which are actually lower values than their annual counterparts. In this


                                                25
sense, the gap is even wider at the quarterly frequency, suggesting that the excess comovement
‘puzzle’ is somewhat heightened.

                    Table 5: Quarterly Return and Fundamental Correla-
                    tions
                                                                                        corr(returns)        corr(∆ earnings)
                     Summary Statistics
                     Mean                                                                     0.47                     0.07
                     Max                                                                      0.62                     0.23
                     Min                                                                      0.20                     0.00
                     Std. Dev.                                                                0.09                     0.05
                     Correlations
                     corr(returns)                                                            1.00                     0.31∗
                     corr(∆ earnings)                                                                                  1.00
                    Notes: Table reports summary statistics of firm-level correlations
                    of returns and earnings growth computed at a quarterly frequency
                    across 29 countries. Data on returns and earnings growth are from
                    Compustat. * denotes statistical significance at the 10%-level.


                                                            0.8

                                                            0.7
                        Correlation of Returns, Quarterly




                                                                          NOR
                                                            0.6
                                                               CHLINDNZL
                                                               ISR         ITA
                                                                    SWEFIN
                                                                   CHN
                                                                 AUT
                                                            0.5 BELCHE
                                                                  SGP
                                                                       ZAF
                                                                     DNK
                                                                   PER
                                                                     FRA     NLD
                                                                                 MEX
                                                                       ESP
                                                                      AUS
                                                                   PHL
                                                                    DEU
                                                            0.4       CAN
                                                                       HKG
                                                                        GBR
                                                                   MYS
                                                                  THA
                                                            0.3

                                                            0.2 USA

                                                            0.1

                                                             0
                                                                  0       0.1    0.2      0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6      0.7     0.8
                                                                                Correlation of ∆ Earnings, Quarterly


                  Figure 7: Quarterly Return and Fundamental Correlations


Forecast horizon and revisions. A related concern is that the forecast horizon that we
study in our baseline exercise - forecasts issued one month after the previous year’s earnings were
announced - is responsible for the high forecast correlations that we document, and ultimately,
for the close fit between the predicted return correlation and the actual. To address this
concern, we recompute the correlations of earnings forecasts using 3 additional forecast horizons
- forecasts made 6 months prior to the end of the fiscal year for which the forecast is made,

                                                                                             26
3 months, and less than 1 month. These periods correspond roughly to the month after the
first, second, and third quarter earnings are released, respectively.32 The idea of the exercise is
to understand how informational quality changes as market participants revise their beliefs in
response to new information that comes in throughout the year.
    For each forecast horizon, we compute the correlation and volatility of forecasts. Two
observations emerge: first, as reported in the top panel of Table 6, the correlation of forecasts
generally falls as the forecast horizon shortens. For example, the mean correlation of forecasts
is 0.36 in our baseline, falls to 0.32 at a 6 month horizon, 0.31 at 3 months, and to 0.28 at 1
month. This pattern is reassuring, as we would expect that as more firm-specific information
is revealed throughout the year, beliefs are revised in different directions. However, even at
the shortest horizon, forecast correlations remain relatively high, especially as compared to the
level of fundamental correlations. Figure 8 plots the correlations of forecasts against those of
earnings growth for our baseline horizon and the shortest horizon of one month. As discussed,
the levels of forecast correlations generally fall somewhat across the board; however, even at
this short horizon, they continue to exceed those in fundamentals.
                                                                                                                   Correlation of Earnings Forecast, Short Horizon
     Correlation of Earnings Forecast, Baseline




    ISR
                                                                         IND
                                                  0.5                          ESP
                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                  DEU
                                                                       CHNSWE                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                     FRA
                                                                     PER
                                                  0.4               ITA
                                                            CHL CANDNK            PHL                                                                                0.4                    IND   ESP
                                                                      SGP
                                                                        AUT                                                                                                               CHN
                                                                FIN      KOR
                                                              CHE
                                                            NOR             MYS                                   ISR
                                                                  THA MEX                                                                                                                  MEX         PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                   BEL                                                                                                           CHECAN
                                                  0.3                      ZAFAUS                                                                                    0.3             DEU SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                        DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                               HKGJPN                                                                                                          CHL HKG ITA KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                   FIN        ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                               MYS
                                                                    NLD NZL                                                                                                           THA
                                                                                                                                                                               NOR       NLD
                                                  0.2                                                                                                                0.2                     NZL AUS
                                                            USA                                                                                                                        JPN
                                                                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                        GBR                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                                                                        GBR

                                                  0.1                                                                                                                0.1


                                                   0                                                                                                                  0
                                                        0         0.1          0.2        0.3       0.4    0.5                                                             0        0.1          0.2        0.3       0.4    0.5
                                                                        Correlation of ∆ Earnings (IBES)                                                                                  Correlation of ∆ Earnings (IBES)


                                                                    Figure 8: Forecast Correlations - Baseline and Short Horizons

    To go one step further, we can use equation (12) to translate these values into predicted
return correlations. Table 6 shows that the mean predicted return correlation follows a similar
pattern, beginning at 0.47 in our baseline analysis and falling to 0.39, 0.35, and 0.28 at the
6, 3, and 1 month horizons, respectively, always well above the correlation of fundamentals,
which averages about 0.11. One caveat here is that due to the differences in timing, with the
  32
     As a concrete example, consider a forecast of annual earnings for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2010.
Our baseline forecast is likely made sometime between January and March of 2010, following the release of fiscal
year 2009 earnings. We then also examine forecasts made in June 2010, roughly the month after first quarter
2010 earnings are released, September 2010, which corresponds to second quarter earnings, and December 2010,
third quarter earnings.


                                                                                                                 27
                         Table 6: Information at Various Forecast Horizons
            Forecast Horizon                  Baseline      6 Months     3 Months       1 Month
            corr(forecasts)
            Mean                                0.36         0.32           0.31          0.28
            Max                                 0.52         0.58           0.57          0.44
            Min                                 0.15         −0.09          0.14          0.15
            Std. Dev.                           0.09         0.13           0.10          0.07
            corr(predicted returns)
            Mean                                0.47         0.39           0.35          0.28
            Max                                 0.72         0.81           0.80          0.54
            Min                                 0.18         −0.45          0.06          0.11
            Std. Dev.                           0.14         0.22           0.15          0.09
            information precision (ψ)
            Mean                                0.45          0.48          0.55          0.64
            Max                                 0.67          1.11          0.85          1.00
            Min                                 0.15          0.14          0.26          0.23
            Std. Dev.                           0.09          0.17          0.15          0.16
           Notes: Table reports summary statistics of (i) firm-level correlations of earnings fore-
           casts, (ii) firm-level correlations of predicted returns, (iii) the information precision
           parameter, ψ, at various forecast horizons for 31 countries. Data on earnings forecasts
           are from I/B/E/S. Predicted returns and the information precision ψ are computed
           from the calibrated model.


exception of our baseline numbers which are essentially annual in nature, these correlations are
not really comparable to those we compute from the data.
    Next, using the volatility of forecasts in conjunction with the correlation, we infer values
for σe2 , the noise in investor information, at each forecast horizon, and from this compute
            1
            2
           σµ
ψ = 1−    1    1   , the fraction of the prior variance that is eliminated by information known at
          2 + σ2
         σµ    e
the time of the forecast. We report the results in the bottom panel of Table 6. As we might
expect, this fraction increases as the forecast horizon shortens, from an average value of 0.45 in
our baseline analysis, to 0.48, 0.55, and 0.64 at the 6 month, 3 month, and 1 month horizons,
respectively. Thus, the picture that emerges is one where overall informational quality improves
over the forecasting horizon and the firm-specific component becomes more important relative
to the common component. On the other hand, even at the shortest horizon, a significant degree
of uncertainty remains, along with a substantial component that is common across firms, which
continues to imply return correlations that exceed fundamentals.




                                                       28
5.2    Discount Rate Shocks
Our model is highly parsimonious and hones in precisely on the statistic we are after, i.e., the
correlation in returns. However, this comes at the cost of abstracting from several factors that
likely play a role in driving stock price movements (and the far from perfect fit of our model
leaves ample room for these). Most notably, our assumption of risk neutrality is a clear simpli-
fication. Although this may not be a bad approximation for large, international institutional
investors, it comes at a cost: it abstracts from the potential role of aggregate discount rate
shocks in driving comovement. It is important to note, however, that our use of direct mea-
sures of beliefs about fundamentals means that we are not in danger of misattributing discount
rate shocks to informational factors. This is in contrast to an empirical strategy that measures
common information using the observed comovement of prices (or even forecasts of them) - in
this case, the presence of alternative factors driving comovement would be problematic in the
sense of potentially leading to an overstatement of the role of information. We would argue
that this a significant, if not the main, beneficial feature of our approach.

Belief shocks as discount rate shocks. Our information-based theory is one potential
mechanism behind what the literature typically refers to as discount rate shocks. Specifically,
in the spirit of Cochrane (2011), it is well known that cash flow dynamics are not sufficient to
account for the behavior of asset prices; therefore, the residual - namely, discount rate shocks -
must be the key driver. The precise nature of these shocks, however, is less clear. For example,
shocks to expectations about firm cash flows, as in our framework, rather than to earnings
themselves, easily map into discount rate shocks. Therefore, the mechanism that we outline in
this paper is one potential theory of discount rate shocks themselves. To see this more clearly,
consider the expression for stock returns in equation (5) - there, both shocks to fundamentals
µit and shocks to beliefs eit drive variation in prices, and the latter leads to a disconnect between
fundamentals and prices.
    The same is true of the aggregate market return. To understand this, consider the following
representation of our model:

                                 µit = µt + µ̃it ,    µ̃it = µit − µt                           (13)
                                 eit = et + ẽit ,    ẽit = eit − et
                       
where µt ∼ N 0, π f σµ2 and et ∼ N (0, π e σe2 ), i.e., firm-level fundamentals and signals are each
composed of an aggregate component and an idiosyncratic one, where the latter is uncorrelated
across firms. To highlight the intuition, let’s consider for the moment the iid case of our model,



                                                 29
ρ = 0 (all the results go through in the general case). Then, from (5), we have

                                  ∆pit = ξψ (µit − µit−1 + eit − eit−1 )                                 (14)

and integrating across firms, the market return is
                            Z
                                ∆pit di = ∆pmt = ξψ (µt − µt−1 + et − et−1 )                             (15)

Just as in the firm level case, shocks to beliefs show up as discount rate shocks, in the sense
of moving market returns in ways that are unrelated to observed fundamentals. If beliefs were
uncorrelated, i.e., π e = 0, fluctuations in the market return would be purely due to fluctuations
in the common element of fundamentals.

Macroeconomic shocks. Of course, a number of additional mechanisms lead to time-varying
aggregate discount rates. For example, in any consumption-based asset pricing model, macroe-
conomics shocks to the stochastic discount factor of investors lead to aggregate movements in
asset prices potentially beyond those in fundamentals. While these types of shocks may be
responsible for the high variability in asset prices, there is reason to believe that they are not
the primary drivers of the cross-sectional differences in excess correlations that we examine
in this paper. For example, in the cross section of countries, there does not appear to be a
systematic relationship between the correlation of returns and macroeconomic volatility. To
reach this conclusion, we obtain data on annual real GDP and consumption per-capita for the
1980-2013 period from the World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) database for all
the countries in our sample.33 These are factors that are standard in many consumption-based
asset pricing models. We then regress return correlations on the standard deviation of the
growth rates of these two variables. While the volatility of growth rates is higher in countries
where return correlations are higher, the relationship is weak and not statistically significant, as
shown in Table 7. Our finding here is in line with those of Pindyck and Rotemberg (1993), who
find that macroeconomic variables (observed or latent) cannot account for observed cross-firm
correlations in the US, a result that seems to extend to other countries as well.34
  33
    For Israel, we could only obtain consumption data since 1995.
  34
    A few additional points: first, recall that our model and calibration strategy control for the correlation
in fundamentals; if it were indeed the case that heterogeneity in aggregate discount rate shocks was driving
variation in comovement across countries, and if these shocks also affected earnings, we might expect to see
a stronger connection between earnings correlations and return correlations. Second, it is not clear that this
theory would be independent from ours - for example, correlated news about aggregate factors that affect both
discount rates and earnings could be one reason that analysts produce correlated forecasts across firms.




                                                     30
                         Table 7: Return Correlations and Macroeconomic
                         Shocks
                                                                     (1)        (2)
                           st.dev(∆ per-capita GDP)                 2.795
                                                                   (2.572)
                           st.dev(∆ per-capita consumption)                    1.806
                                                                              (1.889)
                           R2                                        0.04       0.03
                           # Observations                             31         31
                         Notes: The regressand is the correlation of returns in each
                         country. Regressors and expected signs of coefficients are de-
                         scribed in Section 5.2. Standard errors in parentheses.


Empirical risk factors. Next, to further examine the role of discount rate shocks, we follow
the empirical finance literature and control for other factors that capture time-varying discount
rates and have proven to be important in pricing the cross-section of assets. Now, it is not
obvious that these factors are independent of our information-based mechanism. For example,
to the extent that investors are learning from news about these factors, they would embed an
information element as well. Thus, the ideal experiment would be to find variables that control
for these factors independently of information regarding the assets we study - namely, stock
prices. One example would be shocks to risk premia on assets other than equity. However, it
is not obvious what these variables might be, and whether they would be available across the
countries we study. Thus, we include a battery of common factors that at least at first glance
are not obviously related to our mechanism. To understand the tension, consider the most
common risk factor - namely, the market return. Continuing with the representation of our
model in expressions (13)-(15) and the iid case for simplicity, it is straightforward to rewrite
firm-level returns as:
                           ∆pit = ∆pmt + ξψ (µ̃it − µ̃it−1 + ẽit − ẽit−1 )

that is, firm-level returns consist of an exposure to the market return and an idiosyncratic
component. Clearly, controlling for the market return purges the data of our mechanism -
specifically, regressing firm returns on the market and examining the residuals would in theory
lead to a finding of zero correlation across firms, despite the fact that common information may
be playing an important role. Intuitively, as discussed above, correlated beliefs in part drive
the market return, and controlling for the latter rids the data of this component.35
    A similar relationship is not clear for other factors commonly employed in the literature.
These include the Fama and French (1993) factors (other than the market return) - the difference
  35
     This does not appear to be a bad approximation to the data. Regressing firm-level returns on the market
return constructed from our data and correlating the residuals gives an average correlation across countries that
is just about 0, ranging from -0.02 to a maximum of only 0.03.


                                                       31
between returns on diversified portfolios of small stocks and big stocks (SMB) and the difference
between returns on diversified portfolios of high book-to-market (value) stocks and low book-
to-market (growth) stocks (HML) - as well as the Carhart (1997) momentum factor, which
constitutes the difference between the returns on diversified portfolios of the winners and losers
of the past year (WML), and the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) aggregate liquidity factor.
Additionally, controlling for the risk-free rate captures any fluctuations in the pure rate of
time-preference, i.e., δ in our framework.
    To account for the common variation in discount rates captured by these factors, we project
firm-level returns on them and compute the cross-firm correlation of the residuals. To the extent
that our information-based mechanism interacts with these factors, our strategy here is likely
conservative, in the sense that we may understate the role of informational forces. Thus, it is
somewhat difficult to interpret the results in the absence of a deeper understanding of what
underlying risk factors these variables capture. However, our more limited goal here is simply to
assess the degree of excess return correlation that remains after controlling for them. Following
the arguments in Fama and French (2012) for the importance of local factors, for each country
in our dataset, we use region-specific factors provided by those authors.36 These include the risk
free rate, SMB, HML, and WML. The authors consider four regions: North America, Europe,
Asia Pacific, and Japan (where the last is a standalone). We assign the countries in our sample
to each of these regions.37 As regional data for the liquidity factor is not available, we use the
US liquidity factor throughout.38 We convert all factors into real US dollars using the US CPI.
    For each firm, we run monthly regressions of returns on these factors for the entire period
of study and compute the residual at the monthly level. For comparability to our baseline
results, we then aggregate the residuals to an annual level and compute cross-firm correlations
using firm-pairs for which we have at least eight years of overlap. Figure 9 reproduces the plots
from Figure 1 using these ‘risk-adjusted’ return correlations. Table 8 compares the properties
of the adjusted correlations to the baseline and computes the correlation of the former with
fundamentals and forecasts. As is apparent from the figure, the excess comovement puzzle
remains. Risk-adjusted returns continue to exhibit excess correlation relative to fundamentals
and remain systematically related to the correlations in earnings forecasts. For example, Table 8
shows that the average risk-adjusted return correlation across the 31 countries is 0.33, somewhat
lower than the baseline of 0.46, but well in excess of the average correlation in fundamentals
(0.11). Moreover, countries that exhibit high return correlations are also characterized by
  36
     Obtained from Kenneth French’s website at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.
french/.
  37
     We group Peru and Chile with North America and Israel and South Africa with Europe. All reported results
are unaffected if we drop these four countries from the analysis.
  38
     Obtained from Lubos Pastor’s website at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/lubos.pastor/research/.



                                                     32
high adjusted correlations; the correlation of the two series is 0.67.39 Further, there remains
a strong relationship with the correlation of forecasts - Table 8 shows the correlation between
the two series to be 0.42 and statistically different from zero. Therefore, it seems reasonable to
conclude that discount rate shocks explain a part of the excess comovement puzzle, but ample
room remains for the information mechanism that we study in this paper.

                     Table 8: Firm-Level Correlations in Risk-Adjusted Returns
                                            Risk Adjusted            Baseline
                                            corr(returns)          corr(returns)
        Summary Statistics
        Mean                                       0.33                  0.46
        Max                                        0.59                  0.73
        Min                                        0.10                  0.20
        Std. Dev.                                  0.10                  0.15
                                               Baseline
                                             corr(returns)       corr(∆ earnings)       corr(forecasts)
        Correlations
        Risk Adjusted corr(returns)              0.67∗∗∗                0.44∗∗                0.42∗∗
       Notes: Table reports summary statistics of firm-level correlations of returns across 31 countries.
       Risk-adjusted returns are computed as the residuals from factor regressions as described in Section
       5.2. Data on returns and earnings growth are from Compustat. Data on earnings forecasts are from
       I/B/E/S. ***, ** denote statistical significance at the 1% and 5%-levels, respectively.


    Our findings in this section are perhaps not overly surprising in light of the existing empirical
literature. For example, as previously discussed, Pindyck and Rotemberg (1993) find a small
role for observable macroeconomic factors in driving comovement in the US. Barberis et al.
(2005) show that when stocks are added to the S&P 500 index, their correlation with the index
goes up; they point out that this phenomenon cannot be explained by common macroeconomic
factors, such as those that would affect discount rates - these factors should affect all stocks,
not just the subset that exhibit the change in comovement.40 Of course, it is not our goal to
a priori rule out aggregate shocks as a potential mechanism, but rather to point out that it
  39
      For a small number of mostly developed countries (15 in total, with China and India being the least
developed), we were able to obtain country-level estimates of the factors from http://homepage.sns.it/
marmi/Data_Library.html for the same period of study (with the exception of China for which data becomes
available in July 2000). Using these, the qualitative picture remains similar. Although the average correlation
falls a bit further from 0.31 to 0.21 for this set of countries, it remains well above that in fundamentals. Notably,
this is particularly the case in the two emerging markets, China and India, where the adjusted return correlations
are 0.65 and 0.27, respectively. Further, for the 15 countries, the correlation between their adjusted values and
the baseline is quite high at 0.67.
   40
      Barberis et al. (2005) interpret their findings as pointing to the role of frictions or ‘sentiments’ among
irrational, or completely uninformed, traders. Although similar in spirit to our findings, recall that we are
examining the beliefs of what are presumably fairly sophisticated agents.

                                                          33
                                     0.8                                                                                                         0.8

                                     0.7                                                                                                         0.7
   Correlation of Residual Returns




                                                                                                               Correlation of Residual Returns
                                     0.6        CHN                                                                                              0.6                                     CHN

                                                           IND                                                                                                                                   IND
                                     0.5                                                                                                         0.5
                                                            ESP                                                                                                                                ESP

                                     0.4         ISR  DNK
                                                       CHL
                                                           NOR
                                                          ZAF                                                                                    0.4                         ZAF NOR DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                     CHL          ISR
                                                     NLDNZL
                                                        PER
                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                                                                        NLD              PER
                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                HKG      AUTBEL                                                                                                           HKG  BEL   AUT
                                                 KORCHE PHL                                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                    KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                      PHL
                                     0.3         GBR FIN                                                                                         0.3             GBR                FIN
                                                 SGPAUS SWE                                                                                                                  AUS MEX SGP SWE
                                                CANFRA
                                               THA  MEX                                                                                                                          THA CANFRA
                                                   JPN                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                MYS DEU                                                                                                                           MYS      DEU
                                     0.2                                                                                                         0.2

                                     0.1       USA                                                                                               0.1               USA


                                      0                                                                                                           0
                                           0         0.1     0.2       0.3     0.4   0.5     0.6   0.7   0.8                                           0   0.1         0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                                   Correlation of ∆ Earnings                                                                           Correlation of Earnings Forecast


                 Figure 9: Firm-Level Correlations in Risk-Adjusted Returns, Earnings, and Forecasts

has been difficult to measure this phenomenon in the data, and so an information-based theory
is worth considering. Our findings in this section suggest that modeling the two in tandem
may well be necessary for a comprehensive explanation of excess comovement and asset price
behavior more generally.


5.3                                    Informed Traders and Analysts
Throughout our analysis, we have used analyst information to proxy for the information sets of
informed investors. A potential concern may be the degree to which analyst forecasts actually
reflect the information set of a typical informed investor. Notice that for our mechanism to be
at work, it is not necessarily the case that investors need to purchase this information directly
from analysts. Investors, like analysts, forecast firms’ earnings based on available information.
To the extent that various types of sophisticated market participants use similar sources of
information to form beliefs, the relevant information sets will contain considerable overlap.
Unfortunately, we don’t have direct data on a broader set of investor beliefs and so rely on
analyst data as what we hope is a useful proxy. We would argue that this represents some
progress, since we are able to directly measure beliefs for an important subset of investors
across a large set of firms and countries.
    That being said, we note that many investors of all types turn to analysts as a source of
information. For example, institutional investors routinely purchase analyst reports and in
fact annually rank analyst team performances (see, e.g., www.institutionalinvestor.com).
These investors include mutual, hedge, pension, sovereign wealth, and endowment funds, as
well as securities firms, private equity, insurance companies and commercial banks. Simi-
larly, retail (individual) investors acquire analyst information via standard websites such as


                                                                                                          34
finance.yahoo.com, bloomberg.com, and seekingalpha.com. Thus, the evidence suggests
that even sophisticated investors benefit from acquiring detailed information from analysts and
incorporate this information into their beliefs. For example, Asquith et al. (2005) find that
investors react to news that they obtain from analysts, and in particular, to information that
is contained in the analysts’ detailed reports over the summary statistics. Similarly, Green
(2006) finds that early access to analyst recommendation changes enables profitable trades for
brokerage firm clients.
    Given that our analysis builds centrally on analyst forecasts, it is useful to understand
how analysts arrive at these forecasts. Ramnath et al. (2008) offer a comprehensive review of
the analyst literature and a number of insights from the analyst sphere. The authors argue
that analysts rely on the following sources to arrive at earning forecasts at different horizons,
recommended stock prices and buy/sell recommendations: (i) past earnings, (ii) other infor-
mation from SEC filings, (iii) industry information, (iv) macroeconomic information, and (v)
direct communication with management. In addition to directly purchasing analyst informa-
tion, given that many of these categories are publicly available, it seems plausible that there
is overlap in the information of analysts and other sophisticated investors, so that the analyst
forecasts on which we rely contain valuable insights into a broader set of investor information.
    Another avenue would be to include traders with orthogonal information sets in our theory.
For example, many information-based models of stock prices include heterogeneous information
about a single stock across investors, along with noise (or liquidity) traders that prevent the
price from being perfectly revealing, elements that we abstract from.41 Our data suggest that
security analysts produce correlated information and supply that information to presumably
fairly sophisticated market participants who then act on it. In this sense, we have a direct
measure of the correlation of beliefs on the part of ‘informed’ traders, independent of the
actions of noise traders.42 On the other hand, extending our framework in this direction along
with our detailed data may provide further insights on our mechanism, and would certainly
broaden the model to match additional features of asset price data.43 Interestingly, recent work
by Hassan and Mertens (2011) shows that small correlated errors on the part of near-rational
agents with otherwise dispersed information can lead to high stock price volatility, but that
  41
      Veldkamp (2006) is a closely related example.
  42
      It could be the case that the information of our informed traders is in part due to the actions of noise traders
if the informed traders learn from the market price, which reflects noise trader demand. On the other hand, as
previously pointed out, this channel has been shown in related contexts to be quantitatively small, e.g., David
et al. (2014b). We revisit the question of exactly why these agents exhibit correlated beliefs in Section 5.4.2.
   43
      For example, it would be fairly straightforward to add noise traders alone, and perform a fitting exercise by
calibrating the common component of their demand across stocks to exactly match the correlation of returns.
In this case, the interpretation of our findings in this paper is exactly the degree of comovement that would
remain in the absence of these traders. The difference between our predicted return correlation and the data is
entirely attributable to noise traders, who in this sense, play the role of a residual.


                                                         35
small common noise trading shocks do not exhibit the same effects.44


5.4     Alternative Explanations
In this paper, we have argued that differences in the correlation of beliefs about firm fundamen-
tals across countries play an important role in determining the cross-section of excess return
comovement and consequently, a portion of the variation in aggregate stock market volatil-
ity. Of course, as discussed in Section 1, there are alternative explanations for these patterns,
including, for example: differences in the quality of institutions and the strength of property
rights, capital account openness, a lack of firm-level transparency or ‘opaqueness’, and limits
to arbitrage.
    In light of the large existing literature, it is important to verify whether differences in the
correlation of beliefs hold significant explanatory power for return comovement and aggregate
market volatility after controlling for variables that pertain to the alternative theories described
above. To achieve that task, we begin by regressing the correlation of returns against our
main variable of interest: the correlation of earnings forecasts. We expect that the coefficient
estimate of this regression is positive. Since returns should reflect news about future earnings,
we further add to the regression the correlation of earnings growth and anticipate that the
coefficient estimate is positive.45 We then account for the alternative theories suggested by the
existing literature.
    First, as suggested by Li et al. (2004), we control for the country’s degree of openness
using the widely-used openness index from Chinn and Ito (2006), which covers all countries
in our dataset throughout the entire period of study.46 A higher value of this index, which
ranges between 0 and 1, implies a higher degree of openness of the capital account, which may
be associated with lower comovement and market volatility. Hence, one would hypothesize a
negative coefficient estimate in this case. Second, following Morck et al. (2000), we control for
the quality of institutions using the average Control of Corruption Index provided by the World
Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators Database for the entire period of study.47 The index,
  44
     In a related point, as just discussed, we assume that analyst information is trader information, or at least
that the former is a reasonable proxy for the latter. If only a small piece of the correlated information is
actually used by traders, but they act ‘near-rationally’ as in the model of Hassan and Mertens (2011), the
common component we measure could be one potential force behind their mechanism.
  45
     Notice that including these two factors adheres rather closely to our theoretical framework and empirical
approach above. One key difference is that our more structural theory demonstrates that the assumption of a
constant coefficient from this regression across countries may be problematic; see, for example, expression (12).
  46
     Robustness analysis using the index of openness by Quinn (2003), which spans years until 2004, yields
quantitatively similar results. We opt for the Chinn-Ito Index in the baseline analysis due to the longer coverage.
  47
     Our results are robust to using a host of alternative measures of the quality of institutions, including
indices of the Rule of Law, Voice and Accountability, Political Stability and Absence of Violence/Terrorism,
Government Effectiveness, and Regulatory Quality, all of which are provided by the same database. These


                                                        36
which is based on surveys, reflects perceptions of the extent to which public power is exercised
for private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as ‘capture’ of
the state by elites and private interests. It ranges between -2.5 and 2.5, with higher values
denoting strong governance. Therefore, we hypothesize a negative coefficient estimate. Third,
given the findings of Jin and Myers (2006), we control for the degree of firm-level transparency
using the average Extent of Director Liability Index provided by the World Bank’s Doing
Business Database for the 2004-2013 period.48 The index measures minority shareholders’
ability to sue and hold interested directors liable for prejudicial related-party transactions, and
in particular, reflects the availability of legal remedies within this context. It ranges between 0
and 10, with higher values denoting stronger governance. Therefore, we hypothesize a negative
coefficient estimate. Fourth, in line with Bris et al. (2007), who find that binding short-sale
restrictions correlate with return comovement, we control for the average stock market turnover
ratio provided by the WDI database for the 1998-2012 period. The turnover ratio is the total
value of shares traded during the period divided by the average market capitalization for the
period. Average market capitalization is calculated as the average of the end-of-period values
for the current and previous periods. Higher values of turnover typically suggest greater market
liquidity and hence fewer trading frictions, or limits to arbitrage. Therefore, we hypothesize a
negative coefficient estimate.
    Finally, a large body of work has established that return comovement and aggregate volatil-
ity are higher in less developed economies. To check whether the degree of development has a
direct effect on comovement, conditional on the various measures of market frictions described
above which vary systematically across rich and poor countries, we include the average of the
log of real gross domestic product (GDP) during the 1998-2013 period to the regression and
hypothesize that it earns a negative coefficient.49

5.4.1    Empirical Results

We begin by regressing the correlation of returns against the main variable of interest: the
correlation of earnings forecasts. Column (1) in Table 9 shows a highly statistically significant
coefficient estimate of 0.897 and an R2 of 0.31. The strength of the relationship is not surprising
variables essentially extend the measures used by Morck et al. (2000) and employed by La Porta et al. (1998)
and La Porta et al. (1999) for previous decades. As in those papers, since the measures are highly collinear with
each other and since we only have data for 31 countries, we only include one variable at a time so as to not run
out of degrees of freedom.
   48
      Our results are robust to using a host of alternative measures of opaqueness, including indices of the Extent
of Disclosure, Ease of Shareholder Suits, and Strength of Minority Investor Protection, all of which are provided
by the same database.
   49
      GDP data in constant US dollars are from the WDI Database. We find similar results using GDP in current
US dollars.



                                                        37
                        Table 9: The Cross-Section of Return Correlation
                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)
                     corr(forecasts)                  0.897***     0.749***    0.548**
                                                       (0.248)      (0.229)    (0.246)
                     corr(∆ earnings)                              1.368***    1.191**
                                                                    (0.491)    (0.527)
                     Extent of director liability                              -0.018*
                                                                               (0.010)
                     Corruption control                                         -0.039
                                                                               (0.042)
                     Chinn-Ito openness                                          0.115
                                                                               (0.133)
                     Turnover ratio                                             -0.002
                                                                               (0.047)
                     Log per capita GDP                                         -0.008
                                                                               (0.046)
                     R2                                   0.31       0.46         0.57
                     # Observations                        31         31           31
                    Notes: The regressand is the average cross-firm correlation of stock
                    returns in each country. Regressors and expected signs of coeffi-
                    cients are described in Section 5.4. *, **, *** denote significance at
                    the 10%, 5%, and 1%-levels, respectively. Standard errors in paren-
                    theses.


in light of the right panel of Figure 1. In column (2) we add the correlation of earnings growth
to the regression. The coefficient estimate on the forecast variable falls slightly to 0.749 and
maintains its statistical significance at the 1% level. Earnings growth appears important in
driving return correlations as well; the coefficient estimate is 1.368 and is statistically significant
at the 1% level. Our model predicts that these two variables are key in explaining differences
in return comovement, so the R2 of 0.46 that arises from the regression is somewhat reassuring
of our theory.
    Column (3) shows that forecast correlations continue to play a key role in explaining differ-
ences in return comovement after controlling for the five additional variables described above.
The coefficient estimate on forecast correlation again falls slightly to 0.548 and it is statistically
significant at the 5% level. In other words, the significant effect of the correlation of information
that we measure is robust to the presence of these various factors. Similarly, the coefficient
estimate on earnings growth correlation falls to 1.191 and it is statistically significant at the
5% level. Finally, among the variables that aim to measure different frictions across countries,
higher accountability is associated with lower return comovement. In particular, the coefficient
estimate on the Director Liability Index is negative and statistically significant at the 10%
level. The remaining coefficient estimates are not individually statistically different from zero,
although they jointly add non-trivial explanatory power to the regression as seen in the R2 ’s.

                                                     38
                           Table 10: The Cross-Section of Market Volatility
                                                          (1)         (2)           (3)
                       corr(forecasts)                 0.503***    0.466***     0.300***
                                                        (0.115)     (0.117)      (0.105)
                       corr(∆ earnings)                              0.340       0.393*
                                                                    (0.250)      (0.224)
                       Extent of director liability                               -0.006
                                                                                 (0.004)
                       Corruption control                                         -0.002
                                                                                 (0.018)
                       Chinn-Ito openness                                          0.026
                                                                                 (0.056)
                       Turnover ratio                                              0.026
                                                                                 (0.020)
                       Log per capita GDP                                         -0.032
                                                                                 (0.020)
                       R2                                0.40         0.43         0.69
                       # Observations                     31           31           31
                     Notes: The regressand is the standard deviation of aggregate stock
                     market returns in each country. Regressors and expected signs of
                     coefficients are described in Section 5.4. *, **, *** denote signifi-
                     cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%-levels, respectively. Standard errors
                     in parentheses.


    A similar picture emerges from the exercises that analyze the determinants of aggregate stock
market volatility. The three columns in Table 10 contain the same set of regressions described
above, where the regressand now corresponds to the standard deviation of aggregate returns
in each country. In this case, the coefficient estimate of the forecast correlation remains highly
statistically significant throughout all the exercises; the remaining coefficients are typically not
statistically different from zero, though again, they jointly add significant explanatory power
to the regression.
    Our empirical results suggest that belief correlations are critical in understanding differences
in comovement and aggregate volatility across countries. However, we do not interpret our find-
ings as implying that existing theories emphasizing the roles of institutional quality, opaqueness,
capital account openness, limits to arbitrage, or additionally, macroeconomic volatility, fail to
explain differences in comovement or stock market volatility.50 In fact, these factors may be
captured to some extent by our measures of fundamental and/or belief correlations.
    For example, it is clear that macroeconomic volatility should be reflected by the correlation
in fundamentals - both point to a more sizable aggregate component in fundamentals. Further-
more, smaller countries may be more specialized in the production of goods and services that
  50
    See Diebold and Yilmaz (2008), among others, for evidence that stock market volatility is higher in countries
with more volatile fundamentals.


                                                       39
span fewer industries. Shocks to these important sectors may therefore have economy-wide im-
plications and result in higher macroeconomic volatility. For example, resource-rich economies
find a large fraction of their firms interacting with the resource-producing sector and are there-
fore exposed to the large shocks this sector encounters. Similarly, if the firms that operate in
these sectors dominate the stock market in each country, earnings comovement may be higher.
Finally, fundamentals may be more correlated in countries where stock markets are made up
of very few firms, or if a few large firms dominate the market capitalization.
    Indeed, in exercises not reported in the paper, we additionally control for each country’s
standard deviation of real (or nominal) GDP growth rate over the period of study, geographical
size (in square kilometers) or population size, Herfindahl index of industry concentration, frac-
tion of rents obtained from natural resources, average number of listed firms, and Herfindahl
index of firm concentration in the stock market. The inclusion of these controls renders the
coefficient estimate on fundamentals correlation statistically insignificant, which suggests that
differences in these variables may be responsible for differences in fundamentals comovement.
However, the coefficient estimate of the key indicator of interest - the correlations of forecasts
- remains highly statistically significant, which speaks to the robustness of this variable in
explaining cross-country differences in return comovement.

5.4.2   Interpretation: why does belief correlation vary?

Given these results, it makes sense to take a step back and consider why exactly the correlation
of beliefs varies across countries. Consider, for example, a micro-foundation for the corre-
lated component of information such as that in Veldkamp (2006): with endogenous information
markets characterized by high fixed costs of discovery and low marginal cost of replication,
a strategic complementarity is introduced through the market price of information - namely,
in equilibrium, information suppliers (analysts) provide the highest value signals (those that
are informative for multiple assets) and investors cluster on these signals as they are the most
inexpensive. To the extent that the costs of discovery, or the benefits, vary across countries,
this may go some way in explaining the patterns we uncover. For example, where firm-level
information is costlier to acquire, due perhaps to lower transparency and/or lower reporting
requirements, information production may be more concentrated. In countries where macroe-
conomic instability is high or institutions are weak, the analyst understands that the individual
firm’s fundamentals are not accurate predictors of the cash flows that investors will obtain
from that firm, due, for example, to the high risk of asset expropriation by the government or
a lack of incentive on the part of the firm’s management to rebate cash flows in the absence
of adequate punishment for reneging. In this case, the analyst may not spend her limited re-
sources to acquire individual information about each firm, but may instead spend them to best

                                               40
predict aggregate variables in the country in question. This may generate a higher correlation
in beliefs/forecasts.51
    These potential mechanisms are clearly related to the measures of institutional quality
examined by the literature. In this sense, some of these alternative theories may interact
with ours, and are potentially complementary - namely, the varying quality of institutions,
firm-level transparency, etc., may be among the underlying forces leading to differences in the
commonality of information and beliefs. To explore this relationship in more detail, in Table 11
we directly regress our indicator - forecast correlations - on the measures of institutions already
described. The results demonstrate that forecast correlations indeed vary systematically with
institutional characteristics. In fact, information seems to be more correlated in countries that
are characterized by lower political stability and regulatory quality, both measures of the quality
of institutions in a country, as well as in countries where firm behavior is more opaque, i.e.,
ease of shareholder suit and investor protection are lower. Thus, our results show that there
may be a direct link between the quality of institutions, broadly defined, and the specificity of
information that we measure. It would be fruitful for future research to focus on understanding
the information sets that sophisticated market participants rely on and the factors that they
utilize in forecasting future firm-level performance.

                     Table 11: Institutions and the Correlation of Information
                                       Political    Regulatory     Shareholder      Investor
                                       Stability     Quality           Suit        Protection
                 Coefficient           -0.040**      -0.049**        -0.018*        -0.020**
                 (Standard Error)       (0.018)       (0.024)        (0.009)         (0.010)
                 R2                       0.14          0.13           0.12            0.13
                 # Observations            31            31             31              31
                Notes: The regressand is the average cross-firm correlation of analyst forecasts
                of earnings per share in each country. Regressors and expected signs of coeffi-
                cients are described in Section 5.4.2. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%,
                5%, and 1%-levels, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses.




6        Conclusion
In this paper, we have examined the role of correlated beliefs in leading to excess comovement
in stock prices, which is particularly stark in poor and emerging markets. Our key innovation
is to look directly to agents’ information, in the form of equity market analyst forecasts. We
use a simple theoretical framework to demonstrate that correlated beliefs on the level of what
    51
     As one piece of direct evidence of this mechanism, Dang et al. (2014) show that firm-level news comoves
more in countries with weaker institutional environments, with the interpretation that institutional quality
affects the incentives for firm-specific information production.

                                                       41
we observe in the data can lead to realistic patterns in return correlations - both in levels and
the cross-section across countries. We explore the consequences of this finding for aggregate
stock market volatility.
     We have touched on a number of potential directions for future work in the body of the
paper. These might include further exploring the I/B/E/S dataset, which contains additional
variables that may be useful in a similar vein - namely, to directly measure agents’ information,
which is typically not observed by the econometrician. A more comprehensive modeling of
discount rates and a strict accounting of their role versus the information channel we focus on
would be fruitful, if challenging, as would further investigating the implications of our findings
on market volatility for investment decisions and the international allocation of capital. For
example, David et al. (2014a) show that differences in return volatility across countries plays
a role in leading to differences in the real return to capital. Finally, our theory does not take
a stand on the precise source of correlated information or the variation across countries - large
fixed costs of information production, similar inputs into the information production process,
i.e., relying on common news, or on a common interpretation of that news - these are issues
that are worth understanding.


References
Asquith, P., M. B. Mikhail, and A. S. Au (2005): “Information content of equity analyst
 reports,” Journal of financial economics, 75, 245–282.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000): “Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
 stock investment performance of individual investors,” Journal of Finance, 773–806.

Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and J. Wurgler (2005): “Comovement,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 75, 283–317.

Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey (1997): “Emerging Equity Market Volatility,” Journal of
 Financial Economics, 43, 29–77.

Bris, A., W. N. Goetzmann, and N. Zhu (2007): “Efficiency and the bear: Short sales and
 markets around the world,” The Journal of Finance, 62, 1029–1079.

Carhart, M. M. (1997): “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” The Journal of fi-
 nance, 52, 57–82.

Chan, K. and A. Hameed (2006): “Stock price synchronicity and analyst coverage in emerg-
 ing markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 80, 115–147.

                                               42
Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2012): “Is the Volatility of the Market Price of Risk Due
 to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing?” The American Economic Review, 102, 2859–2896.

Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito (2006): “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
 Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81, 163–192.

Cho, D. D., J. Russell, G. C. Tiao, and R. Tsay (2003): “The Magnet Effect of Price Lim-
 its: Evidence from High-Frequency Data on Taiwan Stock Exchange,” Journal of Empirical
 Finance, 10, 133–168.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011): “Presidential address: Discount rates,” The Journal of Finance, 66,
 1047–1108.

Crawford, S. S., D. T. Roulstone, and E. C. So (2012): “Analyst initiations of coverage
 and stock return synchronicity,” The Accounting Review, 87, 1527–1553.

Dang, T. L., F. Moshirian, and B. Zhang (2014): “Commonality in News Around the
 World,” Journal of Financial Economics.

Dasgupta, S., J. Gan, and N. Gao (2010): “Transparency, Price Informativeness, and
 Stock Return Synchronicity: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
 Analysis, 45, 1189–1220.

David, J. M., E. Henriksen, and I. Simonovska (2014a): “The Risky Capital of Emerging
 Markets,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

David, J. M., H. A. Hopenhayn, and V. Venkateswaran (2014b): “Information, Misal-
 location and Aggregate Productivity,” NBER Working Paper.

Diebold, F. X. and K. Yilmaz (2008): “Macroeconomic Volatility and Stock Market Volatil-
  ity, worldwide,” NBER Working Paper.

Durnev, A., R. Morck, B. Yeung, and P. Zarowin (2003): “Does Greater Firm-Specific
 Return Variation Mean More or Less Informed Stock Pricing?” Journal of Accounting Re-
 search, 41, 797–836.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds,” Journal of financial economics, 33, 3–56.

——— (2012): “Size, value, and momentum in international stock returns,” Journal of financial
 economics, 105, 457–472.


                                            43
Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos (2005): “Shareholder investment horizons and
 the market for corporate control,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 135–165.

Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, P. Matos, R. Patgiri, and Z. Rehman (2012): “Payout policy
 choices and shareholder investment horizons,” Review of Finance, rfr040.

Green, T. C. (2006): “The value of client access to analyst recommendations,” Journal of
 Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 41, 1–24.

Hameed, A., R. Morck, J. Shen, and B. Yeung (2010): “Information, Analysts, and
 Stock Return Comovement,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harvey, C. (1995): “The Cross-Section of Volatility and Autocorrelation in Emerging Mar-
 kets,” Finanzmarkt und Portfolio Management, 9, 12–34.

Hassan, T. A. and T. M. Mertens (2011): “The Social Cost of Near-Rational Investment,”
 Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hou, K., L. Peng, and W. Xiong (2013): “Is R2 a measure of market inefficiency,” Un-
 published working paper. Ohio State University, City University of New York, Princeton
 University, and National Bureau of Economic Research.

Israelsen, R. D. (2015): “Does Common Analyst Coverage Explain Excess Comovement?”
  in Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Jin, L. and S. C. Myers (2006): “R 2 around the world: New theory and new tests,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 79, 257–292.

La Porta, R., F. L. de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): “Law and
  Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113–1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1999): “The Quality
  of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15, 222–79.

Lee, D. W. and M. H. Liu (2011): “Does more information in stock price lead to greater or
  smaller idiosyncratic return volatility?” Journal of Banking & Finance, 35, 1563–1580.

Li, K., R. Morck, F. Yang, and B. Yeung (2004): “Firm-Specific Variation and Openness
  in Emerging Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 658–669.

Liu, M. H. (2011): “Analysts? incentives to produce industry-level versus firm-specific infor-
  mation,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 46, 757–784.

                                             44
Mondria, J. (2010): “Portfolio choice, attention allocation, and price comovement,” Journal
 of Economic Theory, 145, 1837–1864.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer, R. W. Vishny, M. Shapiro, and J. M. Poterba (1990): “The
 stock market and investment: is the market a sideshow?” Brookings papers on economic
 Activity, 157–215.

Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu (2000): “The Information Content of Stock Markets:
 Why do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements?” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 58, 215–260.

——— (2013): “R 2 and the Economy,” Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ., 5, 143–166.

Pástor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2003): “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 111, 642–685.

Pindyck, R. S. and J. J. Rotemberg (1993): “The Comovement of Stock Prices,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1073–1104.

Piotroski, J. D. and D. T. Roulstone (2004): “The influence of analysts, institutional
  investors, and insiders on the incorporation of market, industry, and firm-specific information
  into stock prices,” The Accounting Review, 79, 1119–1151.

Quinn, D. P. (2003): “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 1890-1999:
 A Synoptic View,” International Journal of Finance & Economics, 8, 189–204.

Ramnath, S., S. Rock, and P. Shane (2008): “The financial analyst forecasting literature:
 A taxonomy with suggestions for further research,” International Journal of Forecasting, 24,
 34–75.

Veldkamp, L. L. (2006): “Information Markets and the Comovement of Asset Prices,” The
 Review of Economic Studies, 73, 823–845.




                                               45
Appendix

                 Table 12: Compustat - Returns and Earnings
      Country   Obs.    corr(returns)   corr(∆ earnings)   std(market returns)
      AUS       8144        0.34              0.11                0.20
      AUT        711        0.48              0.15                0.27
      BEL       1088        0.50              0.19                0.25
      CAN       2661        0.22              0.07                0.17
      CHE       2342        0.42              0.12                0.20
      CHL       1326        0.67              0.14                0.28
      CHN       17675       0.73              0.06                0.45
      DEU       6049        0.41              0.11                0.23
      DNK       1653        0.45              0.13                0.27
      ESP        871        0.57              0.18                0.29
      FIN       1200        0.57              0.13                0.29
      FRA       6317        0.42              0.10                0.23
      GBR       15749       0.23              0.07                0.19
      HKG       2279        0.27              0.07                0.22
      IND       12933       0.50              0.16                0.41
      ISR       2102        0.63              0.06                0.35
      ITA       1582        0.70              0.14                0.31
      JPN       36713       0.35              0.10                0.18
      KOR       6571        0.45              0.08                0.33
      MEX        845        0.42              0.11                0.27
      MYS       9420        0.26              0.06                0.19
      NLD       1424        0.54              0.11                0.27
      NOR       1560        0.62              0.18                0.33
      NZL        945        0.39              0.14                0.20
      PER        625        0.69              0.15                0.37
      PHL       1784        0.51              0.15                0.37
      SGP       5663        0.32              0.08                0.26
      SWE       2736        0.53              0.15                0.31
      THA       3565        0.42              0.05                0.25
      USA       57684       0.20              0.04                0.14
      ZAF       3286        0.44              0.17                0.27




                                        46
                                       Table 13: I/B/E/S - Forecasts and Earnings
     Country   Obs.    Analysts/firm   corr(forecasts)   std(forecasts)   corr(earnings)   std(earnings)   corr(∆ earnings)
     AUS       6935         6               0.28             0.47             0.22             0.56             0.20
     AUT        887         6               0.38             0.48             0.33             0.60             0.14
     BEL       1244         8               0.31             0.44             0.30             0.56             0.11
     CAN       7540         5               0.39             0.52             0.31             0.66             0.09
     CHE       2880         9               0.36             0.47             0.24             0.62             0.07
     CHL        813         4               0.38             0.49             0.31             0.56             0.06
     CHN       8243         4               0.43             0.45             0.26             0.59             0.13
     DEU       6181         9               0.46             0.48             0.36             0.65             0.10
     DNK       1536         6               0.38             0.47             0.31             0.61             0.12
     ESP       1759         13              0.49             0.50             0.42             0.63              0.21
     FIN       1640          8              0.37             0.46             0.19             0.62              0.09
     FRA       5504          9              0.42             0.45             0.32             0.55              0.12
     GBR       17458         6              0.15             0.48             0.13             0.54              0.13
     HKG       6515          9              0.25             0.46             0.22             0.60              0.09




47
     IND        5779         7              0.51             0.50             0.43             0.64              0.15
     ISR         368         4              0.52             0.47             0.40             0.60             −0.07
     ITA        2574        10              0.40             0.45             0.24             0.63              0.11
     JPN       38716         4              0.26             0.52             0.21             0.69              0.11
     KOR        8885         6              0.37             0.62             0.24             0.83              0.15
     MEX        1251         8              0.33             0.52             0.31             0.69              0.15
     MYS        4544         7              0.34             0.46             0.27             0.61              0.18
     NLD        2192        13              0.23             0.47             0.16             0.57              0.12
     NOR        2032         6              0.35             0.52             0.20             0.75              0.06
     NZL        1340         5              0.22             0.40             0.17             0.48              0.17
     PER         331         4              0.42             0.66             0.18             0.81              0.12
     PHL        1050         7              0.39             0.62             0.38             0.74              0.24
     SGP        3478         8              0.38             0.45             0.25             0.56              0.13
     SWE        3176         7              0.44             0.47             0.27             0.63              0.16
     THA        3719         6              0.33             0.70             0.22             0.80              0.10
     USA       72251         7              0.19             0.46             0.16             0.56              0.06
     ZAF        3031         5              0.29             0.48             0.25             0.53              0.17
          Table 14: Predicted Return Correlations

Country     ρ     πf     corr (Et [ait ])     \
                                            corr (∆pit )   corr (∆pit )
AUS        0.68   0.22        0.28             0.42           0.34
AUT        0.49   0.33        0.38             0.42           0.48
BEL        0.55   0.30        0.31             0.32           0.50
CAN        0.48   0.31        0.39             0.46           0.22
CHE        0.55   0.24        0.36             0.50           0.42
CHL        0.64   0.31        0.38             0.51           0.67
CHN        0.53   0.26        0.43             0.63           0.73
DEU        0.49   0.36        0.46             0.57           0.41
DNK        0.55   0.31        0.38             0.47           0.45
ESP        0.63   0.42        0.49             0.61           0.57
FIN        0.48   0.19        0.37             0.53           0.57
FRA        0.60   0.32        0.42             0.58           0.42
GBR        0.68   0.13        0.15             0.18           0.23
HKG        0.58   0.22        0.25             0.30           0.27
IND        0.73   0.43        0.51             0.72           0.50
ISR        0.44   0.40        0.52             0.62           0.63
ITA        0.53   0.24        0.40             0.58           0.70
JPN        0.50   0.21        0.26             0.31           0.35
KOR        0.47   0.24        0.37             0.48           0.45
MEX        0.26   0.31        0.33             0.34           0.42
MYS        0.51   0.27        0.34             0.42           0.26
NLD        0.66   0.16        0.23             0.34           0.54
NOR        0.46   0.20        0.35             0.47           0.62
NZL        0.62   0.17        0.22             0.31           0.39
PER        0.56   0.18        0.42             0.72           0.69
PHL        0.69   0.38        0.39             0.42           0.51
SGP        0.55   0.25        0.38             0.54           0.32
SWE        0.44   0.27        0.44             0.58           0.53
THA        0.66   0.22        0.33             0.54           0.42
USA        0.63   0.16        0.19             0.23           0.20
ZAF        0.66   0.25        0.29             0.36           0.44




                                48
      Table 15: Counterfactual Return Correlations
                                              \
                                           corr (∆pit )
Country   σµ2    πe     σe2    Baseline   π = πUe S σe2 = σe,U
                                            e              2
                                                               S

AUS       0.17   0.55   0.20     0.42       0.25        0.42
AUT       0.28   0.49   0.26     0.42       0.30        0.41
BEL       0.22   0.33   0.27     0.32       0.29        0.32
CAN       0.33   0.57   0.30     0.46       0.29        0.44
CHE       0.27   0.64   0.44     0.50       0.27        0.46
CHL       0.19   0.69   0.14     0.51       0.29        0.54
CHN       0.25   0.85   0.34     0.63       0.27        0.59
DEU       0.32   0.68   0.44     0.57       0.31        0.52
DNK       0.26   0.57   0.34     0.47       0.29        0.45
ESP       0.24   0.73   0.40     0.61       0.33        0.59
FIN       0.30   0.70   0.43     0.53       0.25        0.45
FRA       0.19   0.77   0.18     0.58       0.30        0.59
GBR       0.16   0.22   0.12     0.18       0.21        0.19
HKG       0.24   0.34   0.36     0.30       0.26        0.29
IND       0.19   0.99   1.10     0.72       0.38        0.88
ISR       0.29   0.77   0.29     0.62       0.33        0.59
ITA       0.28   0.77   0.59     0.58       0.27        0.52
JPN       0.35   0.37   0.47     0.31       0.25        0.28
KOR       0.54   0.62   0.69     0.48       0.27        0.38
MEX       0.44   0.36   0.39     0.34       0.29        0.33
MYS       0.28   0.51   0.39     0.42       0.28        0.40
NLD       0.19   0.47   0.24     0.34       0.23        0.34
NOR       0.45   0.60   0.84     0.47       0.25        0.37
NZL       0.14   0.41   0.14     0.31       0.24        0.32
PER       0.45   0.99   0.43     0.72       0.24        0.57
PHL       0.29   0.45   0.43     0.42       0.32        0.41
SGP       0.22   0.72   0.26     0.54       0.27        0.52
SWE       0.32   0.75   0.40     0.58       0.28        0.51
THA       0.36   0.82   0.26     0.54       0.25        0.51
USA       0.19   0.28   0.20     0.23       0.23        0.23
ZAF       0.16   0.48   0.08     0.36       0.27        0.39




                               49
                                  Table 16: Country-Level Data for Robustness Exercises
                 Quarterly Frequency        Risk-Adjusted                           Horizon
           corr(returns) corr(∆ earnings)   corr(returns)          corr(forecasts)               std(forecasts)
                                                            6 Month 3 Month 1 Month       6 Month 3 Month 1 Month
     AUS      0.47            0.07              0.27         0.25     0.25       0.21      0.47    0.50     0.50
     AUT      0.51            0.03              0.33         0.58     0.57       0.44      0.55    0.52     0.54
     BEL      0.51            0.02              0.33         0.32     0.30       0.29      0.58    0.52     0.56
     CAN      0.39            0.03              0.26         0.36     0.33       0.31      0.54    0.56     0.61
     CHE      0.49            0.05              0.32         0.36     0.34       0.31      0.49    0.50     0.53
     CHL      0.56            0.01              0.39         0.17     0.22       0.26      0.45    0.47     0.47
     CHN      0.54            0.05              0.59         0.41     0.44       0.38      0.43    0.44     0.47
     DEU      0.43            0.06              0.22         0.47     0.37       0.30      0.51    0.50     0.55
     DNK      0.49            0.07              0.40         0.44     0.37       0.30      0.49    0.52     0.56
     ESP      0.48            0.08              0.45         0.46     0.41       0.38      0.51    0.51     0.58
     FIN      0.55            0.10              0.31         0.32     0.29       0.26      0.48    0.51     0.52
     FRA      0.48            0.06              0.25         0.38     0.34       0.29      0.44    0.44     0.47
     GBR      0.38            0.06              0.30         0.14     0.14       0.15      0.46    0.47     0.49




50
     HKG      0.39            0.05              0.32         0.27     0.26       0.25      0.49    0.49     0.50
     IND      0.56            0.05              0.53         0.45     0.43       0.39      0.50    0.54     0.55
     ISR      0.55            0.00              0.40         0.45     0.39       0.34      0.49    0.57     0.51
     ITA      0.56            0.15              0.35         0.35     0.28       0.26      0.45    0.46     0.54
     JPN      N aN            N aN              0.23         0.28     0.19       0.19      0.52    0.57     0.60
     KOR      N aN            N aN              0.32         0.33     0.29       0.26      0.62    0.61     0.64
     MEX      0.51            0.23              0.25         0.31     0.32       0.34      0.51    0.61     0.62
     MYS      0.33            0.03              0.21        0.34      0.29       0.25      0.48    0.47     0.50
     NLD      0.48            0.18              0.35        0.21      0.17       0.22      0.46    0.50     0.51
     NOR      0.62            0.10              0.40        0.31      0.27       0.22      0.52    0.54     0.60
     NZL      0.55            0.08              0.36        0.21      0.21       0.20      0.42    0.45     0.46
     PER      0.49            0.05              0.36        −0.09     0.15       0.15      0.52    0.57     0.63
     PHL      0.44            0.05              0.31        0.45      0.43       0.33      0.60    0.65     0.57
     SGP      0.48            0.04              0.26        0.39      0.35       0.30      0.45    0.46     0.51
     SWE      0.54            0.06              0.28        0.39      0.36       0.33      0.50    0.51     0.59
     THA      0.31            0.02              0.25        0.29      0.27       0.23      0.69    0.68     0.67
     USA      0.20            0.01              0.10        0.19      0.18       0.18      0.48    0.50     0.53
     ZAF      0.50            0.08              0.40        0.28      0.28       0.26      0.47    0.50     0.51
