                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LABOR-FORCE HETEROGENEITY AND ASSET PRICES:
                      THE IMPORTANCE OF SKILLED LABOR

                                          Frederico Belo
                                            Xiaoji Lin
                                              Jun Li
                                           Xiaofei Zhao

                                       Working Paper 21487
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21487


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2015




We thank Philip Bond, John Boyd, Gianluca Clementi, Andres Donangelo, Bob Goldstein, Francois
Gourio, Alexander Michaelides (BI-CAPR workshop discussant), Vincenzo Quadrini, Miguel Palacios
(SFS discussant), Fabrizio Perri, Johan Walden (WFA discussant), Toni Whited, and Chen Xue for
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Minnesota,
the Society of Economic Dynamics (SED) 2014 meetings in Toronto, the Society of Financial Studies
(SFS) 2015 Finance Cavalcade in Atlanta, the Western Finance Association (WFA) 2015 meetings in
Seattle, the BI-CAPR 2015 workshop on Investment and Production Based Asset Pricing for comments.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Frederico Belo, Xiaoji Lin, Jun Li, and Xiaofei Zhao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor-Force Heterogeneity and Asset Prices: the Importance of Skilled Labor
Frederico Belo, Xiaoji Lin, Jun Li, and Xiaofei Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 21487
August 2015
JEL No. E13,E22,E23,E24,E44,G12

                                                ABSTRACT

We introduce labor-force heterogeneity in a neoclassical investment model. In the baseline model,
we highlight the fact that labor adjustment costs are higher for high skilled workers than for low skilled
workers. The model predicts that the negative hiring-expected return relation should be steeper in industries
that rely more on high skilled workers because firm's hiring responds less elastically to changes in
the discount rate when labor adjustment costs are higher. In an extended version of the model we show
that the previous prediction also holds in the presence of additional sources of labor-force heterogeneity
such as higher wage rigidity of high skilled workers. Empirically, we document that the negative hiring-expected
return relation is between 1.7 and 3.2 times larger in industries that rely more on high skilled workers,
than in industries that rely more on low skilled workers. This result is robust: it holds in U.S data,
in international data, across sub-samples, and in both firm-level and portfolio-level analyses. Taken
together, our results show that labor-force heterogeneity affects asset prices in financial markets.


Frederico Belo                                         Jun Li
Carlson School of Management                           University of Texas at Dallas
University of Minnesota                                800 West Campbell Road
321 19th Avenue South                                  Richardson, TX 75080
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                  Jun.Li3@utdallas.edu
and NBER
fbelo@umn.edu                                          Xiaofei Zhao
                                                       University of Texas at Dallas
Xiaoji Lin                                             800 W Campbell Road
Department of Finance                                  Richardson, TX 75080
Ohio State University                                  xiaofei.zhao@utdallas.edu
2100 Neil Ave
Columbus, OH, 43210
lin.1376@osu.edu
1     Introduction
Labor is not a homogenous input in firms’ production technology. There is a large
heterogeneity in the labor force - a high skilled worker (for example, an engineer) is a
different input from a low skilled worker (for example, a janitor). While low skilled workers
execute routine tasks and are relatively easier to hire and replace, high skilled workers
execute complex tasks and are costly to hire and replace. Given their different nature,
workers with different levels of skills play different roles in firms’ production processes, and
thus contribute differently for the properties of firms’ cash flows and hence firms’ value and
risk. In this paper, we examine the impact of labor-force heterogeneity on firms’ value and
risk in the cross section of publicly traded firms in the U.S., as well as in other international
markets.
   To establish the theoretical link between labor-force heterogeneity and asset prices in the
cross section, we introduce labor-force heterogeneity in the neoclassical investment model
proposed by Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch (2014) (henceforth BLB). Firms’ managers make
hiring and investment decisions to maximize the value of the firm, taking as given a stochastic
discount factor to value its endogeneous cash flows. There are labor market frictions: labor
hiring and firing is costly for firms, which we capture through an adjustment cost function.
There are two sources of aggregate risk: aggregate productivity (TFP) shocks, and aggregate
adjustment cost shocks. We then consider two industries that differ in the type of labor
force used in the production process: one industry uses high skilled workers (high skill
industry), whereas the other industry uses low skilled workers (low skill industry). Through
comparative statics, we use the theoretical model to obtain several empirical predictions
linking the firm’s hiring decisions and asset prices in the two industries, which we then test
in the data.
   The key difference between high skilled and low skilled workers that we emphasize in the
baseline specification of the model is that it is more costly to hire and fire a high skilled
worker than a low skilled worker, consistent with the empirical evidence that we discuss in
detail in the related literature section below (we examine other dimensions of labor-force
heterogeneity in an extended version of the model). This specification is natural because
the worker screening, selection, and hiring process is more difficult for jobs that require very
specialized skills given that these skills are not easy to identify. In addition, the training
of a high skilled worker is more costly because of the higher complexity of the tasks that
the worker has to perform. Furthermore, high skilled workers possess firm-specific capital
or firm-specific relationship with the firm, which makes it particularly costly for firms to
fire skilled workers because this would destroy firm-specific capital. This makes high skilled


                                               2
workers appear to have higher firing costs as well.
    Consistent with standard neoclassical theory of investment, the model predicts a negative
relation between the firm’s hiring rate and its expected stock return (risk premium). This
result is intuitive. Like any investment decision, labor adjustment costs make the firm’s
hiring decision to be forward looking: optimal hiring is determined by an intertemporal
trade-off between the marginal cost of hiring a worker today, and the marginal benefit given
by the expected risk adjusted present discounted value of the cash flows generated by the
new worker in the future. All else equal, hiring is then high when expected future cash flows
from an additional worker are high, or when discount rates (expected stock returns) are low.
   More important, the model makes the novel prediction that the negative hiring-expected
return relation is steeper in industries that rely more on high skilled workers. This is the
central prediction from the model that we test in the data. This result is also intuitive. Due
to the intertemporal nature of a firms’ hiring decision, the higher the labor adjustment costs
are, the less elastically hiring responds to changes in the discount rate (all else equal, the
risk adjusted benefit of hiring an additional worker goes down when the firm’s discount rate
goes up). Thus, when adjustment costs are higher, a given magnitude change in the hiring
rate corresponds to a higher magnitude change in the discount rate.1
   To test the model’s asset pricing predictions, we estimate the cross-sectional relation
between the firm’s hiring rate and expected stock returns across industries which differ in
the average skill level of its labor force (henceforth, high skill and low skill industries).
Thus, consistent with the empirical evidence, we assume that the industry average skill
level of its workers is positively correlated with the magnitude of labor adjustment costs
in the industry. We then classify an industry to be a low or high skill industry based on
the percentage of workers in that industry that are high skilled workers, using the Specific
Vocational Preparation (SVP) index from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT),
available from the Department of Labor, and data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program. We compute the percentage
of high skilled workers in an industry every year to keep track of technological change. Due
to the availability of the labor skill data, our main asset pricing tests are then performed for
the 1991 to 2012 period.
    The main empirical findings can be summarized as follows. In firm-level panel OLS
stock return predictability regressions using the firm’s lagged hiring rate as a predictor, we
show that the negative hiring-expected return relation is significantly steeper for firms in
high skill industries than for firms in low skill industries. In the baseline regression, the
   1
    Of course, in the model, hiring and discount rates are jointly determined in equilibrium, but this causal
interpretation is useful to organize ideas.



                                                     3
difference in the slope coefficient associated with the firm’s lagged hiring rate in the low
and high skill industries is both economically and statistically significant: a 20% increase in
the firm’s hiring rate (which roughly corresponds to a 20% increase in the size of the firm’s
workforce), is associated with a decrease of −2.3% in firms’ expected (future) stock return in
the low skill industry, and with a decrease of −3.9% in firm’s expected return in the high skill
industry. That is, the hiring-expected return negative relation is 1.7 times steeper in high
skill industries than in low skill industries. This difference in the slope coefficients increases
even more when we control for firm-fixed effects or for the effect of micro cap firms in the
results, in which case the negative hiring-expected return relation can be 3.2 times steeper
in high skill industries than in low skill industries.
    The results from the firm-level panel OLS regressions are in general confirmed when we
test the model’s predictions using a portfolio approach. We construct five one-way sorted on
firms’ labor hiring rate portfolios separately in low and high skill industries. In the baseline
portfolio analysis, we find that the hiring return spread, that is, the difference in average
returns of the portfolio of firms with currently low hiring rates relative to the portfolio of
firms with currently high hiring rates in the cross section, is considerably larger in high skill
industries than in low skill industries. In low skill industries, the hiring return spread is
about 2.7% per annum, and this value is only 1.1 standard errors from zero. In high skill
industries, the hiring return spread is about 8.6% per annum, and this value is more than
2.7 standard errors from zero. Thus, the hiring return spread is about three times larger in
high skill industries than in low skill industries.
   To help establish the robustness of the findings we perform several additional analysis.
First, we use international data for the G7 countries (France, Germany, Italy, UK, Canada,
Japan, but exclude the U.S.) and show that the negative hiring-expected return relation
is steeper (between 1.6 and 2.7 times steeper, depending on the specification) in high skill
industries than in low skill industries in these countries as well. Second, we show that the
inference from the firm-level panel OLS regressions is robust to the econometric procedure:
we obtain similar results using Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross sectional regressions. Third, the
main results hold when we extend the sample backwards to start in 1963 by assigning the
average industry level labor skill measure between 1991 and 2001 to all the years between
1963 and 1991. Finally, the negative hiring-expected return relation remains steeper in high
skill industries than in low skill industries even after controlling for several other return
predictors, although this last analysis is outside the scope of the theoretical analysis.2
   2
     In the online appendix, we show that our results are robust to using an alternative labor skill measure
based on firm-level R&D investment data, which we show to be positively correlated with our baseline
industry-level labor skill measure. We show that the negative hiring-expected return relation is also steeper
in industries that are more R&D intensive (high skill industry) than in low R&D intensive (low skill industry).


                                                      4
   The theoretical model makes several additional predictions which we also test in the
data. The model predicts that the negative hiring-expected return relation is not explained
by differential exposure to the market factor, that is, the unconditional capital asset pricing
model (CAPM) fails, especially in industries characterized by high labor adjustment costs.
The economic reason for this result is that the hiring return spread in the model is driven by
firms’ exposure to the aggregate adjustment cost shock. Because in the model the aggregate
stock market is almost entirely driven by aggregate productivity shocks that are uncorrelated
with the aggregate adjustment cost shock, the CAPM is unable to capture the difference in
the risk of the hiring portfolios. The predicted failure of the CAPM is more pronounced in
the high skill industry because the exposure of the hiring portfolios to the adjustment cost
shock is proportional to the magnitude of the labor adjustment costs, which are higher in
this industry. In addition, the mechanism in the model implies that the Sharpe ratio of the
hiring spread portfolio should be higher in high skill industries.
   Consistent with these predictions, we find that the unconditional CAPM cannot explain
the hiring return spread in the high skill industry. The CAPM performs reasonably well in
the low skill industry in which none of the portfolio’s alphas are significant. In the high skill
industry the CAPM generates large abnormal returns. In particular, the abnormal return
of the low minus high hiring portfolio is economically large, 10.4% per annum, which is
more than 3.1 standard errors from zero, and is even larger than the hiring return spread
itself (8.6%). The alpha of the hiring return spread portfolio in the high skill industry
is 8.1 percentage points larger than the alpha of the hiring return spread in the low skill
industry, and this difference is more than 2.5 standard errors from zero. Finally, the Sharpe
ratio of the hiring spread portfolio is about two times larger in the high skill industry than
in the low skill industry.
    Naturally, labor-force heterogeneity may affect asset prices through other channels as
well, not just due to differences in the labor adjustment cost channel that we examine in
the baseline model. In an extended version of the model we thus consider the following
two additional sources of labor-force heterogeneity, which are consistent with the evidence
from previous studies: (i) differences in the economic environment (demand/TFP volatility)
of the industries in which high skilled and low skilled workers operate, in particular, the
fact that demand and/or productivity shocks are more volatile in high skill industries; and
(ii) differences in the productivity and the wage rate process of high skilled and low skilled
workers, in particular, the fact that the wage rate of high skilled workers is higher and
smoother than the wage rate of low skilled workers. We show that while adding these
additional features allows us to improve the model fit on several dimensions (especially for
the fit of the model on the moments for real quantities), these features do not affect in a


                                               5
quantitatively important way the key testable predictions relating the firm’s hiring rate and
stock returns with different levels of labor skills that we obtain from the baseline model.
This result suggests that differences in the adjustment costs of low and high skilled workers
is a quantitatively important channel through which labor-force heterogeneity affects asset
prices in financial markets.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section
3 introduces labor-force heterogeneity in a neoclassical investment model with labor
adjustment costs to obtain testable predictions and organize the empirical analysis. Section
4 describes the asset prices, accounting, and labor market data used in our empirical tests.
Section 5 presents our main findings. Section 6 presents the results from several robustness
analysis. Section 7 introduces other sources of labor-force heterogeneity in the baseline
model. Finally, Section 8 concludes. A separate appendix with additional results and
robustness checks is posted online.


2       Related literature
Our analysis assumes that the magnitude of labor adjustment costs is positively correlated
with the worker’s labor skill level. In addition, the analysis in the extended model investigates
the impact of higher wage rigidity of high skilled workers on asset prices. These assumptions
have theoretical and empirical support. Hamermesh (1993) reviews a set of direct estimates
of the costs of adjusting labor, and shows evidence that it is more costly to replace a high
skilled worker than a low skilled worker.3 More recently, Dube, Freeman, and Reich (2010),
using a panel survey of California businesses in 2003 and 2008, establish that replacement
costs are substantial relative to annual wages, vary positively with the worker’s wage rate,
and are higher for professional and managerial (high skilled) workers than for blue collar and
manual labor workers (low skilled). Ochoa (2013), using data from the 1980 Employment
Opportunities Pilot Projects (EOPP), finds that the cost of hiring is positively associated
with labor skill of the new hire.
   Lagakos and Ordonez (2011) show that wages are smoothed relatively more in high skill
industries than in low skill industries. Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009, 2010) show
    3
    Additional empirical studies on the link between labor skills and magnitude of labor adjustment costs
include: Oi (1962), Mincer (1962), Shapiro (1986), Pfan and Vespagen(1989), Button (1990), Hammermesh
and Pfan (1996), Cappelli and Wilk, (1997), Dolfin (2006), Blatter, Muehlemann, Schenker (2012), among
others. For additional theoretical analysis, see, for example, Acemoglu (2001) and Caballero (2007). The
importance of labor adjustment costs is consistent with the theoretical work by Diamond (1982), Mortensen
(1982), and Pissarides (1985), and with the empirical work surveyed in Hamermesh and Pfann (1996) and
Bond and Van Reenen (2007).



                                                   6
that the cyclicality of wages is higher for low-income (less skilled) households than for high-
income (more skilled) households at all levels of the income distribution except for the top
1%, whose wages are much more cyclical than average. Additional studies documenting the
higher wage rigidity of high skilled workers include Campbell (1997), Caju, Fuss and Wintr
(2007), among others.
    Several recent studies emphasize the importance of labor frictions (labor adjustment
costs, search frictions, and/or wage rigidities) to understand asset prices, and the dynamics
of real macroeconomic variables. A non-comprehensive list of contributions is, for aggregate-
level analysis, Danthine and Donaldson (2002), Uhlig (2007), Merz and Yashiv (2007),
Petrosky-Nadeau, Zhang, and Khuen (2013), Favilukis and Lin (2015); for firm-level analysis,
Bloom (2009), BLB (2014), Khuen, Simutin and Wang (2014), Donangelo, Gourio, and
Palacios (2015). None of these papers consider explicitly heterogeneity in the labor-force as
we have here. Hall (2014) shows that in an economy with search and matching frictions, firms’
hiring decisions are affected by movements in discount rates, consistent with our approach.
This mechanism helps explain the high and persistent aggregate-level unemployment rates
during recessions. His work does not investigate the importance of the mechanism for
equilibrium risk premiums in the cross section.
   The focus on labor heterogeneity is related to early work by Kydland (1984), and more
recent work by Lustig, Syverson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011), Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2013), Ochoa (2013), and Donangelo (2014). Kydland (1984) incorporates labor-force
heterogeneity in an otherwise standard real business cycle model and shows that this
extension helps improve the fit of the model to the data. His work does not look at asset
prices. Lustig, Syverson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011) show that technological change
starting from 1970s stimulates the accumulation of firms’ organizational capital which in turn
leads to the secular change in the U.S. labor market reallocations. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2012) show that firms with more organizational capital are riskier (i.e., have higher average
stock returns) than firms with less organizational capital. Because organizational capital is
embodied in the firm’s labor force, their findings show that the characteristics of the labor
force have an impact on firms’ risk, a finding that is consistent with the main findings that
we report here.
    In a contemporaneous paper, Ochoa (2013) documents that firms in high labor skill
industries have higher returns than firms in low skilled labor industries. In contrast with
Ochoa (2013), our main empirical analysis focuses on the negative hiring-expected return
relation across industries with different labor skills levels, consistent with the approach in
the neoclassical theory of investment literature (see, for example, Li and Zhang (2010), for
a similar approach in the context of differences in investment (not hiring) frictions across


                                              7
firms). Donangelo (2014) shows that differences in labor mobility across industries, that is,
the flexibility of workers to walk away from employers in response to better opportunities,
leads to differences in risk premiums in the cross section. Our analysis focuses on a different
characteristic of the labor-force, differences in the average skill of workers. Thus, our work
is also related to the empirical literature on asset pricing which explores the predictability
of firm characteristics for stock returns (Fama and French, 2008, provide a survey of this
literature). We link the characteristics of the labor force (skilled labor) to expected returns,
thus helping us to understand the economic determinants of equilibrium risk premiums in
the cross section.
   The approach in this paper is also related to the literature that studies asset prices in
production economies (see, for example, Kogan (2001 and 2004), Zhang (2005), Tuzel (2009),
Imrohoroglu and Tuzel (2012), and Kogan and Papanikolaou (2013 and 2014)). In most of
these studies labor is assumed to be an homogenous input across firms. Finally, our work is
related to studies on the importance of human capital, a characteristic of the labor force that
is closely related to labor skills, for understanding equilibrium asset prices. References on the
relationship between human capital and asset returns go as far back as Mayers (1972) and
Fama and Schwert (1977). More recent work includes Santos and Veronesi (2006), Lustig
and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), Betermier, Jansson, Parlour and Walden (2012), Berk and
Walden (2013), and Palacios (2015). Different from the work in this literature, we link firm-
level labor variables to asset prices through the lens of a neoclassical model of investment,
thus focusing on the characteristics of the firms’ technologies and on its role to determine
the properties of the firm’s endogenous cash flows.


3       Hypotheses development
To guide the empirical analysis, we introduce labor-force heterogeneity in the neoclassical
model of investment proposed in BLB (we refer the reader to BLB for justification of the
standard model ingredients). We consider two different industries, which differ in the type
of workers used in the production process. The technology in the first industry uses high
skilled workers (high skill industry), while the technology in the second industry uses low
skilled workers (low skill industry).4 Here, we describe the general model which allows for
several forms of labor-force heterogeneity: differences in labor adjustment costs, worker’s
productivity, wage rate, and productivity shocks in the two industries. We then solve for
    4
    We focus on one type of worker in each industry for tractability and without loss of generality. In
practice, firms’ use both type or workers, which could generate interesting substitution effects. As we discuss
in the data section below, however, the fraction of high skill workers used in each industry is very persistent
in the data, suggesting that this substitution effect is not empirically very relevant.


                                                      8
equilibrium asset prices in the two industries in restricted versions of the model to understand
the incremental impact of each form of labor-force heterogeneity on asset prices.


3.1     Economic environment
Within a given industry i =low skill, high skill, the model is similar to the homogenous
economy of BLB. In each industry, there is a large number of firms that produce a
homogeneous good.

3.1.1   Technology

We focus on the optimal production decision problem of one firm in industry i (we suppress
any firm-specific subscripts to save on notation). The firm uses capital inputs Kt,i and
labor inputs Nt,i to produce output Yt,i , according to the following constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) technology:
                                        h                                   iθ/(1−1/φ)
                                           1−1/φ                      1−1/φ
                  Yt,i =   Zt,i Xt1−θ    αKt,i   + (1 − α) (λi Nt,i )                  ,    (1)

in which α > 0 controls the relative weight of the two inputs in the production process,
0 < θ ≤ 1 is the degree of returns to scale, and the parameter φ > 0 controls the elasticity
of substitution between physical capital and the total labor stock. When φ → 1 the CES
aggregator collapses to the Cobb-Douglas case, when φ → +∞ the two inputs are perfect
substitutes, and when φ → 0 the two inputs are perfect complements (Leontief). Xt is
aggregate productivity, and Zt,i is firm-specific productivity, the source of cross-sectional
heterogeneity within each industry. λi controls the average productivity of one worker in
industry i.
   The law of motion of the firm’s total labor force Nt,i is given by

                            Nt+1,i = (1 − δ n )Nt,i + Ht,i        0 < δ n < 1,              (2)

in which δn is the (constant) quit rate, the rate at which workers leave the firm for voluntary
reasons, and Ht,i is gross hires, which can be positive (hire) or negative (fire).
   Similarly, the law of motion of the firm’s capital stock Kt,i is given by

                             Kt+1,i = (1 − δ k )Kt,i + It,i       0 < δ k < 1.              (3)

where δ k is the capital depreciation rate, and It,i is gross investment, which can be positive
(investment) or negative (disinvestment).


                                                      9
   Both labor hiring and capital investment are subject to asymmetric nonconvex and
convex adjustment costs. The labor adjustment costs include training and screening of
new workers, advertising of job positions, disruption costs (output that is lost through time
taken to readjust the schedule and pattern of production) and separation costs (for example,
severance pay). Labor adjustment costs are specified by the following function:
                                 
                                                c+
                                                                 2
                                                           Ht,i
                                  b+ Y +        n,i
                                                                       Nt,i if Ht,i > 0
                                  n,i t,i       2         Nt,i
                                 
                                 
                         adj
                       CNt,i   =   0                                           if Ht,i = 0           (4)
                                 
                                                c−
                                                                 2
                                  b− Yt,i +               Ht,i
                                                n,i
                                                                       Nt,i if Ht,i < 0
                                 
                                    n,i          2         Nt,i

in which θn,i ≡ [c+      −      +      −
                  n,i , cn,i , bn,i , bn,i ] > 0 is a vector of constants that controls the size of labor
adjustment costs in industry i.
   Capital adjustment costs include planning and installation costs, learning the use of new
equipment, or the fact that production is temporarily interrupted. The capital adjustment
costs are specified by the following function:
                                                                      2
                                                       c+
                                                            
                                         +                      It,i
                                       bk Yt,i +                           Kt,i if It,i > 0
                                                       k
                                                        2       Kt,i
                                      
                                      
                       adj
                     CKt,i ≡ It,i +     0                                        if It,i = 0         (5)
                                                                     2
                                       b− Yt,i +
                                                      c−       It,i
                                                        k
                                                                            Kt,i if It,i < 0
                                      
                                         k             2        Kt,i


in which θk ≡ [c+     − + −
                 k , ck , bk , bk ] > 0 is a vector of constants that controls the size of the
capital adjustment costs. The capital adjustment cost parameters are the same in the two
industries because our focus is on labor-force heterogeneity. Note that we include investment
expenditures (It,i ) in this specification of capital adjustment costs.
   Adjustment costs are stochastic. The total adjustment cost function of the firm is given
by

                                                  adj     adj
                                               [CNt,i + CKt,i ]
                                      Ψt,i =                    ,                                    (6)
                                                      St
in which St is a stochastic variable that captures changes in the aggregate cost of adjusting
the inputs. We refer to St as an adjustment cost wedge and shocks to this wedge as an
adjustment cost shock.
    Finally, the firm also incurs fixed operating costs of production that are independent of
firm size, which are captured by Ft,i = fi Xt , with fi > 0. We scale the fixed operating costs
by aggregate productivity to allow for growth in the economy.




                                                     10
3.1.2   Stochastic processes

Aggregate productivity follows a random walk process with a drift

                                      ∆xt+1 = µx + σ x εxt+1 ,                             (7)

in which xt+1 = log(Xt+1 ), ∆ is the first-difference operator, εxt+1 is an independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) standard normal shock, and µx and σ x are the average growth
rate and conditional volatility of aggregate productivity, respectively.
   Firm-specific productivity follows the AR(1) process

                            zt+1,i = z̄(1 − ρz ) + ρz zt,i + σ z,i εzt+1,i ,               (8)

in which zt+1,i = log(Zt+1,i ), εzt+1,i is an i.i.d. standard normal shock that is uncorrelated
across all firms in the economy and independent of εxt+1 , and z̄, ρz , and σ z,i are the mean,
autocorrelation, and conditional volatility of firm-specific productivity, respectively.
   The aggregate adjustment cost wedge follows the AR(1) process

                                      st+1 = ρs st + σ s εst+1 ,                           (9)

in which st+1 = log(St+1 ), εst+1 is an i.i.d. standard normal shock that is independent of all
the other shocks in the economy, and ρs and σ s are the persistence and conditional volatility
of the aggregate adjustment cost wedge, respectively.
    Given the focus on the production side of the economy, we directly specify the stochastic
discount factor Mt,t+1 (used to value the firm’s cash flows arriving in period t + 1), as
well as the equilibrium stochastic wage rate, without explicitly modeling the consumer’s
problem. Firms are competitive and take these prices as given. The stochastic discount
factor (marginal utility) is a function of the two aggregate shocks in the economy and is
given by
                                           exp (−γ x ∆xt+1 − γ s ∆st+1 )
                    Mt,t+1 = exp (−rf )                                    ,         (10)
                                        Et [exp (−γ x ∆xt+1 − γ s ∆st+1 )]
in which rf is the constant (log) risk-free rate, and γ x > 0 and γ s < 0 are the loadings of
the stochastic discount factor on the two aggregate shocks, and the operator Et [.] represents
the expectation over all states of nature at time t. The sign of the loadings of the stochastic
discount factor on the two aggregate shocks follows from previous studies. Most equilibrium
models (see, for example, Jermann, 1998) imply γ x > 0, that is, low productivity states
are associated with low output and thus low consumption and high marginal utility. The
specification γ s < 0 is consistent with the analysis in BLB, and with the theoretical and

                                                  11
empirical literature on the impact of investment-specific shocks on asset prices (for example,
Papanikolaou, 2011, and Kogan and Papanikolaou, 2013 and 2014).
   The real wage rate is an increasing function of the aggregate productivity shock and is
given by
                                            Wt,i = τ 1,i exp(τ 2,i ∆xt ),                                    (11)

with τ 1,i , τ 2,i > 0. In this specification, τ 1,i is a scaling factor, and the parameter τ 2,i controls
the cyclicality and volatility of the wage rate in each industry.5

3.1.3    Firm’s maximization problem

All firms in the economy are assumed to be all-equity financed, so we define

                                      Dt,i = Yt,i − Wt,i Nt,i − Ψt,i − Ft,i                                  (12)

to be the dividend distributed by the firm to the shareholders. The dividend consists of
output Yt,i , less the wage bill Wt,i Nt,i , total adjustment costs Ψt,i , which includes the purchase
cost of investment, and fixed operating costs Ft,i . A negative dividend is considered as an
equity issuance.
   Define the vector of state variables as St,i = (Kt,i , Nt,i , xt , zt,i , st ), and let V (St,i ) be the
cum-dividend market value of the firm in period t. The firm makes hiring Ht,i and investment
It,i decisions to maximize its cum-dividend market value by solving the problem
                                                                         (    "∞                    #)
                                                                               X
                V (St,i ) =                   max                        Et         Mt,t+j Dt+j,i        ,   (13)
                              {It+j,i ,Kt+j+1,i ,Ht+j,i ,Nt+j+1,i }∞
                                                                   j=0        j=0

subject to the labor and capital accumulation equations (2) and (3) and the flow of funds
constraint (12) for all dates t.


3.2     Testable predictions
The goal of the theoretical analysis is to understand how labor-force heterogeneity affects
asset prices in the cross section. Consistent with standard neoclassical theory of investment
(see introduction section), we focus on the model’s predicted link between the firm’s level
hiring rate and discount rate (risk premia), and how this link varies with the type of workers
used in the production process across heterogenous industries. This link is conveniently
   5
    For simplicity, as in BLB, we specify the wage rate process to be a function of one aggregate shock only
(TFP shocks). Consistent with the analysis in BLB (internet appendix), we obtain very similar results to
those reported here when we specify the wage rate process to be a function of both TFP and adjustment
cost shocks, at least for reasonable calibrations of the model (results available upon request).


                                                            12
summarized by examining the properties of portfolios sorted on the firms’ current hiring
rate in artificial data generated from the model, and examine the properties of the portfolio’s
average realized returns.6 In particular, we focus on the properties of the low minus high
hiring (HN) portfolio, which we refer to as the hiring spread portfolio.

                                           [Insert Table 1 here]

       To obtain the model’s predictions, we start by calibrating the model using the same
parameter values used in BLB. The parameters are reported in Table 1, and were chosen to
match 25 aggregate- and firm-level moments of asset prices and real quantities (see Table
6 in BLB). This model generates a sizeable equity premium (about 4.8% per annum), a
large value premium (about 5.5% per annum), a smooth risk free rate, and matches key
properties of the aggregate wage rate, aggregate profits, and several properties of the firm-
level investment and hiring rates both in the time series and in the cross-section. To obtain
the model implied moments we solve the endogenous variables numerically. Appendix A-1
provides a description of the solution algorithm (value function iteration) and the numerical
implementation of the model.
   Naturally, the homogenous economy studied in BLB does not generate any differences in
the hiring return spread across industries because all firms are ex-ante identical in that model.
Thus, we now introduce labor-force heterogeneity in the model by examining the model
implied moments generated by alternative calibrations. As discussed in the introduction
section, the key difference between the low and high skill industry that we focus on in the
baseline specification of the model, is the difference in the magnitude of the labor adjustment
costs in the two industries. To that end, we compare two different calibrations of the model
which differ only in the size of the labor adjustment cost parameters summarized in the vector
θn,i .7 In the first calibration, we set θn,i to be small, in particular, we set each element in the
parameter vector θn,low to be 1/6 of the baseline parameters used in BLB. This calibration
corresponds to a low skill industry. In the second specification, we set θn,i to be high, in
particular, we set each element in the parameter vector θn,high to be 1.25 times larger than
the baseline parameters in BLB. This calibration corresponds to a high skill industry. The
comparison between these two specifications (and its comparison with the BLB economy)
   6
     Following Fama and French (1993), we construct the hiring portfolios using data generated from the
model as follows. At the end of June of year t, we sort all firms into five portfolios based on the firm’s hiring
rate at the end of year t − 1. The hiring breakpoints used to allocate firms into portfolios are the quintiles of
the hiring rate cross-sectional distribution of all firms. Once the portfolios are formed, their value-weighted
returns are tracked from July of year t to June of year t + 1. The procedure is repeated at the end of June
of year t + 1.
   7
     For technical reasons (avoid negative firm values), the operating fixed cost parameter fi also varies across
calibrations, but this feature has no qualitatively effects on our results.


                                                       13
can be interpreted as a comparative statics exercise, which allows us to obtain qualitative
predictions from the model in a simple manner (the exact scalings of the labor adjustment
costs were not calibrated hence this analysis is mostly qualitative). We provide a more formal
quantitative analysis of this calibration in Section 7 below, in particular, we discuss the fit
of the model on other moments, such as the hiring and investment rate volatilities.

                                       [Insert Table 2 Here]

   Table 2, column 2 (Adj. cost) reports the main testable asset pricing predictions from
the baseline version of the model in which the only difference across the two industries is the
magnitude of the labor adjustment cost parameters. Rows 1 and 2 show that the average
hiring return spread (low minus high hiring) in the two industries is positive, that is, as in
BLB (reported in column 1), the model predicts a negative relation between firms’ current
hiring rate and future stock returns (discount rate). This is a result that follows from
standard neoclassical theory of investment (see, for example, Abel and Blanchard, 1986),
applied to labor. Intuitively, optimal labor hiring by firms is high when the expected future
marginal profitability of labor inputs is high, or when the discount rate (cost of capital),
used to value the future marginal profitability of labor is low, or both. Thus, the link
between labor hiring and expected stock returns (discount rate) is negative, consistent with
the evidence in previous studies.8
    The first new theoretical finding is reported in rows 1 and 2, which shows that the
predicted hiring return spread is larger in high skill industries than in low skill industries.
In these calibrations, the hiring return spread is 5.3% per annum in the high skill industry
versus 1.2% per annum in the low skill industry. In the baseline BLB (column 1), the
hiring return spread is 4.4%, which is between the previous two values. Thus, the hiring
return spread is increasing in the size of the labor adjustment cost parameters. Given the
importance of this central prediction in our analysis, we state it explicitly as prediction 1
(P1).

P1: The negative hiring-expected return relation is steeper in industries that rely more on
high skilled workers.
      The economic intuition behind the result in P1 is as follows. When hiring is close to
frictionless, θn → 0, hiring becomes infinitely elastic to changes in the discount rate (risk
premium). With hiring frictions, θ n > 0, hiring entails costs, and these costs are increasing
in the firm’s hiring rate. As such, hiring is less elastic to the discount rate. The crucial
  8
    Of course, in the model, hiring and expected stock returns are jointly determined, but this causal
interpretation is useful to organize ideas.


                                                 14
observation for our empirical tests is that the magnitude of this elasticity decreases with the
size of θn . The higher θn is, the less elastically hiring responds to changes in the discount
rate. That is, the higher θn is, a given magnitude change in hiring rate corresponds to a
higher magnitude change in the discount rate. This effect means that the negative hiring-
expected return relation is steeper for firms with high labor adjustment costs, which we
identify as firms in industries that rely more on high skill labor, than for firms with low
hiring adjustment costs. Our main empirical analysis is centered around this result.
    Table 2 shows two additional asset pricing predictions from the model. In rows 3 and 4,
the model predicts that the Sharpe ratio of the hiring spread portfolio is higher in the high
skill industry. In these calibrations, the Sharpe ratio of the hiring spread portfolio is 1.1 at
the annual frequency in the high skill industry versus 0.2 in the low skill industry (in the
baseline BLB economy, the Sharpe ratio is 1.05). That is, the relatively higher hiring return
spread in the high skill industry is not simply a compensation for higher return volatility.
This is the second prediction from the model (P2).
P2: The Sharpe ratio of the hiring spread portfolio is higher in industries that rely more on
high skilled workers

    The previous result P2 is interesting because it suggests that the hiring return spread
is not driven by a standard operating leverage effect, a popular alternative mechanism in
the cross sectional asset pricing literature (for example, Zhang, 2005, shows that operating
leverage can generate a large value spread in a one aggregate-shock model). This is because
operating leverage, similar to financial leverage, generates a positive link between average
returns and return volatility, and hence no (or very small) variation in Sharpe ratios across
portfolios. As we discuss below, the hiring return spread is driven by the two aggregate
shock structure of the model.
    Finally, the model has implications for tests of asset pricing models. Several studies
emphasize the importance for structural models to match the failure of the capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) (see, for example, Lettau and Wachter, 2007; and Kogan and
Papanikolaou, 2013), because this failure provides an important set of moments that help
distinguish between alternative economic mechanisms that generate risk dispersion in the
cross section (for example, one- versus two-aggregate shock models). Rows 5 and 6 in Table
2 show that, consistent with BLB, the model predicts that the hiring return spread is not
explained by exposure to the market factor: the unconditional CAPM fails, and the model
generates large CAPM alphas.9 The novel prediction here is that the failure of the CAPM
   9
     To test the CAPM in the model, we run monthly time-series regressions of the excess returns of each
hiring portfolio on a constant and the excess returns of the market portfolio (market). To avoid taking
a stand on the fraction of firms in each low and high skill industry, we take the market portfolio in each


                                                   15
is significantly more pronounced in the high skill industry. In these calibrations, the CAPM
alpha of the hiring spread portfolio in the high skill industry is 7.2% per annum, but is only
2.8% per annum in the low skill industry (in the baseline BLB, the CAPM alpha of the hiring
spread portfolio is 5.2%), a difference in CAPM alphas of about 4.2% per annum. This is
the third prediction from the model (P3).
P3: The CAPM alpha of the hiring spread portfolio is higher in industries that rely more
on high skilled workers.
    The failure of the unconditional CAPM in the model, especially in the high skill industry,
is due to the interaction of the adjustment cost shock and the labor adjustment costs. To
understand this result, note that the two aggregate shock structure of the model implies that
the equilibrium risk premia (expected excess returns) of any asset in the economy is given
by the following standard asset pricing equation:

                                              = λx × β x + λs × β s
                                         e 
                                      Et rt+1                                                              (14)

           e
in which rt+1        s
                = Rt+1   − Rf is the stock excess return, Rf ≡ exp (rf ) = Et [Mt,t+1 ]−1
is the gross risk-free rate, λx = γ x V ar(∆xt+1 ) and λs = γ s V ar(∆st+1 ) are the price of
risk of the aggregate productivity shock and aggregate adjustment cost shock, respectively,
and β x = Cov rt+1 e
                      , ∆xt+1 /V ar(∆xt+1 ) and β s = Cov rt+1   e
                                                                          
                                                                   , ∆st+1 /V ar(∆st+1 ) are the
sensitivities (betas) of the firm’s excess stock returns with respect to the two aggregate shocks
in the economy. The model generates a spread in the average returns of the hiring portfolios
because high hiring firms in the model are more exposed (higher adjustment cost shock beta)
to the aggregate adjustment cost shocks, which carry a negative price of risk in equilibrium.
But in this model, the overall stock market (or industry) return is almost entirely driven
by aggregate productivity shocks that are uncorrelated with the aggregate adjustment cost
shock.10 As a result, the CAPM fails to explain the cross sectional variation of the hiring
portfolios because the overall stock market return is barely correlated with the aggregate
adjustment cost shock (aggregate productivity shocks and the adjustment cost shocks are
uncorrelated). The novel insight here is that because the exposure of the hiring portfolios
industry to be the overall industry level return. This approach has no impact on the qualitative results
because the industry level return is mostly driven by the aggregate TFP shock.
  10
     In the baseline model, almost all of the variation of the aggregate stock market return is driven by shocks
to aggregate productivity. Across panels, a multivariate time-series regression of the aggregate stock market
(or industry) return on the two risk factors has an average regression R2 ≈ 98%, a univariate regression on
the aggregate productivity shock has an average regression R2 ≈ 88%, but a univariate regression on the
aggregate adjustment cost shock has an average regression R2 ≈ 10% (results not tabulated). Thus, because
the aggregate stock market (or industry) return is mostly driven by the aggregate productivity shock, the
market factor alone fails to capture the differential exposure of the hiring portfolios to the adjustment cost
shock.

                                                      16
to the adjustment cost shock is proportional to the magnitude of the labor adjustment costs
(the aggregate adjustment cost shock affect labor adjustment costs as a proportional shift
of the adjustment cost schedule) the model predicts that the failure of the CAPM is more
pronounced in the high skill industry because of its higher labor adjustment costs.
    In this section, we examined the impact of difference in the hiring and firing costs of high
skilled and low skilled workers on asset prices, which we now test in the data. These are
robust predictions from the model. In Section 7 below, we examine the model implications
for other moments (real quantities), and the the impact of other additional realistic features
of the labor-force heterogeneity, and find that the predictions P1 to P3 also hold in more
general versions of the model.


4      Data
In this section we describe the data (asset prices and accounting variables), and the industry-
level labor skill variable used in our empirical tests. We also report the characteristics of a
typical firm in each industry.


4.1     An industry-level labor skill measure
The key labor skill measure used in our empirical analysis is the variable Skill, which is the
fraction of high skilled workers in a given industry. We use two data sources to compute
this measure. The first data source is the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT): Revised
Fourth Edition, 1991 from U.S. Department of Labor.11 DOT includes the information on
Specific Vocational Preparation (SVP), which measures the amount of lapsed time required
by a typical worker to learn the techniques, acquire the information, and develop the facility
needed for average performance in a specific job-worker situation (Appendix A-2 describes
the SVP index in more detail). The value of SVP ranges from 1 to 9, where SVP =1
corresponds to the lowest preparation, and SVP = 9 corresponds to the highest preparation
of over 10 years. We define a high skill occupation if its SVP index is equal to or greater
than 7 (this corresponds to an occupation that requires over 2 years of preparation), and
low skill otherwise.12
  11
     The data for 1991 DOT are obtained from the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) Study No 6100 v.1 (DOI:10.3886).
  12
     Our labor skill measure is based on Donangelo (2009), who first examined the link between this measure
and asset prices. But the data sources used to compute this measure are different. Our primary dataset for
the occupational level labor skill is from DOT, whereas Donangelo (2009) uses data from the Occupational
Information Network (O*NET). In 1998, the O*NET supersedes Dictionary of Occupational Titles with
current information that can be accessed online or through a variety of public and private sector career and


                                                    17
   Next, we compute the Skill variable for each industry by calculating the percentage
(across all occupations) of workers in the industry that belong to a high skill occupation.
We focus on this measure due to its simplicity and obvious interpretation.13 The data on
the number of workers by occupation in each industry is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program. The data is available since
1988 except in 1996 when OES did not conduct a survey. Each industry was surveyed every
three years before 1996 and every year starting from 1997. Following Donangelo (2014),
we use the same industry data for three consecutive years to ensure continuous coverage of
the full set of industries in early years, which imposes a constraint on the beginning of our
tradable sample period which is 1991.14 We define an industry using three-digit Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) codes until 2002, and four-digit North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) codes after 2002.
   To help understand the Skill variable, Table 3 reports the top 10 (Panel A) and bottom
10 (Panel B) industries sorted on average labor skill in 2012. In this year, there are a total
of 290 NAICS industries. Computer related industries are classified as high skill industries.
We also note that health care related industries rank very high as well, although they are
not in the top 10. Restaurants and other eating places, clothing stores, and shoe stores are
low skill industries. The ranking conforms with our priors regarding the degree of required
labor skills across these industries.

                                          [Insert Table 3 Here]


4.2     Asset prices and accounting data
Most of the empirical tests are based on data for U.S. publicly traded firms. As a robustness
check, we also test the main predictions from the model using international data for the G7
countries (France, Germany, Italy, UK, Canada, Japan, and U.S.).
labor market information systems. We use DOT instead of O*NET to maximize the sample size (start in
1991) while making sure that our investment strategy is tradable (O*NET data is available only after 1998).
   13
      We note that the results reported here are robust to the use of other industry level measures of labor
skills. For example, when we use the industry-level average across all SVPs, we obtain similar results to
those reported here. Also, when we use a measure of the average level of education of the workers in a given
industry, we obtain again similar results (results available upon request).
   14
      For instance, the 1988 OES data covers only industries with SIC codes between 4000 and 5999 and certain
industries with SIC codes above 8000. The 1989 OES data mainly covers SIC codes between 2000 and 3000.
The 1990 OES data mainly covers industries with SIC codes 1000-1999, 6000-7999, and some industries
above 8000. In addition, due to the difference in the classification of occupations, we use a crosswalk table
that relates the older DOT codes to the new Standard Occupational Code (SOC). The crosswalk table
is obtained from the Department of Education (https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/rehab/support/doc-
soc.xls). In addition, since the OES survey adopts the 2010 SOC classification starting from 2010, we
also use a crosswalk table that relates the 2010 SOC codes to 2000 SOC codes for OES data since year 2010.


                                                     18
U.S. data: Monthly stock returns are from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP), and accounting information is from the CRSP/Compustat Merged Annual
Industrial Files. The benchmark tradable sample is from July 1991 to December 2012. As
standard, we exclude firms whose primary standard industry classification (SIC) is between
4900 and 4999 (regulated firms). We require a firm to have a fiscal year-end in the last
quarter of the year, to roughly align the accounting data across firms (results are nearly
identical if we require a December fiscal-year-end). We include firms with common shares
(SHRCD=10 and 11) and firms traded on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (EXCHCD= 1, 2,
and 3). We correct for the delisting bias following the approach in Shumway (1997). Finally,
the data for the market factor (MKT) used in the tests of the unconditional capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) is from Kenneth French’s Web page.
    We are interested in examining the relation between the firm-level hiring rate with future
stock returns across industries with different levels of labor skill. We construct the hiring rate
as in Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2006) and Bloom (2009). The firm-level hiring rate
is given by HNt =Ht / (0.5 × (Nt−1 + Nt )), in which the number of employees (Nt ) is given
by Compustat data item EMP, and net hiring (Ht ) is given by the change in the number of
employees in year t from year t − 1 (Ht =Nt −Nt−1 ). By construction, this measure of labor
hiring is symmetric around zero and bounded between ±200%.
    We also keep track of the following accounting variables. Following Bloom (2009), the
firm-level investment rate is given by IKt =It / (0.5 × (Kt−1 + Kt )), in which the physical
capital stock (Kt ) is given by data item PPENT (net property plant and equipment),
and physical capital investment (It ) is given by Compustat data item CAPX (capital
expenditures) minus SPPE (sales of property, plant, and equipment). Missing values of
SPPE are set to zero. Market equity (size) is price times shares outstanding at the end of
December of t, from CRSP. Age is the firm age measured as the number of years since the
firm is included in CRSP. Lev is book-leverage.15 The book-to-market equity ratio (BM)
is the ratio of the firm’s book equity to market equity, computed as in Fama and French
(1993). Firms’ sales are given by data item SALE. Real sales growth rate (∆Sales) is thus
measured by the ratio of the change in the sales from year t − 1 to year t to the sales in year
t − 1, deflated by the consumer price index. The firm’s capital to labor ratio is given by the
log of the ratio of the firms physical capital stock (Kt ) deflated by the consumer price index,
to the number of employees. Research and development (R&D) intensity is given by data
  15
       Following Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009), book leverage is given by

                                  Lev = (DLTT+DLC)/(DLTT+DLC+ME)

in which: DLTT is Long-Term Debt - Total, DLC is Debt in Current Liabilities - Total, and ME is market
equity.


                                                     19
item XRD divided by SALE.
   The industry-level annual wage rate data are calculated for a subsample of industries from
the National Bureau of Economic Research and U.S. Census Bureau’s Center for Economic
Studies (NBER-CES) Manufacturing Industry Database. This database contains annual
industry-level data from 1958-2009 on output, employment, payroll and other input costs,
investment, capital stocks, TFP, and various industry-specific price indexes. We define the
wage rate for each industry as the ratio of the total payroll to total employment for that
industry. The real wage rate is then computed as the ratio of the nominal wage and the
consumer price index.
   We exclude from the sample the firm-year observations with missing or negative capital
stock data, missing number of employees, number of employees less than 50, missing capital
expenditures data, and missing labor skill data. The final U.S. sample includes a total of
53,233 firm-year observations.

International data: The accounting data for the G7 countries is from Compustat Global
Fundamentals Annual file and the key variables are defined in the same way as in the U.S.
sample. The security data is from Compustat Global Security Daily. The sample period
of our data ranges from 1992 to 2012 but the exact starting year varies by country. We
keep the primary issue of each company (IID=PRIROW) and we only include common
stocks (TPCI=0). We convert all prices at the end of each month into U.S. dollars and
calculate the stock return in month t taking into account any change in the number of
shares outstanding.16
    In contrast to the high quality of the U.S. data, the Compustat global data has
significantly more measurement errors. Following Ince and Porter (2006), Hou, Karolyi,
and Kho (2011), and others, we apply the following filters to deal with potential errors in
the data. First, we set monthly returns Rt , Rt−1 as missing if Rt or Rt−1 is above 300%,
and (1 + Rt )(1 + Rt−1 ) − 1 < 50%. That is, any return that is above 300% and reversed
within a month is treated as missing. Secondly, we treat the monthly return as missing
if the previous month end closing price is below $1. Then we aggregate the non-missing
monthly returns into annual returns. Finally, consistent with the filters applied to U.S data,
we exclude regulated firms from our the sample (SIC code between 4900 and 4999) and the
firm-year observations with missing number of employees, number of employees less than 50,
  16
       Specifically, the firm-level stock return is given by

                       P RCCDt /AJEXDIt × T RF Dt − P RCCDt−1 /AJEXDIt−1 × T RF Dt−1
                Rt =
                                    P RCCDt−1 /AJEXDIt−1 × T RF Dt−1

in which P RCCDt is the closing price at month end, AJEXDIt and T RF Dt are the corresponding share
and return adjustment factors.


                                                          20
and missing labor skill data. The final international data includes a total of 56, 412 firm-year
observations.17


4.3     Labor skill and firm characteristics
Before we test the model’s predictions, we first investigate the characteristics of a typical firm
in these two industries to understand the data. We report the unconditional characteristics
of a typical firm in each industry, as well as the characteristics of these firms conditional
on its current hiring rate, that is, the firms’ characteristics across the five hiring portfolios
within each industry. We allocate firms to an high or low skill industry at the end of June
of year t based on the cross sectional median value of the industry-level labor skill variable
(Skill) at the end of year t−1. Similarly, as in the theoretical analysis, we form the five hiring
portfolios separately across low and high skill industries as follows. At the end of June of
year t, we first sort the universe of common stocks into five portfolios based on the quintile of
the cross-sectional distribution of the firm-level hiring rate at the end of year t − 1 separately
across low and high skill industries. We then compute the average characteristic of each
firm in each portfolio as the time-series average of the cross sectional median characteristic
across all the firms in each portfolio.

                                           [Insert Table 4 here]

   The top panel in Table 4 reports the time series average of median portfolio-level
characteristics of a typical firm in the two labor skill portfolios. This table shows that firms
in high skill industries tend to be slightly younger, have higher hiring and investment growth
rates, have higher sales, and have slightly lower book-to-market (BM) ratios (a characteristic
of a growth firms) than firm in low skill industries.18 Finally, we note that firms in high
skill industries have significantly higher R&D expenditures, which is expected because R&D
activities typically require high skilled workers. Taken together, and consistent with the
ranking of the industries reported in Table 3, these characteristics suggest that firms in high
skill industries are more associated with the new economy/high tech sector (R&D intensive,
growth like firms), and the firms in the low skill industries are more associated with the old
  17
      Due to data availability, the number of firm-year observations (N) and the sample period varies across
countries as follows. France: N= 4, 888, 1992-2011; Germany: N= 5, 275, 1992-2011; Italy: N= 1, 356,
1992-2011; UK: N= 10, 758, 1992-2011; Canada: N= 6, 774, 1992-2011; Japan: N= 27, 361, 2001-2011.
   18
      In untabulated results we also find that the difference in the average returns of the firms’ in the two
industries is relatively small, at least for the two sector decomposition investigated here. The average returns
in the high skill industry is between 1.5% per annum and 2.5% per annum higher than in the low skill industry,
and this difference is not statistically significant in our sample. This result supports our approach to examine
the conditional HN spread within industries as opposed to investigating the unconditional labor skill spread.


                                                      21
economy. In the online appendix we show that our labor skill measure has a low correlation
with other measures of labor market characteristics such as labor mobility (Donangelo, 2014)
and labor unionization rates (Chen, Kacperczyk, and Ortiz-Molina, 2011)
   Turning to the analysis of the characteristics of the firms across the hiring portfolios,
we note that the pattern of the characteristics across the portfolios is overall similar in the
two industries. Firms with currently high hiring rates tend to be younger, invest more in
physical capital, have higher sales growth, and have lower book-to-market ratios (growth
firms) than firms with currently low hiring rates. In addition, the firms with currently high
hiring rates tend to be larger (higher market capitalization) and have lower capital-to-labor
ratios, but these characteristics do not vary monotonically across the portfolios. Finally, in
the high skill industry, firms with currently high hiring rate tend to invest more in R&D as
well. In the low skill industry, the pattern of R&D expenditures across the hiring portfolios
is reversed, but the R&D intensity is very small across all firms in these portfolios.


5     Main findings
We follow two complementary empirical methodologies to examine the model’s main asset
pricing predictions. In the first approach, we run standard firm-level regressions of stock
returns on the lagged firms’ hiring rate. The advantage of this approach is that the estimated
slopes are easy to interpret: the slope coefficient from this regression captures the link
between hiring and expected stock returns (prediction P1). In addition, this approach allows
us to control for firm-, year- and (in international data) country-fixed effects, thus allowing
us to control for other sources of firm heterogeneity that are beyond the scope of the analysis
in the model. It also allows to control for the effect of other accounting variables in an easy
manner. In the second approach, we construct portfolios sorted on the firm’s hiring rate
and look at the properties of the ex post stock returns of the portfolios to test the model’s
predictions P1-P3 (see, for example, Fama and French (2008) for a discussion about the
advantages and disadvantages of each approach). The two approaches allow us to cross-
check the results and establish the robustness of the findings.


5.1    Firm-level analysis
To test P1, we run a standard pooled OLS firm-level stock return predictability regression
using the lagged firm-level hiring rate as the return predictor, and potentially other control




                                              22
variables. Specifically, we run a regression of the form:

 rite = ai + bt + c × HNit−1 + d × HNit−1 × HSkillit−1 + e × HSkillit−1 + controlsit−1 + eit , (15)

in which rite in the firm i annual log stock gross return from July of year t to June of year
t + 1, ai is firm i fixed-effect, bt is a year fixed-effect, HNit−1 is the lagged value of firm i
hiring rate, HSkillit−1 is a dummy variable which is one if the firm i belongs to a high skill
industry at the end of fiscal year end t−2, and controlsit−1 are other lagged firm-level control
variables. As control variables we include the lagged value of firm i investment rate, as well
as the firm size (market equity), book-to-market ratio (BM) and leverage ratio. Although
the inclusion of these variables is outside the scope of the theoretical analysis, we include
these variables here because, from an empirical point of view, it is interesting to examine
the additional explanatory power of hiring for future returns in the presence of other well
established predictors. Standard errors are clustered by firm. We report the results with
and without firm fixed-effects (we always include the time fixed-effect because the model
predictions are for the cross section).19 Finally, it is well known that firm-level regressions
can be heavily influenced by the behavior of very small firms because these firms are plentiful
and have more volatile returns and characteristics (Fama and French, 2008). To make sure
that our results are not mainly driven by the behavior of these small firms, we also present
results where we include a dummy variable Microt , which is one if the firm is classified as a
micro cap firm (market equity below the 20th percentile of the cross sectional distribution
of market equity at time t) and also interact this variable with the firm’s hiring rate and
hiring rate interacted with HSkill.

                                        [Insert Table 5 Here]

       Table 5 reports the regression results across different specifications of equation (15). The
regression’s main coefficient of interest is coefficient d, which is reported in row 2. According
to the theoretical analysis, this slope coefficient should be negative if the negative hiring-
expected return relation is steeper in high skill industries. Overall, the table shows that
the negative slope on the hiring rate variable is higher in high skill industries: the slope
coefficient d is estimated to be negative, and statistically significant, across all specifications.
   The difference in the hiring rate slope coefficient in high and low skill industries is also
economically large. We focus first on the results reported in columns 1 to 4 which do not
include any additional control variables (except the micro cap dummy), and hence are more
  19
    Note that when we include firm-fixed effects we do not include the HSkill dummy variable separately
because of multicolinearity. Most firms do not switch between high and low skill industry during the whole
sample period.

                                                   23
aligned with the predictions from the model. In column 1, the slope coefficient on the
interaction of hiring and the high skill dummy is −8.2, whereas the slope coefficient on
the hiring rate variable alone is −11.5. This difference is large in economic terms: a 20%
increase in the firm’s hiring rate (which roughly corresponds to a 20% increase in the size of
the firm’s workforce), is associated with a decrease of −2.3% in firms’ expected stock return
in the low skill industry, and with a decrease of −3.9% in firm’s expected stock return in the
high skill industry. That is, the hiring-expected return negative relation is 1.7 times steeper
in high skill industries than in low skill industries. This difference in the slope coefficients
increases even more when we include firm-fixed effects in column 2, and hence we control
for other nonspecified forms of firm-heterogeneity in the two industries. Here, the negative
hiring-expected return relation is 2.6 times steeper in high skill industries than in low skill
industries. When we control for the impact of micro cap firms, the effects remain large. In
columns 3 (no firm fixed-effect) and 4 (with firm fixed-effects), the negative hiring-expected
return relation is 2.3 and 2.2 times steeper in high skill industries than in low skill industries,
respectively.
   When we add the control variables in columns 5 to 9, the previous qualitative analysis
does not change. The slope coefficient on the interaction of hiring and high skill remains
negative and statistically significant. Translating into economic magnitudes, the negative
hiring-expected return relation is between 2 and 3.2 times steeper in high skill industries
than in low skill industries when we control for the firms’ investment rate (columns 5 to
8). In column 9, when we control for many other accounting variables, the hiring-expected
returns relation is only negative in high skill industries.
    Overall, the evidence reported in Table 5 supports the main theoretical prediction P1
from the model. Taken together, the hiring rate negative slope coefficient in high labor skill
industries is, averaging the ratio across specifications in columns 1 to 8, about 2.3 times
larger than the slope coefficient in low labor skill industries.


5.2    Portfolio-level analysis
We now investigate the negative hiring-expected return relation (P1) among industries with
different levels of labor skill using a portfolio approach. Consistent with the theoretical
analysis, we form five one-way-sorted on hiring portfolios and compute the post-formation
average excess stock returns (in excess of the risk-free rate) of the portfolios. As noted in
the theory section, these portfolios are rebalanced every year at the end of June t, based on
the quintile of the cross-sectional distribution of the firm-level hiring rate at the end of year
t − 1, and separately across low and high skill industries. Once the portfolios are formed,


                                                24
their returns are tracked from July of year t to June of year t + 1 with no rebalancing over
the year. The procedure is repeated in June of year t + 1. That is, we consider a one year
buy-and-hold investment strategy because of its low transaction costs. We then also compute
the Sharpe ratios and the CAPM alphas (abnormal returns) of the portfolios to check the
model’s predictions P2 and P3.
   In computing the portfolio-level stock return, we focus on value-weighted returns to
minimize the effect of the very small firms on the results. Value-weighted returns do not
necessarily represent the returns of a well diversified portfolio, however, because of the
heavy tails of the size distribution in the U.S. stock market. As discussed in Fama and
French (2008), and Malevergne, Santa-Clara, and Sornette (2011), the characteristics of
value-weighted portfolio returns are dominated by a small, albeit important, number of very
large (mega cap) firms. Thus, to provide a balanced analysis of the link between hiring and
stock returns in the overall economy, we impose a cap of 5% on the maximum weight of
each firm in the portfolio at the time of portfolio formation and then compute the capped
value-weighted portfolio returns (the firm’s weight in the portfolio may exceed 5% over the
course of the year if the firm has a good stock market performance because the portfolio
is only rebalanced once a year to minimize turnover costs; it’s a one-year buy-and-hold
strategy). This constraint guarantees that the minimum effective (equal-sized) number of
firms in each portfolio is twenty. In a robustness section below, we report the results using
several alternative return weighting schemes to investigate the sensitivity of the results to
the weighting procedure.

                                     [Insert Table 6 Here]

   The results reported in Table 6 are overall consistent with the results from the firm-level
panel regressions. Table 6 reports the average excess stock returns (r e ), Sharpe ratios (SR),
and CAPM alphas (α) of the five one-way-sorted on hiring portfolios in the low skill (left
columns) and the high skill (right columns) industries. Consistent with the empirical findings
in BLB, the average excess returns of the portfolio of firms with currently low hiring rates
are higher than the average excess returns of the portfolio of firms with currently high hiring
rates - that is, the hiring return spread is positive.
   The new empirical finding is that the hiring return spread is substantially higher in the
high skill industry. In particular, the hiring return spread is 2.7% per annum in the low skill
labor industries, and this value is only 1.1 standard errors from zero. In high skill industries,
the hiring return spread is 8.6% per annum, and this value is more than 2.7 standard errors
from zero. So, the hiring return spread is 3.2 times larger in high skill industries than in
low skill industries. The difference in absolute terms of the hiring return spread in the low

                                               25
and high skill industries is economically large, about 5.9% per annum, and this value is
1.8 standard errors from zero. The Sharpe ratio of the hiring spread portfolio is about two
times larger in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry. Taken together, the
portfolio level evidence suggests that the negative hiring- expected return and Sharpe ratio
relation is steeper for firms in high skill industries than in low skill industries, consistent
with predictions P1 and P2 from the model.
   We now investigate the unconditional CAPM alphas of the hiring portfolios in the two
industries. According to the model’s prediction P3 discussed in Section 3.2, the hiring return
spread is not driven by exposure to the market factor, hence the CAPM should not be able
to explain the pattern in the returns of the hiring portfolios, especially in the high skill
industry in which the hiring return spread is larger. To test the CAPM, we run monthly
time-series regressions of the excess returns of each portfolio on a constant and the excess
returns of the market portfolio (market). The intercepts from this regression are the alphas
(abnormal returns).
   The results reported in Table 6 show that the CAPM cannot explain the pattern of the
returns of the hiring portfolios in the high skill industry. The CAPM performs reasonably
well in the low labor skill sector in which none of the portfolio level individual alphas are
significant. In the high labor skill sector the CAPM generates large abnormal returns. In
particular, the abnormal return of the low minus high hiring portfolio is economically large,
10.4% per annum, which is more than 3.1 standard errors from zero, and is even larger than
the hiring return spread itself (8.6%). Consistent with the predictions from the theoretical
model, the alpha of the hiring return spread portfolio in the high skill industry is 8.1% larger
than the hiring return spread in the low labor skill industry, and this difference is more than
2.5 standard errors from zero.
    Even though the CAPM is unable to explain the cross sectional variation in the average
returns of the hiring portfolios in high skill industries, the fact that the model generates
a large hiring spread is consistent with the hypothesis that the hiring spread is driven by
exposure to risk factors. Indeed, in the online appendix, we find that recent multifactor asset
pricing models such as Hou, Xue and Zhang (2014) and Fama and French (2014) capture the
hiring return spread even in the high skill industry, consistent with the hypothesis that the
hiring return spread is driven by differences in risk across the hiring portfolios. Although a
detailed analysis of this result is outside the scope of our analysis, this result follows because
the additional factors capture the effect of the aggregate adjustment cost shock that drives
the hiring return spread.




                                               26
6     Robustness analysis
To help establish the robustness of the main empirical findings, we now report the results
from the following additional analysis: (i) use a different econometric methodology, Fama
and MacBeth (1973) cross sectional regressions, to confirm the significance of the effects; (ii)
examine the results in a longer sample that starts in 1963; (iii) use international data for the
G7 countries to test if the model’s main prediction holds in other countries as well; and (iv)
investigate the sensitivity of the portfolio returns to the return weighting procedure.


6.1    Cross sectional regressions
The main empirical analysis reported in Section 5 is based on the results from panel OLS
firm-level regressions. As discussed in, for example, Petersen (2009), the computation of the
standard errors in panel data can be difficult due to the fact that, in most datasets used
in empirical finance (such as the CRSP/Compustat data used here), the residuals from the
panel OLS regressions are correlated across firms and time, and the exact structure of the
correlation can be complex. As a result, different procedures to compute the standard errors
may lead to different inferences, and it’s not always clear what the appropriate method is
in a given application. To partially address this concern, we consider here an alternative,
albeit related, estimation method. We estimate the firm level regressions using standard
cross-sectional Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions. Specifically, in each month t, we run
cross sectional regressions of the form:

 rite = Intt + at × HNit−1 + bt × Microit−1 + ct × HNit−1 × Microit−1 + controlsit−1 + eit , (16)

in which rite is the firm i log stock return in month t, Inti is a regression intercept, HNit−1
is the lagged value of firm i hiring rate, Microit−1 is a dummy variable which is one if the
firm is classified as a micro cap firm, and controlsit−1 are other lagged firm-level control
variables (we use the same control variables included in the analysis reported in Section 5).
We estimate equation (16) separately across high skill and low skill industries.

                                     [Insert Table 7 here]

    Table 7 reports the estimated average slope coefficients of equation (16) in the low (L)
and high (H) skill industries. The coefficient of interest in this regression is (the average
of) coefficient bt , which is reported in row 1. In particular, we want to test if this slope
coefficient is higher (in absolute value) in high skill than in low skill industries (P1). To
perform this test, we use a simple difference in means test of the estimated slope coefficient.

                                               27
The results reported in Table 7 confirm the results from the panel regressions. The estimated
hiring rate slope coefficient is small (close to zero) in the low skill industry, but its large and
strongly negative in the high skill industry. The difference in hiring slope coefficient in
the two industries is large and statistically significant across the five different specifications
considered here.


6.2       Evidence from a long sample
Due to the availability of the labor skill data, the main empirical analysis is based on a
sample that starts in July of 1991. This restriction is necessary to make the stock return
predictability analysis to be based on publicly available information (labor skill data), and
hence to reflect the returns of tradable investment strategies. From an empirical point of
view, however, it is natural to ask if the link between hiring and future returns is specific to
the (relatively short) sample period under analysis, or if it also holds over a longer sample.
To address this question, we build on the fact that our industry level labor skill measure has a
very high persistence (based on the labor skill portfolio’s transition probabilities, in any given
year, a firm in a high skill industry has a 98% probability of being in a high skill industry
in the following year), to extend the sample backwards. In particular, for each three-digit
SIC industry we assign the average industry level labor skill measure between 1991 and 2001
to all the years between 1963 and 1991, a typical sample period used in empirical finance.20
We then re-do the main empirical analysis over this longer sample. We note, however, that
the results from this analysis introduce additional measurement error in the analysis because
the imputed 1963 to 1991 labor skill data naturally misses any technological change across
industries that are associated with significant changes in the relative use of high and low
skilled workers in each industry during this pre-1991 period. As such, the analysis reported
here is likely to be subject to an attenuation bias.

                                       [Insert Table 8 here]

       Table 8 replicates the panel OLS regression analysis reported Section 5 using the longer
sample from 1963 to 2012. Again, the coefficient of interest is the coefficient associated with
the firm-level lagged hiring rate interacted with the high skill dummy, which is reported
in row 2. Across all specifications, this slope coefficient is always negative and statistically
significant. As such, the finding that the negative hiring-expected return relation is steeper
in industries with more skilled labor does not seem to be specific to the shorter sample.
  20
    We start in 1963 because before this date the number of firms which report the number of employees
data necessary to construct the firm-level hiring rate is small.



                                                 28
   The economic magnitude of the difference in the hiring rate slope coefficient across
industries remains large, although they are, as expected, slightly smaller than those reported
in the shorter sample due to attenuation bias. When no control variables are included,
columns 1 (no firm fixed-effects) and 2 (with firm fixed-effects), the negative hiring-expected
return relation is 1.5 and 1.8 times steeper in high skill industries than in low skill industries,
respectively. When we control for the effect of micro cap firms in columns 3 (no firm fixed-
effect) and 4 (with firm fixed-effects), the negative hiring-expected return relation is 1.9 and
2 times steeper in high skill industries than in low skill industries, respectively. When we
add the control variables in columns 5 to 9, the qualitative analysis does not change.


6.3     Evidence from international data
The main empirical analysis is based on U.S. data. Here, we examine if the results also
hold in international data. We focus on data for developed countries, in particular, the
G7 countries. We exclude the U.S. from this sample because the results for the U.S. were
examined in the previous sections. Naturally, the magnitude of the labor adjustment costs
varies across these countries because of, for example, differences in labor legislations and
local labor market conditions. But the relative size of the labor adjustment costs is likely
to be higher in high skill industries than in low skill industry in these countries as well.21
As a result, the international data provides an interesting sample to further test the model’s
predictions. In this section, we focus on prediction P1.
   In the absence of country-specific labor skill data, we assign to each country in our sample
the same low and high skill industry classification used in the U.S. sample. It is unlikely
that this procedure introduces any significant biases in the analysis because the classification
is based on primitive features of the technology, and it is natural to expect the primitive
features of the technology to be similar across countries. We then replicate the analysis
reported in Section 5 using the international data. In particular, we estimate a pooled OLS
firm-level stock return predictability regression similar to regression equation 15, and we
allow the year fixed-effects to vary across countries. Due to data availability, we only use
the lagged value of firm i investment rate, and the micro dummy, as the control variables.
The micro dummy variable is defined at the country level. Specifically, in each year t, a firm
i is classified as a micro cap if the market equity of the firm in year t − 1 is below the 20th
percentile of the cross sectional distribution of market equity in firm’s i country.

                                           [Insert Table 9 here]
  21
    The empirical evidence on the relative size of labor adjustment costs of high and low skilled workers
discussed in the related literature section covers studies based on data for both the U.S. and other countries.


                                                      29
   Table 9 reports the slope coefficients of equation (15) estimated in the international
data. The slope coefficient of interest in this regression is reported in row 2. As before, this
coefficient should be negative if the negative hiring-expected return relation is steeper in
industries with more skilled workers. The results from the international data seem to provide
additional support for this prediction. When no control variables are included (columns 1
and 2), the hiring-expected return negative relation is 2.3 and 1.7 times steeper in high skill
industries than in low skill industries, respectively. When we control for the effect of micro
cap firms, the effects remain large. In columns 3 (no firm fixed-effect) and 4 (with firm
fixed-effects), the hiring-expected return negative relation is 2 and 1.6 times steeper in high
skill industries than in low skill industries, respectively. When we add the control variables
in columns 5 to 8, the qualitative analysis does not change. Taken together, the results from
the international data are consistent with the analysis for the U.S.. Similar to the analysis
of the results in the longer sample, however, we note that the magnitude of the difference in
the hiring rate slopes across industries is marginally smaller in the international data than
in the U.S. data.


6.4    Alternative portfolio-level analysis
In the benchmark portfolios-analysis reported in Section 5.2, we compute the average returns
of the hiring portfolios in the low and high skill industries as average value-weighted returns,
in which the maximum weight of each firm in each portfolio is constrained to be at most
5% at the time of portfolio formation. In this section we consider four alternative return
weighting procedures. To be conservative, we continue to focus on one-year buy-and-hold
investment strategies (allowing monthly portfolio rebalancing to keep the weight of each firm
constant over the year produces stronger results than those reported here).
   In the first procedure, which we refer to as equal-weighted, we compute the returns of a
portfolio assigning the same weight to all firms at the time portfolio formation (the weights
vary over the year due to the changes in the firm’s relative market values). The second
procedure is equal to the previous equal-weighting procedure but we exclude the micro cap
firms from the portfolios, to avoid the large influence of these firms in the portfolio average
returns. In the third procedure we weight each firm by the firms’ lagged labor force at
the time of portfolio formation, and we refer to these portfolios as number of employees-
weighted. Finally, in the last procedure, we weight each firm by the standard one month
lagged market value of equity of each firm, which corresponds to the standard value-weighting
procedure. The last two procedures allow us to investigate if the differences in the negative
hiring-expected return relationship across industries also varies with firm size in a systematic


                                              30
manner.

                                     [Insert Table 10 here]

   The results from average equal-weighted returns (with and without micro caps), are
consistent with the results reported for the baseline capped value-weighted portfolios. When
all firms are included, the hiring return spread in the high skill industry is 10.1% per annum,
which is more than 4.2 standard errors from zero, and its only 3.2% per annum in the low
skill industry, which is only 1.2 standard errors from zero. The difference in the hiring return
spread in the two industries is 6.9% per annum, which is more than 2.5 standard errors from
zero. This means that the hiring return spread is three times larger in the high skill industry
than in the low skill industry. The pattern of the Sharpe ratio and CAPM alpha of the hiring
spread portfolio are qualitatively similar to the analysis of the pattern of average returns.
The conclusions are similar when the micro cap firms are excluded from the portfolios (All
but micro equal-weighted).
   Turning to the analysis of the portfolio returns weighted by measures related to firm size,
Table 10 shows that when the returns are weighted by the firm’s lagged number of employees,
the hiring return spread in the high skill industry is 9.6% per annum, which is more than
3.6 standard errors from zero, and it’s only 2.2% per annum in the low skill industry, and
this value is not statistically significant. Thus, when the average returns are weighted by the
number of employees, the hiring return spread is 4.3 times larger in the high skill industry
than in the low skill industry. Similarly, the CAPM alpha of the hiring spread portfolio is
8.6% larger in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry, and this difference is
more than 2.1 standard errors from zero. Thus, the difference in the average returns and
CAPM alpha of the hiring spread portfolio in low and high skill industries is substantially
larger here than in the baseline procedure with capped value-weighted average results. A
similar result holds for the pattern of the Sharpe ratios of the hiring spread portfolio across
the two industries. The stronger result with this return weighting procedure is expected
because the hiring/firing frictions should naturally be more important among more labor
intensive firms, which is captured here by weighting the average returns by the size of each
firms’ labor force.
    Finally, turning to the analysis of the portfolio returns weighted by market equity (which
corresponds to standard value-weighted returns), we see that the difference in the hiring
return spread in low skill and high skill industries is significantly smaller than in the baseline
set of results. In the high skill industry, the hiring return spread is 5.9% per annum, which is
more than 1.9 standard errors from zero. In the low skill industry, the hiring return spread
is 4.6% per annum, but is not statistically significant. Thus, when the average returns

                                               31
are weighted by the firm’s market capitalization, the hiring return spread is only 1.3 times
larger in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry. When we look at the difference
in the CAPM alphas of the hiring spread portfolio in the low and high skill industry the
difference in the CAPM alpha of the hiring spread portfolio remains economically large,
about 3.8% per annum, but it’s not statistically significant. The Sharpe ratio of the hiring
spread portfolio remains larger in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry, but
the difference in Sharpe ratio is now only 0.1 (the Sharpe ratio of the HN spread portfolio
is 1.3 times larger in the high skill industry relative to the low skill industry). Although it
is tempting to interpret these smaller differences in the hiring return/Sharpe ratio/CAPM
alpha spreads across low and high skill industries as evidence that the support for the model’s
predictions are weaker for large firms, the stronger results using employee-weighted returns
speak against this interpretation. Taken together, the differences in the hiring return/CAPM
alpha/Sharpe ratios spreads between low skill and high skill industries are large among large
firms, provided that the size measure is directly related to the size of the firm’s labor force.
This result is intuitive because weighting by the size of the firm’s labor force (instead of
market equity) captures more directly the importance of the labor adjustment cost friction
for a firm (for example, the labor frictions are likely to be less important for very large firm
that are more physical capital intensive).


7    Other dimensions of labor heterogeneity
So far we have investigated the implications of differences in the size of labor adjustment
costs of high skilled and low skilled workers for asset prices. Naturally, high skilled and
low skilled workers differ in many other dimensions as well. Here, we incorporate realistic
features of labor-force heterogeneity in the model by considering alternative calibrations,
and investigate its impact on the model predictions for asset prices in high and low skill
industries. In addition, we examine the implications of the model for real quantities, in
particular, for the properties of firm’s endogenous hiring and investment rates.
   Incorporating other sources of heterogeneity in the model seems important here because,
as reported in Table 2, column 2, row 7, the baseline model fails to capture the relative
properties of sales, hiring and investment rates in the two industries. In the baseline model,
the volatility of sales (measured in the model as total output) is counterfactually lower in
the high skill industry than in the low skill industry. Related, rows 10 and 11 show that the
baseline model predicts that the volatility of hiring and investment rates are counterfactually
lower in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry. These results follow because,
in the baseline calibration, the firms in the low skill industry face lower costs of adjusting

                                              32
labor, thus having a more volatile labor force, which in turn leads to a more volatile output
and volatile hiring rate. Due to the complementarity between labor and capital, the physical
capital investment rate also inherits this higher volatility.
   In what follows, we focus on the following two additional features of labor-force
heterogeneity which are consistent with the empirical evidence reported in previous studies
(discussed in the related literature section), and with additional evidence that we provide
here: (i) differences in the economic environment (demand/TFP volatility) of the industries
in which high skilled and low skilled workers operate; and (ii) differences in the productivity
and the wage rate process of high skill and low skilled workers.
   As we show here, while adding these additional features allows us to improve the model
fit on several dimensions (especially for real quantities), these features do not affect in a
quantitatively important way the key testable predictions relating firm’s hiring decisions
and asset prices across industries with different levels of labor skills that we obtain from the
baseline model with only differences in the labor adjustment cost parameter. In this sense,
the testable predictions from the model that we take to the data (P1 to P3) are robust
predictions.


7.1    Heterogeneity in the economic environment
The volatility of key real variables in the low and high skill industry suggests that the
economic environment in which the two industries operate is different. As reported in Table
2, column 5 (Data), row 7 shows that the relative standard deviation of the firm-level real
sales growth is about 24% higher in the high skill industry than in the low skill industry (in
levels, the standard deviation of real sales growth is 38% versus 31% per annum, respectively;
a qualitatively similar result is obtained if we look at the volatility of profits- not tabulated).
The higher volatility of sales in the high skill industry suggests that the firms in this industry
are subject to more volatile demand and/or productivity shocks. Here, we incorporate this
additional source of heterogeneity in the model and examine its impact on the model’s key
asset pricing predictions (P1-P3), and on the moments for real quantities. Ignoring this
feature of the data might lead to a wrong assessment of the model’s fit.
    We incorporate heterogeneity in the economic environment in the two industries by
specifying the volatility of the firm-specific productivity shocks in the two industries to be
different, that is, we calibrate σ z,high > σ z,low . Specifically, we calibrate these two parameters
to roughly match the relative volatility of the endogenous hiring rates in the two industries
(which is close to 1), and set σ z,high = 0.14 and σ z,low = 0.08 (recall that in the baseline
calibration we set σ z = 0.10). We maintain the difference in the labor adjustment costs


                                                 33
parameters to be equal to the baseline calibration so that we can evaluate the incremental
impact of this source of heterogeneity on the model’s fit.
   As reported in Table 2, column 3, rows 7 and 10, by construction, this extended model
fits significantly better the relative volatilities of the firm-level sales growth and hiring rates
observed in the data. Row 11 also shows that this extended model also fits better the
properties of the firm-level investment rate in the two industries, in particular, it captures
the fact that the standard deviation of the firm-level investment rate is higher in the high
skill industry than in the low skill industry (the ratio is 1.33 in the data; but its 0.96
in the baseline model and 1.19 here). More important, the key asset pricing implications
predictions of the model relating the hiring rate and stock returns do not change in any
quantitatively meaningful way. Column 3, rows 1 to 6 show that the key testable predictions
P1 to P3 remain valid in this more realistic calibration of the model as well, in particular, the
hiring return and CAPM alpha spread, and the Sharpe ratio of the hiring spread portfolio
is only large in the high skill industry, and the model implied moments are very close to
those obtained in the baseline model. Taken together, we conclude that difference in the
volatility of idiosyncratic volatility shocks in the two industries helps improve the model’s
for real quantities, but this source of heterogeneity has a small impact on the model’s key
predictions for asset prices obtained from the baseline model.


7.2     Heterogeneity in wages
By definition, high skilled workers are more productive than low skilled workers (that is
λhigh > λlow ), and thus receive higher wages in equilibrium (Wt,high >Wt,low ). At the same
time, the volatility of the real wage rate is smaller for high skilled workers than for low
skilled workers. As reported in Table 2, column 5 (Data), row 8, the average real wage in
a high skill industry is about 38% higher than in a low skill industry.22 Row 9 shows that
the standard deviation of wage growth in the high skill industry is only 62% of the standard
deviation of real wage growth in the low skill industry (the annual wage growth standard
deviations are 2.3% and 1.4%, respectively). As discussed in the related literature section,
the higher rigidity of wages of high skilled workers relative to low skilled workers is a well
documented fact in the labor economics literature.
  22
     Note that this ratio is for the average wage in each industry, not for the ratio of the wages of a high
skill vs. low skilled worker. Because both industries employee both low skill and high skilled workers (but
in different proportions), the average represents an intermediate value of the ratio of the two wages. If we
take the average fraction of high skilled workers to be 0.32 in the high skill industry and 0.10 in the low skill
industry (as reported in Table 4), and solve for the effective ratio of the wage rate of a high skilled worker
relative to low skilled worker, the estimated ratio is 3.03, that is, a typical high skilled worker has an annual
wage rate three times larger than a low skilled worker.



                                                       34
    To incorporate the previous differences in the model, we consider an alternative
calibration of the model in which we set the relative productivity of a typical worker in
the high skill industry to be λhigh = 1.38, and in the low skill industry to be λlow = 1,
which is the value used in the baseline calibration. We set the parameters of the wage rate
process in the two industries to roughly match the relative mean and standard deviation of
the wage rate in the two industries. This leads to the following parameters: τ 1,high = 0.0095,
τ 1,low = 0.0032, τ 2,high = 0.98, and τ 2,low = 0.75. We maintain the difference in the labor
adjustment costs parameters and idiosyncratic productivity to be equal to the parameters
used in the previous section (calibration results reported in Table 2, column 3), so that we
can continue to evaluate the incremental impact of this additional source of heterogeneity.
   As reported in Table 2, column 4, rows 7 to 11, this extended model is now overall
consistent with the relative properties of the hiring rate, investment, and wages in the two
industries. More important, and consistent with the analysis in the previous section, the fit
of the model for the key asset pricing implications relating the hiring rate and asset prices
(hiring spread portfolio) do not change in a quantitatively meaningful way. Rows 1 to 6 show
that the key testable predictions P1 to P3 remain valid in this more realistic calibration of
the model as well, and the model implied moments are very close to those obtained in
the baseline model. This result is intuitive. The rigidity of the wage rate operates in the
model through an operating leverage effect: with less flexible costs, the volatility of the firm’s
profits (and hence of the payments to shareholders) increases. But, as discussed in the theory
Section 3.2, the hiring return spread in the baseline calibration of the model is not driven
by an operating leverage effect; it is mostly driven by exposure to the aggregate adjustment
cost shock, and is due to labor adjustment costs. As such, it is natural to expect that the
change in the properties of the wage rate processes across industries has a relatively minor
impact on the properties of the hiring return spread in the model, at least within the set
of realistic parameter values of the wage rate processes considered in this and the baseline’s
calibrations.


8     Conclusion
We show novel empirical linkages between the stock market and the labor market. We find
that the negative hiring-expected return relation identified in previous studies is steeper in
high skill industries than in low skill industries. This result holds in data for the U.S. and in
international data for the G7 countries. Theoretically, we introduce labor-force heterogeneity
in a standard model of investment to show that this result supports the hypothesis that
labor adjustment costs are higher for more skilled workers than for low skilled workers, a

                                               35
hypothesis that is also consistent with empirical evidence from the labor demand literature.
In addition, we show that the Sharpe ratios of the hiring rate spread portfolio varies with
the composition of the industry labor force. In particular, the Sharpe ratio of the hiring
rate spread portfolio is substantially larger in high labor skill industries than in low labor
skill industries. Finally, we show that the steeper negative expected return–hiring relation in
industries with higher labor skills is not explained by exposure to the aggregate market factor,
that is, the unconditional CAPM cannot explain the returns of these portfolios, consistent
with the theoretical analysis.
    Taken together, our results show that labor-force heterogeneity affects asset prices in
financial markets. This result has broader implications for the link between the asset pricing
and labor economics literatures. Our findings suggest that financial market variables, which
are typically ignored in the labor economics literature, can be a useful source of information
about the importance of labor market frictions. At the same time, our results suggest that the
characteristics of the labor force, which are typically ignored in the asset pricing literature,
is an important determinant of equilibrium risk premiums in the cross section.
   Relaxing some of our simplifying assumptions would lead to interesting extensions of
the model and to novel empirical predictions. Here, we take the wage rate process to be
exogenous. In a general equilibrium setting in which wage rates are determined through,
for example, Nash bergaining, the difference in bargaining power of high and low skilled
workers is likely to further affect the properties of firm’s cash flows, and hence potentially
generate additional differences in risk premiums in the cross section. In addition, a large
literature on capital-skill complementarity suggests that elasticity of substitution between
capital and unskilled labor is higher than that between capital and skilled labor.23 In turn,
this difference is likely to affect the firms’ ability to respond to aggregate shocks, and hence
generate additional cross sectional variation in equilibrium risk premiums. Finally, our
analyses ignore worker’s training, which can have implications for the endogenous size of
labor adjustment costs. Firms can adjust their skilled labor force not only by hiring skilled
workers but also by training unskilled workers internally, and hence avoid part of the large
hiring costs associated with hiring high skilled workers in the future. Examining the impact
of these and other labor related differences on asset prices is an interesting topic for future
research.
  23
   See, for example, Griliches (1969), and more recently, Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krussel (1997),
Krussel, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000), and Duffy, Papageorgiou, and Perez-Sebastian (2004).




                                                 36
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, 2001, Good jobs versus bad jobs, Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1),
     1 − 21

 [2] Andrew B. Abel, and Olivier J. Blanchard ,1986, The present value of profits and the
    cyclical variability of investment, Econometrica, 54(2), 249 − 273

 [3] Asness, Clifford, R. Burt Porter, and Ross Stevens, 2000, Predicting stock returns
    using industry-relative firm characteristics, Working paper, Iowa State University

 [4] Belo, Frederico, Xiaoji Lin, and Santiago Bazdresch, 2014, Labor hiring, investment,
     and stock return predictability in the cross section, Journal of Political Economy,
    122(1), 129-177

 [5] Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment,
    growth options and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1153-1607.

 [6] Berk, J., and J. Walden, 2013, Limited capital market participation and human capital
    risk, Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 3(1), 1 − 37

 [7] Betermier, Sebastien, Thomas Jansson, Christine Parlour, and Johan Walden, 2012,
     Hedging labor income risk, Journal of Financial Economics, 105(3), 622 − 639

 [8] Blatter, M., S. Muehlemann, S. Schenker, and S. Wolter, 2012, Hiring costs of skilled
     workers and the supply of firm-provided training, working paper, University of Bern

 [9] Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica, 77(3),
     623 − 685

[10] Bond, Stephen, and John Van Reenen, 2007, Microeconometric models of investment
    and employment, Handbook of econometrics, 6, 4417 − 4500

[11] Boyd, John H., Jian Hu, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2005, The stock market’s reaction to
    unemployment news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks, Journal of Finance,
    60(2), 649 − 672

[12] Button, Peter, 1990, The cost of labour turnover: an accounting perspective, Labour
    Economics and Productivity 2, 146 − 160

[13] Caballero, Ricardo. 2007, Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring. MIT
    Press

                                           37
[14] Caju, Philip Du, Catherine Fuss, and Ladislav Wintr, 2007, Downward wage rigidity
     for different workers and firms : an evaluation for Belgium using the IWFP procedure,
     Working Paper, European Central Bank.

[15] Campbell III, Carl M. ,1997, The variation in wage rigidity by occupation and union
     status in the US, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 59, 133 − 147

[16] Cappelli, Peter, and Steffanie L. Wilk, 1997, Understanding selection processes:
     organization determinants and performance outcomes, Mimeo, The Wharton School

[17] Chen, Huafeng Jason, Marcin Kacperczyk, and Hernn Ortiz-Molina, 2011, Labor
    unions, operating flexibility, and the cost of equity, Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis, 46, 25 − 58

[18] Cochrane, John, 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock
     returns and economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 461, 209 − 237

[19] Cochrane, John, 2005, Financial Markets and the Real Economy, Foundations and
    Trends(R) in Finance, 1, 1C101.

[20] Danthine, Jean-Pierre, and John B. Donaldson, 2002, Labour relations and asset
    returns, Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 41 − 64

[21] Davis, Steven, R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, 2006, The flow approach
     to labor markets: New data sources and micro-macro links, Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 20(3), 3 − 26

[22] Diamond, Peter A, 1982, Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium,
    Journal of Political Economy, 90(5), 881 − 894

[23] Dolfin, Sarah, 2006, An examination of firms’ employment costs, Applied Economics,
     38(8), 861 − 878

[24] Donangelo, Andres, 2009, Investments in human capital and expected asset returns,
     Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin

[25] Donangelo, Andres, 2014, Labor mobility: implications for asset pricing, Journal of
     Finance, 68(3), 1321 − 1346

[26] Donangelo, Andres, Francois Gourio, and Miguel Palacios, 2015, Labor leverage and
     the value spread, Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin


                                           38
[27] Dube, Arindrajit, Eric Freeman, and Michael Reich, 2010, Employee replacement costs,
     Working Paper, UC Berkeley: Institute for Research on Labor and Employment

[28] Duffy, John, Chris Papageorgiou, and Fidel Perez-Sebastian, 2004, Capital-skill
    complementarity? Evidence from a panel of countries, Review of Economics and
    Statistics, 86(1), 327 − 344

[29] Eiling, Esther, 2011, Industry-specific human capital, idiosyncratic risk and the cross-
     section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance, 68(1), 43 − 84

[30] Eisfeldt, Andrea and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2013, Organizational capital and the
    cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Finance, 68(4), 1365 − 1406

[31] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns
    on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3 − 56

[32] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2008, Dissecting anomalies, Journal of
     Finance, 63(4), 1653 − 1678

[33] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2014, A five-factor asset pricing model,
     Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming

[34] Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium:
     Empirical tests, Journal of Political Economy, 81(3) 607

[35] Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert, 1977, Human capital and capital market
    equilibrium, Journal of Financial Economics, 4(1), 95-125

[36] Favilukis, Jack, and Xiaoji Lin, 2015, Wage rigidity: A solution to several asset pricing
    puzzles, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming

[37] Greenwood, Jeremy, Hercowitz, Zvi, and Per Krusell,1997, Long-run implications of
    investment-specific technological change, American Economic Review, 87(3), 342 −362

[38] Griliches, Zvi ,1969, Capital-skill complementarity, Review of Economics and Statistics,
     51(4), 465-468

[39] Hall, Robert, 2014, High discounts and high unemployment, NBER working paper
     19871

[40] Hamermesh, Daniel S, 1993, Labor demand, 1st ed, Princeton University Press



                                             39
[41] Hamermesh, Daniel S and Gerard Pfann, 1996, Adjustment costs in factor demand,
     Journal of Economic Literature, XXXIV, 1264 − 1292

[42] Hou, Kewei, Andrew Karolyi, and Bon-Chan Kho, 2011, What Factors Drive Global
     Stock Returns?, Review of Financial Studies, 24(8), 2527-2574.

[43] Hou, Kewei, Lu Zhang, and Chen Xue, 2014, Digesting anomalies: An investment
    approach, Review of Financial Studies, 28(3), 650-705

[44] Imrohoroglu, Ayse, and Selale Tuzel, 2014, Firm-level productivity, risk, and return,
    Management Science, 60, 2073-2090.

[45] Ince, Ozgur, and R. Burt Porter, 2006, Individual equity return data from Thomson
     Datastream: Handle with care!, Journal of Financial Research, 29(4), 463C479.

[46] Jagannathan, Ravi and Zenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-
     section of expected returns, The Journal of Finance, 51, 3 − 53

[47] Jermann, Urban J, 1998, Asset pricing in production economies, Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 41(2), 257 − 275

[48] Kogan, Leonid, 2001, An equilibrium model of irreversible investment, Journal of
    Financial Economics, 62, 201 − 245

[49] Kogan, Leonid, 2004. Asset prices and real investment, Journal of Financial Economics
     73, 411–431

[50] Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2012, Economic activity of firms and asset
     prices, Annual Review of Financial Economics, 4, 361-384

[51] Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2013, Firm characteristics and stock
     returns: The role of investment-specific shocks, Review of Financial Studies, 26(11),
    2718 − 2759

[52] Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2014, Growth opportunities, technology
     shocks and asset prices, Journal of Finance, 69(2), 675 − 718

[53] Krussel, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, Geovanni L. Violante, 2000, Capital-
     skill complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis, Econometrica, 68(5),
    1029 − 1053

[54] Kuehn, Lars-Alexander, Mikhail Simutin, and Jessie J. Wang, 2014, A labor capital
     asset pricing model, Working Paper

                                           40
[55] Kydland, Finn E., 1984, Labor-force heterogeneity and the business cycle, Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 173 − 208

[56] Lagakos, David, and Guillermo Ordonez, 2011, Which workers get insurance within
    the firm?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 632 − 645

[57] Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2007, Why is long-horizon equity less risky?
    A duration-based explanation of the value premium, Journal of Finance 62, 55 − 92

[58] Li, Dongmei and Lu Zhang, 2010, Does q-theory with investment frictions explain
     anomalies in the cross-section of returns?, Journal of Financial Economics, 98(2),
    297 − 314

[59] Li, Erica X. N., Dmitry Livdan, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Anomalies, Review of Financial
    Studies, 22 (11), 4301-4334

[60] Liu, Laura X. L., Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Investment-based expected
     stock returns, Journal of Political Economy, 117(6), 1105 − 1139

[61] Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, The returns on human capital:
     Good news on wall street is bad news on main street, Review of Financial Studies,
    21(5), 2097 − 2137

[62] Lustig, Hanno, Chad Syverson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Technological
     Change and the Growing Inequality in Managerial Compensation, Journal of Financial
    Economics, 99(3), 601 − 627

[63] Malevergne, Yannick, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Didier Sornette (2011), Professor Zipf
    goes to Wall Street, Working Paper

[64] Mayers, David, 1972, Non-marketable assets and capital market equilibrium under
     uncertainty, in Jensen, M. Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, Praeger, New
    York,223 − 248

[65] McGrattan, Ellen R., 1999, Application of weighted residual methods to dynamic
    economic models. In Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies,
    Chapter 6, eds. R. Marimon and A. Scott. Oxford: Oxford University Press

[66] Merz, Monika, and Eran Yashiv, 2007, Labor and the market value of the firm,
    American Economic Review, 97(4), 1419 − 1431



                                          41
[67] Mincer, Jacob, 1962, On-the-job training: Costs, returns, and some implications,
     Journal of Political Economy, 70(5), 50 − 79

[68] Mortensen, Dale T, 1982, Property rights and efficiency in mating, racing, and related
     games, American Economic Review, 72(5) 968 − 979

[69] Ochoa, Marcelo, 2013, Volatility, labor heterogeneity, and asset prices, Working Paper

[70] Oi, Walter Y., 1962, Labor as a quasi-fixed factor, Journal of Political Economy 70,
     538 − 555

[71] Palacios, Miguel, 2015, Human capital as an asset class: Implications from a general
    equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies, 28(4), 978 − 1023

[72] Palacios, Miguel, and Alex Stomper, 2014, Training the doubtful and timid, working
    paper, Vanderbilt University

[73] Parker, Jonathan, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, Who bears aggregate
     fluctuations and how?, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings

[74] Parker, Jonathan, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2010, The increase in income
     cyclicality of high-income households and its relation to the rise in top income shares,
    Brookings Papers on EconomicActivity

[75] Parlour, Christine, and Johan Walden, 2011, General equilibrium returns to human and
     investment capital under moral hazard, Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 394 − 428

[76] Petersen, Mitchel A., 2009, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets:
     Comparing approaches, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 435 − 480

[77] Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, Lu Zhang, and Lars-Alexander Khuen, 2013, Endogenous
     disasters and asset prices, working paper, Carnegie Mellon University and Ohio State
    University

[78] Pissarides, Christopher A., 1985, Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment,
     vacancies, and real wages, American Economic Review, 75(4), 676 − 690

[79] Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1995, Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle
     models, In Frontiers of business cycle research , Ed T.F. Cooley(ed), Princeton
    University Press, 294 − 330

[80] Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, Labor Income and Predictability of Stock
     Returns, Review of Financial Studies, 19, 1 − 44

                                            42
[81] Shapiro, Matthew D, 1986, The dynamic demand for capital and labor, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 101(3), 513 − 542

[82] Shumway, Tyler, 1997, The delisting bias in CRSP data, 1997, Journal of Finance, 52,
    327 − 340

[83] Tauchen, George, and Robert Hussey, 1991, Quadrature-based methods for obtaining
    approximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models, Econometrica, 59(2), 371−396

[84] Tuzel, Selale, 2009, Corporate real estate holdings and the cross section of stock
     returns, Review of Financial Studies, 23(6), 2268 − 2302

[85] Uhlig, Harald, 2007, Explaining asset prices with external habits and wage rigidities
     in a DSGE model, American Economic Review, 97(2), 239 − 243

[86] Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, The Journal of Finance, 60(1), 67 − 103




                                           43
A-1        Numerical Algorithm
All of the endogenous variables in the model are functions of the state variables. Because
the functional forms are not available analytically, we solve for these functions numerically.
The model is solved at a monthly frequency, which is the frequency of the stock return data
used in the empirical tests. Because all the firm-level accounting variables in the data are
only available at an annual frequency, we time-aggregate the simulated accounting data to
make the model-implied moments comparable with those in the data.24
   We use the value function iteration procedure to solve the firm’s maximization problem.
The value function and the optimal decision rule are solved on a grid in a discrete state
space. We specify a grid of 27 points for capital and labor, respectively, with upper bounds
k̄ and n̄ that are large enough to be nonbinding. The grids for capital and labor stocks are
constructed recursively, following McGrattan (1999), that is, ki = ki−1 + ck1 exp(ck2 (i − 2)),
where i = 1,...,27 is the index of grids points and ck1 and ck2 are two constants chosen to
provide the desired number of grid points and two upper bounds k̄ and n̄, given two pre-
specified lower bounds k and n. The advantage of this recursive construction is that more
                        ¯     ¯
grid points are assigned around k and n, where the value function has most of its curvature.
                                ¯     ¯
     The aggregate productivity shock εxt is an i.i.d. standard normal shock. We discretize
εxt into 5 grid points using Gauss-Hermite quadrature. The state variables s and z have
continuous support in the theoretical model, but they have to be transformed into discrete
state space for the numerical implementation. The popular method of Tauchen and Hussey
(1991) does not work well when the persistence level is above 0.9. Because both the aggregate
adjustment cost wedge and idiosyncratic productivity processes are highly persistent, we use
the method described in Rouwenhorst (1995) for a quadrature of the Gaussian shocks. We
use 9 grid points for the s process and 5 grid points for the z process. In all cases, the results
are robust to finer grids as well. Once the discrete state space is available, the conditional
expectation can be carried out simply as a matrix multiplication. Cubic spline interpolation
is used extensively to obtain optimal investment and hiring that do not lie directly on the
grid points. Finally, we use a simple discrete global search routine in maximizing the firm’s
problem.
  24
    Because firms are all-equity financed in the model, but use both debt and equity in the real data, we
leverage up all returns generated in the model to make them comparable with the data. We compute the
                                  e
model-implied levered return as rt+1   = (1 + Debt/Equity) × (Rta − Rf ), where Ra is the return of the all-
equity firm in the model, Rf is the risk-free rate, and Equity/Debt is the average equity-to-debt ratio in the
data (0.67).




                                                     44
A-2       Specific vocational preparation (SVP) index
In this appendix, we describe the Specific Vocational Preparation (SVP) index used to
construct our industry-level labor skill measure in more detail. The data on SVP index
comes from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT): Revised Fourth Edition, 1991
from U.S. Department of Labor. For each occupation, the SVP index is defined based on
the amount of time required by a typical worker in the occupation to learn the techniques,
acquire the information, and develop the facility needed for average performance in a specific
job-worker situation.
   This training may be acquired in a school, work, military, institutional, or vocational
environment. It does not include the orientation time required of a fully qualified worker
to become accustomed to the special conditions of any new job. Specific vocational
training includes: vocational education, apprenticeship training, in-plant training, on-the-job
training, and essential experience in other jobs.
   Specific vocational training includes training given in any of the following circumstances:
a. Vocational education (high school; commercial or shop training; technical school; art
school; and that part of college training which is organized around a specific vocational
objective);
b. Apprenticeship training (for apprenticeable jobs only);
c. In-plant training (organized classroom study provided by an employer);
d. On-the-job training (serving as learner or trainee on the job under the instruction of a
qualified worker);
e. Essential experience in other jobs (serving in less responsible jobs which lead to the higher
grade job or serving in other jobs which qualify).
   The following is an explanation of the various levels of specific vocational preparation:
1. Short demonstration only;
2. Anything beyond short demonstration up to and including 1 month;
3. Over 1 month up to and including 3 months;
4. Over 3 months up to and including 6 months;
5. Over 6 months up to and including 1 year;
6. Over 1 year up to and including 2 years;
7. Over 2 years up to and including 4 years;
8. Over 4 years up to and including 10 years;
9. Over 10 years




                                              45
                                Table 1: Baseline parameter values

This table presents the parameter values of the baseline model (BLB) with no labor-force heterogeneity.


                                  Parameter                               Symbol       Value
          Technology: general
            Weight of physical capital in the production function            α            0.36
            Returns to scale                                                  θ           0.85
            Elasticity of substitution between capital and labor             φ            0.50
            Rate of depreciation for capital                                 δk           0.01
            Quit rate of labor                                               δn           0.01
            Fixed operating cost                                             f          0.0105
            Worker’s productivity                                            λ               1
          Technology: adjustment costs
            Convex parameters in capital adjustment cost                   c+   −
                                                                            k /ck     3.1/34.1
            Convex parameters in labor adjustment cost                     c+   −
                                                                            n /cn      1.2/1.2
                                                                            + −
            Nonconvex parameters in capital adjustment cost                bk /bk      .04/.08
            Nonconvex parameters in labor adjustment cost                  b+   −
                                                                            n /bn    0.16/0.20
          Stochastic processes
            Multiplicative coefficient on wage rate process                 τ1          .0095
            Sensitivity of the wage rate to aggregate productivity          τ2            0.9
            Average growth rate of aggregate productivity                   µx       0.013/12
            Conditional volatility of aggregate productivity                σx          0.055
            Average level of firm-specific productivity                     z̄           −3.4
            Persistence coefficient of firm-specific productivity           ρz           0.97
            Conditional volatility of firm-specific productivity            σz           0.10
            Persistence coefficient of adjustment cost wedge                ρs           0.97
            Conditional volatility of adjustment cost wedge                 σs          0.035
            Real risk-free rate (%)                                         rf        1.65/12
            Loading of the SDF on aggregate productivity shock              γx           6.75
            Loading of the SDF on the adjustment cost shock                 γs          −14.5




                                                   46
         Table 2: Model predictions: selected moments across alternative calibrations

This table presents the selected moments of asset prices and real quantities in alternative calibrations of the
model (columns 1 to 4) and in the real data (column 5). BLB corresponds to the homogeneous economy
calibration in Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch (2014). We compare the moments in the data with moments of
simulated data. The model-implied moments are the mean value of the corresponding moments across
simulations. Rows 1 to 6 report the return properties of the hiring (HN) low minus high (spread) portfolio
in the high skill industry and in the low skill industry. The hiring return spread is the average returns of the
5th quintile minus 1st quintile hiring rate portfolio. Excess return is the annualized (×1200) portfolio excess
return (in excess of the risk free rate). Sharpe ratio is the HN spread portfolio Sharpe ratio (mean excess
return-to-standard deviation of excess returns ratio). CAPM alpha is the intercept from monthly CAPM
regressions, reported in annual percentage (×1200). Rows 7 to 11 report the ratio of the moments of selected
variables in the high skill relative to the low skill industry (denoted h/l). S.D.(∆Sales)h/l , S.D.(∆Wage)h/l ,
S.D.(HN)h/l , S.D.(IK)h/l are the ratio of the standard deviation of firm-level real sales growth (∆Sales), real
wages (∆Wages), hiring rate (HN), investment rate (IK), respectively in the high skill industry relative to
the standard deviation of the same variables in the the low skill industry. Mean(Wage)s/l is the ratio of the
mean real wage rate in the high skill industry relative to the mean real wage rate in the low skill industry.
The real data are from 1991 to 2012. The reported statistics for the model are obtained from 500 samples
of simulated data, each with 1,500 firms and 600 monthly observations for each industry.



                                                        BLB Adj. cost          Adj. cost     Adj cost,     Data
                                                                                & vol.        vol. &
                                                                                               wage
 Row                   Moments                           (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)
         Asset prices: HN spread portfolio
   1       Excess return (%) - High skill               4.38           5.29          5.24          5.16 8.55
   2       Excess return (%) - Low skill                4.38           1.23          0.90          0.21 2.66
   3       Sharpe ratio - High skill                    1.05           1.09          0.97          0.95 0.77
   4       Sharpe ratio - Low skill                     1.05           0.18          0.19          0.04 0.31
   5       CAPM alpha (%) - High skill                  5.17           7.21          6.47          6.46 10.44
   6       CAPM alpha (%) - Low skill                   5.17           2.77          2.28          2.28 2.30
         Relative quantities and wages
   7       S.D.(∆Sales)h/l                                 1           0.72          1.31          1.37     1.24
   8       Mean(Wage)h/l                                   1              1             1          1.38     1.38
   9       S.D.(∆Wage)h/l                                  1              1             1          0.76     0.62
  10       S.D.(HN)h/l                                     1           0.68             1          1.16     1.04
  11       S.D.(IK)h/l                                     1           0.96          1.19          1.19     1.33




                                                      47
                Table 3: Industries with highest and lowest average labor skills
This table presents the top 10 (Panel A) and bottom 10 (Panel B) industries sorted on average labor skill
in 2012. Industry average labor skill (Skill, in percentage) is measured as the industry-level proportion of
workers in occupations that have a Specific Vocational Preparation (SVP) value of 7, 8, or 9. An industry
is defined at the four-digit NAICS level.


             NAICS                             Industry                             Skill (%)

                       Panel A: 10 Industries with highest average skills
             5112      Software Publishers                                             76.5
             5415      Computer Systems Design and Related Services                    71.9
             3341      Computer and Peripheral Equipment Manufacturing                 70.4
             5417      Scientific Research and Development Services                    67.9
             5413      Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services                65.9
             5414      Specialized Design Services                                     63.9
             5232      Securities and Commodity Exchanges                              63.4
             6111      Elementary and Secondary Schools                                62.1
             6113      Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools                61.1
             6112      Junior Colleges                                                 60.0

                       Panel B: 10 Industries with lowest average skills
             7225      Restaurants and Other Eating Places                             1.3
             4481      Clothing Stores                                                 1.4
             4482      Shoe Stores                                                     1.4
             4531      Florists                                                        1.4
             4471      Gasoline Stations                                               1.5
             4854      School and Employee Bus Transportation                          1.5
             8121      Personal Care Services                                          1.7
             7224      Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)                           2.1
             4452      Specialty Food Stores                                           2.1
             4533      Used Merchandize Stores                                         2.3




                                                    48
               Table 4: Firm characteristics in low and high labor skill industries
This table reports the average portfolio characteristics of 2 one-way sorted (Low and High) on labor skill
portfolios (top Panel), and 10 two-way sorted on labor skill (Low and High) and labor hiring (HN, from
1-Low to 5-High) portfolios (medium and bottom Panels). We split the firms into low and high labor skill
industries based on the median value of the industry-level labor skill variable in the cross-section in each
year. Skill is the fraction of workers in high skill industries; Age is the firm age measured as the number of
years since the firm is included in CRSP; HN in the (net) hiring rate; IK is the physical capital investment
rate; ∆Sales is the real growth rate in sales; Size is the log market equity; BM is the book-to-market ratio;
KL is the real physical capital stock to employee ratio; R&D is the research and development to sales ratio
(in percentage). All measures are annual. H-L stands for high-minus-low. The portfolio-level characteristic
is the time series average of the median characteristic across the firms in the portfolio in each year. The
sample is from 1991 to 2012.


          Portfolio sort
          Skill Hiring Skill        Age      HN      IK    ∆Sales Size      BM      KL      R&D

                                       Two labor    skill portfolios
          Low              0.10    11.55 0.02        0.18     0.04 5.40 0.64         0.18    0.28
          High             0.32     9.30 0.04        0.22     0.07 5.45 0.53         0.19    7.81
                     H-L 0.21      −2.25 0.02        0.05     0.03 0.05 −0.11        0.01    7.53
                      [t] 17.16    −4.33 4.62        6.92     6.03 0.56 −2.96        1.77    8.92

                           Five hiring portfolios in low labor skill industries
          Low    Low         0.10 13.41 −0.15 0.13 −0.07 4.64 0.91 0.17 0.48
          Low    2           0.10 15.63 −0.03 0.15 −0.01 5.60 0.73 0.23 0.43
          Low    3           0.10 15.26 0.02 0.17           0.03 5.83 0.63 0.22 0.47
          Low    4           0.10 12.59 0.09 0.22           0.09 5.64 0.58 0.18 0.25
          Low    High        0.10 9.04 0.28 0.29            0.20 5.48 0.51 0.16 0.08
                 H-L       −0.01 −4.37 0.43 0.17            0.27 0.84 −0.40 −0.02 −0.40
                 [t]       −1.73 −3.36 11.98 8.33 13.11 6.32 −7.06 −1.94 −4.78

                          Five hiring portfolios in high labor skill industries
          High   Low        0.33 10.81 −0.17 0.16 −0.09 4.61 0.71 0.19 9.16
          High   2          0.29 14.20 −0.03 0.17           0.01 5.62 0.64 0.22 4.48
          High   3          0.29 13.07 0.04 0.21            0.06 5.79 0.56 0.21 5.65
          High   4          0.32 9.60 0.13 0.29             0.13 5.68 0.47 0.19 8.51
          High   High       0.34 7.02 0.35 0.40             0.30 5.63 0.40 0.17 11.44
                 H-L        0.01 −3.79 0.52 0.25            0.39 1.02 −0.31 −0.03 2.28
                 [t]        1.29 −4.94 12.42 13.04 11.41 8.91 −7.13 −5.00 1.83




                                                     49
                                                               Table 5: Panel OLS regressions
     The table reports the slope coefficients from pooled firm-level ols regressions to predict annual stock returns of the form:
                                      ri,t = at + bi + c × HNt−1 + d × HNt−1 × HSkillt−1 + e × HSkillt−1 + controlst−1 + eit ,
     in which the subscripts i stand for firm i = 1, ..N, and t stands for time t = 1, .., T . The explained variable is r, the firm’s i future annual log stock
     return from July of year t to June of year t+1. The explanatory variables are the following: at is a time fixed effect (Year FE, if included); bi is a
     firm fixed effect (Firm FE, if included); HN, is the firms’ lagged hiring rate; HSkill is a dummy variable which is one if the firm belong to a high skill
     industry at the end of fiscal year end t-2; Micro is a dummy variable which is one if the firm is classified as a micro cap firm (market equity below the
     20th percentile of the cross sectional distribution of market equity of NYSE firms) at the end of fiscal year end t-2. The additional control variables
     are: IK, is the firms’ lagged physical investment rate; Size is the firm’s lagged log market capitalization; BM is the firms’ lagged log book-to-market
     ratio; and Lev is the firm’s lagged leverage ratio. N is the number of observations. R2 is adjusted for degrees of freedom. The t-statistic of each
     coefficient is reported in parenthesis and is computed from standard errors clustered by firm. To decrease the influence of outliers, the firm-level
     investment rate is winsorized at the top and bottom 0.5% in each cross-section. The sample is from 1991 to 2012.

                   Row                     (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)                      (5)        (6)    (7)     (8)                (9)
                    1 HN                  −11.54 −8.49 −11.35 −15.91                        −7.61      −5.69  −7.27 −13.13                1.506
                                         (−4.68) (−3.10) (−3.41) (−4.45)                  (−3.10)    (−2.07)(−2.19) (−3.74)              (0.43)
                     2   HN×HSkill         −8.16 −13.68 −14.67 −19.52                       −7.33     −12.41 −12.94 −18.15              −14.43
                                         (−2.87) (−4.35) (−3.74) (−4.61)                  (−2.58)    (−3.95)(−3.31) (−4.38)            (−3.55)
50




                     3   HSkill            −0.65            0.77                              0.34              1.48
                                         (−0.99)          (1.06)                            (0.51)            (2.04)
                     4   Micro                            −3.92                                               −3.81
                                                         (−3.63)                                            (−3.53)
                     5   HN×Micro                         −0.88    11.51                                      −1.30    11.43               5.07
                                                         (−0.19) (2.34)                                     (−0.28)   (2.34)             (1.06)
                     6   HSkill×Micro                     −2.40                                               −1.99
                                                         (−1.92)                                            (−1.59)
                     7   HN×HSkill×Micro                    9.98   10.30                                        8.46   10.18               6.02
                                                          (1.84) (1.79)                                       (1.56)  (1.78)             (1.09)
                     8   IK                                                               −16.81 −19.32 −16.18 −19.21                    −9.72
                                                                                         (−12.62) (−11.14) (−12.23) (−11.11)           (−5.68)
                     9   Size                                                                                                           −25.66
                                                                                                                                      (−37.15)
                    10 BM                                                                                                                 1.882
                                                                                                                                         (2.71)
                    11 Lev                                                                                                              −11.21
                                                                                                                                       (−3.70)
                         Year FE                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                         Firm FE                               Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes         Yes
                         N                        44938      44074     44922     44059      44905      44040       44889      44025      43769
                         R2                       0.110      0.010     0.112     0.012      0.115      0.014       0.117      0.017       0.111
                          Table 6: Labor skill and the hiring return spread
This table reports the average excess stock returns and abnormal returns of five one-way sorted on labor
hiring rate portfolios across firms belonging to industries classified as low skilled labor industries (left panel),
and across firms belonging to industries classified as high skilled labor (right panel). The split the firms
into low and high skill industries is based on the median value of the industry-level labor skill variable in
the cross-section in each year. re is the average annualized (×1200) portfolio excess stock return; [t] are
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent t-statistics (Newey-West); SR is the portfolio Sharpe ratio,
α is portfolio average abnormal return, obtained as the intercept from monthly CAPM, reported in annual
percentage (×1200); L-H stands for the low-minus-high hiring portfolio; Diff L-H stands for the difference
in the L-H in high labor skill industries and low labor skill industries. The sample is from July 1991 to
December 2012.



                  Low skill industries                         High skill industries                        Diff
         L       2     3       4       H     L-H      L      2      4       4      H L-H                    L-H
                                                 Excess returns
  re     7.86   8.10    6.01    7.50    5.21 2.66 11.13 9.53 8.02 9.64 2.58 8.55                             5.89
  [t]    1.64   2.20    1.75    2.02    1.22 1.06    2.92 2.95 2.34 2.40 0.54 2.65                           1.76
  SR     0.47   0.63    0.50    0.58    0.35 0.31    0.84 0.85 0.67 0.69 0.16 0.77                           0.46
                                            CAPM abnormal returns
  α      0.20 2.00 0.27 1.17           −2.10 2.30    4.23 3.57 1.40 1.94 −6.21 10.44                        8.14
  [t]    0.07 0.87 0.13 0.57           −0.90 0.91    2.31 2.47 1.21 1.39 −2.84 3.18                         2.51
  b      1.14 0.91 0.85 0.94            1.09 0.05    1.03 0.89 0.99 1.15 1.31 −0.28                        −0.33
  [t]   14.28 14.94 16.43 17.09        17.64 0.89 22.30 24.16 36.91 37.59 26.01 −3.37                      −4.19




                                                        51
                                                             Table 7: Cross sectional regressions
     The table shows average slope coefficients and their heteroscedasticity-and-autocorrelation-consistent t-statistics (Newey-West) (in parenthesis) from
     monthly firm-level cross-section regressions of the form:
                                                rit = Intt + at × HNit−1 + bt × HNit−1 × Microt−1 + controlst−1 + eit ,
     in which the subscripts i stand for firm i = 1, ..Nt , and t stands for time t = 1, .., T . The explained variable is r, the firm’s i future monthly log stock
     return. Depending on the specification (from 1 to 5), the explanatory variables are: HN, is the firms’ lagged hiring rate; Micro is a dummy variable
     which is one if the firm is classified as a micro cap firm (market equity below the 20th percentile of the cross sectional distribution of market equity of
     NYSE firms) at the end of fiscal year end t-2. The additional controls are: IK, is the firms’ lagged physical investment rate; Size is the firm’s lagged
     log market capitalization; BM is the firms’ lagged log book-to-market ratio; Lev is the firm’s lagged leverage ratio. R2 is time series average of the
     regression R2 adjusted for degrees of freedom. To decrease the influence of outliers, the firm-level investment rate is winsorized at the top and bottom
     0.5% in each cross-section. Each specification of the regression is estimated separately across two samples: L (Low) includes only firms in low skill
     labor industries at the end of fiscal year-end t-2 and H (High) includes only firms in high skill labor industries at the end fo fiscal year-end t-2. The
     columns H-L test for the difference in the average estimated slope coefficients in the high (H) and low (L) labor skill industries. The stock returns
     data are monthly, the accounting data are annual, and the sample is from July 1991 to December 2012.



                            (1)                    (2)                                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)
     Row            L      H       H-L      L       H      H-L                    L        H      H-L    L        H      H-L     L        H      H-L
52




      1 HN          0.10 −1.37 −1.47 −0.60 −1.97 −1.38                             0.39 −0.94 −1.33       0.32 −1.10 −1.43 −0.11 −1.30 −1.19
                  (0.31) (−5.40) (−4.40) (−1.75) (−5.35) (−3.46)                 (1.23) (−4.35) (−4.05) (1.04) (−5.68) (−4.42) (−0.33) (−4.84) (−3.26)
       2 Micro                             −0.99 −1.06 −0.07                                                                      0.19 −0.10 −0.30
                                         (−4.59) (−4.24) (−0.44)                                                                (1.01) (−0.60) (−1.46)
       3 HN×Micro                            0.87   0.80 −0.07                                                                    0.62    0.34 −0.28
                                           (2.06) (2.21) (−0.13)                                                                (1.52) (1.07) (−0.56)
       4 IK                                                                      −1.15 −1.17 −0.03 −1.60 −1.32            0.28 −1.60 −1.28        0.32
                                                                               (−3.06) (−3.40) (−0.07) (−4.18) (−4.73) (0.75) (−4.19) (−4.81) (0.86)
       5 Size                                                                                             1.77    1.73 −0.04      1.95    1.64 −0.31
                                                                                                        (5.37) (5.01) (−0.15) (5.03) (4.85) (−0.96)
       6 BM                                                                                               0.49    0.54    0.05    0.49    0.54    0.05
                                                                                                        (5.83) (6.07) (0.46) (5.81) (6.10) (0.48)
       7 Lev                                                                                            −2.09 −1.46       0.63 −2.11 −1.46        0.64
                                                                                                       (−5.09) (−4.32) (1.43) (−5.13) (−4.38) (1.47)
          R2              0.56     0.40               1.77      1.50              1.05    0.91            3.75    2.93            4.34    4.34
                                                         Table 8: Evidence from a long sample
     This table replicates the analysis in Table 5 in the longer (non-tradable) sample from 1963 to 2012. The sample is extended backwards from 1991 to
     1963 by assuming that our labor skill measure for each three-digit SIC industry during this period is equal to the average labor skill measure for the
     same three-digit SIC industry between 1991 and 2001.


                   Row                     (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)                   (5)       (6)     (7)     (8)               (9)
                    1 HN                  −10.47 −9.46 −11.83 −14.71                     −6.97     −6.85   −7.94 −11.95               0.230
                                         (−6.36) (−5.48) (−4.97) (−5.94)               (−4.20)    (−3.96)(−3.32) (−4.89)             (0.09)
                    2    HN×HSkill         −5.68 −7.98 −10.17 −14.33                     −4.89     −7.09   −8.94 −13.53             −12.41
                                         (−2.86) (−3.82) (−3.51) (−4.73)               (−2.45)    (−3.40)(−3.08) (−4.53)           (−4.19)
                    3    HSkill            −0.28            0.28                           0.34              0.70
                                         (−0.63)          (0.58)                         (0.77)            (1.45)
                    4    Micro                            −4.25                                            −4.24
                                                         (−6.24)                                         (−6.24)
                    5    HN×Micro                           1.21    7.64                                     0.49   7.378              1.00
                                                          (0.39) (2.33)                                    (0.16)  (2.27)            (0.31)
53




                    6    HSkill×Micro                     −1.33                                            −0.99
                                                         (−1.61)                                         (−1.20)
                    7    HN×HSkill×Micro                    7.20   10.93                                     6.39   11.04              9.88
                                                          (1.88) (2.74)                                    (1.67)  (2.79)            (2.55)
                    8    IK                                                            −15.16    −16.6 −14.68 −16.48                 −8.56
                                                                                      (−14.57) (−13.26) (−14.22) (−13.16)          (−6.87)
                    9    Size                                                                                                       −18.57
                                                                                                                                  (−35.70)
                    10 BM                                                                                                              3.89
                                                                                                                                     (8.11)
                    11 Lev                                                                                                          −15.76
                                                                                                                                   (−7.94)
                         Year FE                 Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                         Firm FE                           Yes                Yes                   Yes                   Yes        Yes
                         N                      75927     74905    75838     74813      75891      74868      75802      74776     73472
                         R2                     0.155     0.007    0.157     0.009      0.159      0.011      0.161      0.013      0.083
                                                         Table 9: Evidence from international data
     This table replicates the analysis in Table 5 using international data for the G6 countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and United
     Kingdom). The table reports the slope coefficients from pooled firm-level ols regressions to predict annual stock returns of the form:
                                     ri,z,t = at,z + bi + c × HNt−1 + d × HNt−1 × HSkillt−1 + e × HSkillt−1 + controlst−1 + eit ,
     in which the subscripts i stand for firm i = 1, ..N, z stands for country c = 1, .., 6, and t stands for time t = 1, .., T . The explained variable is r, the
     firm’s i future annual log stock return from July of year t to June of year t+1 (expressed in dollars). The explanatory variables are the following:
     at,z is a country×time fixed effect (Country×Year FE); bi is a firm fixed effect (Firm FE, if included); HN, is the firms’ lagged hiring rate; HSkill is a
     dummy variable which is one if the firm belong to a high skill industry at the end of fiscal year end t-2; Micro is a dummy variable which is one if the
     firm is classified as a micro cap firm (market equity below the 20th percentile of the cross sectional distribution of market equity of all international
     firms included in the sample) at the end of fiscal year end t-2. The additional control variables is the IK, the firms’ lagged physical investment rate.
     N is the number of observations. R2 is adjusted for degrees of freedom. The t-statistic of each coefficient is reported in parenthesis and is computed
     from standard errors clustered by firm. To decrease the influence of outliers, the firm-level investment rate is winsorized at the top and bottom 0.5%
     in each cross-section. The sample is from 1992 to 2012.


                          Row                              (1)     (2)      (3)          (4)         (5)     (6)  (7)                (8)
                           1 HN                           −6.43 −9.84 −8.80             −10.87       −4.42 −9.35  −5.78              −9.24
                                                         (−3.18) (−4.29) (−4.03)       (−4.55)     (−2.31) (−4.28)
                                                                                                                (−2.59)            (−3.68)
54




                            2   HN×HSkill                 −8.21 −6.66 −8.56              −6.67       −5.99 −4.97  −7.07              −6.22
                                                         (−3.35) (−2.40) (−3.14)       (−2.23)     (−2.53) (−1.83)
                                                                                                                (−2.55)            (−2.00)
                            3   HSkill                    −1.30            −1.39                     −0.46        −0.64
                                                         (−3.56)         (−3.52)                   (−1.26)      (−1.60)
                            4   Micro                                      −1.48                                  −1.45
                                                                         (−2.14)                                (−2.06)
                            5   HN×Micro                                    10.13        6.29                       5.94               1.79
                                                                           (1.88)      (0.99)                     (1.32)             (0.36)
                            6   HSkill×Micro                                 0.49                                   0.92
                                                                           (0.53)                                 (0.98)
                            7   HN×HSkill×Micro                              1.41      −3.39                        4.96               2.12
                                                                           (0.23)    (−0.46)                      (0.91)             (0.34)
                            8   IK                                                              −13.39 −12.69 −13.17                −12.74
                                                                                              (−12.46) (−9.22) (−12.23)            (−9.20)
                                Country × Year FE            Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes                Yes
                                Firm FE                                Yes                Yes              Yes                          Yes
                                N                          53233     52462     52064 51304       51152 50370      50025              49252
                                R2                         0.208     0.007     0.212    0.007    0.219   0.011     0.223              0.012
                              Table 10: Alternative portfolio procedures
This table replicates the analysis in Table 6 using alternative weights in the computation of the average
returns of the hiring portfolios across low and high labor skill industries. For each procedure, the table
reports the average excess stock returns, Sharpe ratios (SR), and CAPM abnormal returns of five one-
way sorted on labor hiring rate portfolios across firms belonging to industries classified as low skilled labor
industries (left panel), and across firms belonging to industries classified as high skilled labor (right panel).
The split the firms into low and high skill industries is based on the median value of the industry-level
labor skill variable in the cross-section in each year. All portfolios are one-year buy and hold so there is
no rebalancing over the year. re is the average annualized (×1200) portfolio excess stock return; [t] are
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent t-statistics (Newey-West); α is portfolio average abnormal
return, obtained as the intercept from monthly CAPM regressions, reported in annual percentage (×1200).
L-H stands for the low-minus-high hiring portfolio; Diff L-H stands for the difference in the L-H in high labor
skill industries and low labor skill industries. The sample is from July 1991 to December 2012.


                   Low skill industries                        High skill     industries                Diff
           L       2    3       4      H       L-H     L      2     3           4      H       L-H      L-H
                                                 Equal-weighted
   re      8.71   9.05 10.03 9.50        5.51 3.20 14.98 12.72 11.92          10.72 4.85 10.13          6.93
   [t]     1.78   2.21 2.60 2.50         1.23 1.29    2.69 3.22 2.85           2.25 0.87 4.25           2.55
   SR      0.51   0.64 0.75 0.72         0.36 0.37    0.78 0.93 0.82           0.65 0.25 1.23           0.74
   a       1.34   2.58 3.76 3.38        −1.68 3.02    6.95 5.97 4.79           2.81 −4.02 10.97         7.95
   [t]     0.41   0.99 1.58 1.39        −0.62 1.23    1.81 2.75 2.13           1.05 −1.19 4.60          3.01
                                          All but micro equal-weighted
   re   7.58 7.89         7.84   7.80    6.20 1.38 11.68 10.81 9.46           11.19 4.16        7.52    6.14
   [t]  1.62 2.03         2.10   1.97    1.39 0.60    2.80 3.00 2.47           2.42 0.78        2.54    2.13
   SR 0.47 0.58           0.61   0.57    0.40 0.17    0.81 0.87 0.71           0.70 0.23        0.73    0.61
   a −0.02 1.52           1.65   1.31   −1.30 1.29    4.08 4.22 2.24           3.06 −5.20       9.28    8.00
   [t] −0.01 0.62         0.73   0.55   −0.52 0.55    2.10 2.56 1.49           1.33 −1.91       3.15    2.88
                                         Number of employees-weighted
   re   6.92 7.29 5.41 8.79              4.70 2.22 13.57 9.31 9.38             8.95 3.99        9.58    7.36
   [t]  1.22 1.67 1.29 2.15              1.09 0.60    3.09 2.48 2.52           2.34 0.97        3.64    1.81
   SR 0.35 0.48 0.37 0.62                0.32 0.17    0.89 0.72 0.73           0.67 0.28        1.05    0.52
   a −0.97 0.68 −0.74 2.35              −2.09 1.12    6.20 2.79 2.64           1.77 −3.50       9.70    8.58
   [t] −0.23 0.23 −0.25 0.90            −0.76 0.31    2.37 1.33 1.51           1.13 −1.91       3.54    2.16
                                             Market value-weighted
   re      9.63   8.29    6.01   6.78    5.05 4.58    8.92 8.85 7.03           9.14 3.04        5.89    1.31
   [t]     2.15   2.18    1.85   1.98    1.31 1.45    2.42 2.82 2.07           2.23 0.67        1.93    0.33
   SR      0.62   0.63    0.53   0.57    0.38 0.42    0.70 0.81 0.60           0.64 0.19        0.56    0.10
   a       2.50   2.31    0.89   1.31   −1.30 3.80    2.23 3.21 0.67           1.41 −5.34       7.56    3.76
   [t]     0.87   0.92    0.42   0.59   −0.56 1.19    1.29 2.07 0.49           0.90 −2.62       2.51    1.00




                                                       55
