NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN INCENTIVES BACKFIRE:
SPILLOVER EFFECTS IN FOOD CHOICE
Manuela Angelucci
Silvia Prina
Heather Royer
Anya Samek
Working Paper 21481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21481
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We are grateful to Tristin Ganter, Justin Holz, and the rest of the Behavioral and Experimental Economics
(BEE) Research Group at the University of Chicago for conducting the experiment, to Meera Mahadevan
and Irvin Rojas for their outstanding research assistance, and to Michele Belot, Marianne Bitler, Kitt
Carpenter, David Chan, Silke Forbes, Peter Kuhn, Pedro Rey Biel, Scott Shane and seminar participants
at the NBER Summer Institute, University of Michigan, University of Chicago Harris School, Universidad
Pompeu Fabra, Bocconi University, and the World Bank for their comments. We have received funding
from the University of Michigan, the University of California-Santa Barbara, and Case Western Reserve
University to carry out this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Manuela Angelucci, Silvia Prina, Heather Royer, and Anya Samek. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Incentives Backfire: Spillover Effects in Food Choice
Manuela Angelucci, Silvia Prina, Heather Royer, and Anya Samek
NBER Working Paper No. 21481
August 2015
JEL No. C93,I1,J13
ABSTRACT
How do peers influence the impact of incentives? Despite much work on incentives, little is known
about the spillover effects of incentives. We investigate two mechanisms by which these effects can
occur: through peers' actions and peers' incentives. In a field experiment on snack choice (grapes versus
cookies), we randomize who receives incentives, the fraction of peers incentivized, and whether or
not it can be observed that peers' choices are incentivized among over 1,500 children in the school
lunchroom. Incentives increase the likelihood of initially choosing grapes. However, peer spillover
effects can be large enough to undo these positive effects.
Manuela Angelucci
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Lorch Hall, 611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mangeluc@umich.edu
Silvia Prina
Case Western Reserve University
Weatherhead School of Management
11119 Bellflower Road, Room 273
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-7235
silvia.prina@gmail.com

Heather Royer
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
royer@econ.ucsb.edu
Anya Samek
University of Southern California
anyasamek@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Incentives are a cornerstone of economics. As such, their use is frequent in many domains,
including education, health, pro-social behavior, and the labor market.1 While often being
successful at improving behaviors or outcomes, incentives can backfire. This is because incentives
can act as both prices and signals. While the price effect of a higher incentive increases takeup,
the signaling effect may increase or decrease takeup.
For example, incentives can signal information about the difficulty of the task (Bénabou and
Tirole, 2003) or the quality of the good incentivized (e.g., Nelson (1970); Shapiro (1983); Milgrom
and Roberts (1986)). In addition, incentives may make a subject feel controlled (deCharms,
1968) or, more broadly, convey “bad news” (Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel, 2011). Consistent
with this signaling theory, Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) find in two separate experiments that
performance on a task falls when small monetary incentives are offered, compared to offering no
monetary incentives. Fischer et al. (2014) find that the subsequent demand for various products
decreases with their introductory price.2
One limitation of the literature on the signalling effects of incentives is that it focuses on
the effects of incentives on their recipients (the direct effects), neglecting the spillover effects
of incentives.3 For example, consider paying students to read books. The direct effect of the
incentive program, absent the influence of peers, may result in students reading more books. At
the same time, these incentives cause two types of spillover effects. One spillover effect operates
through observing peers’ behavior and a second works through observing peers’ incentives. If
I see my friends read, then I may think that reading is interesting and pleasant. However, if I
see my friends incentivized to read, I may think that reading is hard. That is, the two spillover
effects are not necessarily of the same sign or magnitude. Two implications of considering the
signalling effects of incentives are 1) spillover effects are of indeterminate sign and 2) the overall
effect (i.e., the sum of the direct and spillover effects) may differ from the direct effect.
In this paper, we design and conduct a field experiment to measure the net effect of incentives
and decompose it into its direct effect and its spillover effects. We incentivize the choice of grapes
1

A not nearly-exhaustive list of these studies include Volpp et al. (2008, 2009); Charness and Gneezy (2009);
Acland and Levy (2015); Babcock and Hartman (2010); Babcock et al. (forthcoming); Cawley and Price (2013);
John et al. (2011); Royer, Stehr and Sydnor (2015); Belot, Jonathan and Patrick (2013); List and Samek (2014,
2015) for healthy behaviors, Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos (2009); Bettinger (2012); Fryer Jr (2011); Levitt et al.
(2011); Levitt, List and Sadoff (2011) for academic achievement, Ariely, Bracha and Meier (2009); Lacetera and
Macis (2010); Lacetera, Macis and Slonim (2013) for pro-social behavior, and Gneezy and List (2006); Fehr and
List (2004); Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul (2013); Shearer (2004) for worker effort.
2
See Deci, Koestner and Ryan (1999) for a meta analysis of the evidence from psychology and Gneezy, Meier
and Rey-Biel (2011) and Kamenica (2012) for evidence from economics.
3
Following the taxonomy of Angelucci and Di Maro (2015), we define spillover effects in this paper as peer
social interaction effects.

2

versus cookies of 1,600 children in grades K-8 in a low-income Chicago neighborhood. Almost
a third of US children aged 2-19 are now deemed overweight or obese, and part of the problem
is the habitual decision to consume high calorie, low nutrient foods (Ogden et al., 2010). Thus,
incentivizing the choice of healthy food may be one policy tool to reduce the rates of overweight
and obesity.
We first let students choose grapes or cookies simultaneously while seated at lunch tables,
which define our peer network. Later, students can switch their minds after observing their
peers’ actions. To identify the direct effect of incentives, we randomize who is incentivized
to choose grapes. To isolate the two spillover effects of incentives, we randomize both the
fraction incentivized at each table and whether a student’s choice of incentivized grapes is public
knowledge (our public treatment). Randomizing the fraction of tablemates incentivized allows
us to identify the spillover effects under weaker assumptions than much of the prior literature.4
To separate the spillover effects of peers’ actions from the spillover effects of peers’ incentive
status, we randomize whether incentive status is public information. Lastly, to separate the
direct and spillover effects, we also record the initial and final snack choices
We report three main findings. First, incentives increase the likelihood of initially choosing
grapes by over 50%, from 49% to 75%. Second, the spillover effect of observing peers’ choices is
positive. The effect grows monotonically with the peer fraction incentivized and is between one
third to one half as large as the direct effect of incentives. Third, in contrast, the overall spillover
effect of observing both peers’ food choice and whether they picked incentivized grapes is at first
a positive but then a negative function of the fraction of table mates incentivized. When peer
incentives are visible, the overall effect of incentives (i.e., combining the direct and spillover
effects) is largest when roughly 70% of table mates are incentivized. The takeup of grapes for
the 100% incentivized group is not statistically different from that of the 0% incentivized group.
We attempt to disentangle the mechanisms behind these spillover effects. The results are not
consistent with models of conformity where there is a desire to conform to one’s best friends,
popular kids, or kids of the same gender. We also rule out that the spillover effects are mainly
driven by a desire for anti-conformism and by envy of other children’s incentive status.
Our findings have three broad implications. First, to understand the full impact of incentives,
which is policy relevant, one should design experiments that allow for spillover effects to operate.
4

As summarized by Baird et al. (2014), the previous literature identifies spillover effects by not treating some
group members (e.g., Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009); Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011); Bobonis and Finan (2009);
Duflo and Saez (2003); Lalive and Cattaneo (2009); Guiteras, Levinsohn and Mobarak (2015)), by using plausible
exogenous variation in the fractions of peers treated (e.g., Babcock and Hartman (2010); Beaman (2012); Conley
and Udry (2010); Duflo and Saez (2002); Munshi (2003)), and by looking at differential treatment effects within
a predetermined peer group (e.g., Banerjee et al. (2013); Chen, Humphries and Modi (2010); Macours and Vakis
(2008); Neumark-Sztainer et al. (2012)).

3

Failure to do that might result in imprecise policy recommendations because the direct and
spillover effects can offset one another. For example, in our experiment, the direct effect of
incentives can be larger than the net effect of incentives, when incentives are public.
Second, the presence of non-linearities makes extrapolation and policy scale-up from field
experiments challenging. For example, in our experiment, the overall effect of incentives in
the public treatment is positive when we incentivize up to 70% of table mates. If we had not
incentivized higher fractions of table mates, we may have incorrectly assumed that the treatment
effects would be at least as large as the 70% group and therefore, erroneously deduced that
incentivizing all children maximizes take-up, when in fact incentivizing all children does not
statistically change take-up rates, compared to incentivizing no children. While the existence
of “social multipliers” (Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 2003) is well known, the implicit
assumption – backed by abundant empirical evidence – is that the multiplier is positive and that,
therefore, the direct effect of incentives is a lower bound of its net effect (in absolute level).5
Given that most policies treat subsets of the population, either because of budget constraints
or eligibility cutoffs, the possibility that the social multiplier may be negative has important
practical relevance.
Third, if observing others’ incentives reduces take-up, private incentives may be preferable.
However, keeping incentives private may not be feasible in most settings, as people communicate
and interact.
While one should be cautious in generalizing our results, evaluating the spillover effects of
incentives may be worthwhile in several settings. The first type of setting is one in which the
value of the incentivized action is not well known and in which subjects believe peers and policy
makers may have private information (e.g., new technology adoption). In such settings incentives
allow subjects to learn from peers’ and policymakers’ actions. However, as the signalling effects
of incentives can be both negative and positive, careful consideration should be made when
invoking incentive schemes for public policy. For example, the Physician Payment Sunshine
Act, which requires drugs manufacturers to disclose certain payments to physicians, may reduce
the demand for drugs from the paying manufacturers, if the payments are perceived to signal
that the drugs of a given manufacturer are not as effective as others. The second type of
setting is one in which the incentivized behavior has short-run costs but long-run benefits (e.g.,
nutrition, exercise, education, and other behaviors that increase health and human capital).6
5

Examples include the takeup of welfare (Borjas and Hilton, 1996; Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan,
2000), employer-sponsored health insurance (Sorensen, 2006), retirement plans (Duflo and Saez, 2003), public
prenatal care (Aizer and Currie, 2004), disability insurance (Rege, Telle and Votruba, 2009) and movie attendance
(Moretti, 2011), among others.
6
Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel (2011) review the evidence of incentives backfiring in this type of setting.

4

In this case, the incentive may increase the salience of the short-term cost over the long-term
benefit of the incentivized action. The third type of setting is in pro-social behaviors, such as
recycling, charitable giving, or blood donation, whose ‘warm-glow’ value exceeds the monetary
value of incentives. Finally, the fourth possible setting is in interesting or pleasant activities,
where incentives may reduce interest in the task.7

2

Theory

In this section, we present a simple model, in the spirit of Bénabou and Tirole (2003), that
highlights potential mechanisms that would give rise to both positive and negative direct and
spillover effects.
Consider the choice of grapes versus cookies for child i in a setting with asymmetric information. The child decides to pick grapes over cookies if the expected private benefits of this choice
exceed its costs. The child’s beliefs of the benefits, Bi , depend on her idiosyncratic taste, τi , as
well as on the behavior of her peers and of the experimenter, whom the child believes to have
private information about the relative value of grapes over cookies, such as their comparative
health benefits. The child observes the behavior of her peers and of the experimenter to infer
their private information.8 The choice depends also on the monetary (or cash-equivalent) cost
of choosing grapes over cookies, C. This cost is a function of incentives, I.
The child observes a signal of the private information of her peers and of the experimenter
from their actions. In our experiment, she observes i) the fraction of her peers who choose
grapes over cookies, Ḡ−i , ii) the fraction of her peers who choose incentivized grapes, I¯−i , and
iii) whether she is incentivized to pick grapes, I. I¯−i is a lower bound of the fraction of peers
who were incentivized to choose grapes, T P . In our experiment, we can distinguish behavior in
response to i) versus ii).
In sum, the expected utility of choosing grapes over cookies can be expressed as:
E[U (Gi = 1) − U (Gi = 0)] = Bi (τi , Ḡ−i (T P ), I¯−i (T P ), I) − C(I)

7

(1)

Kamenica (2012) review the evidence of incentives backfiring for the last two settings.
The benefits of choosing grapes over cookies may also depend on social conformity, as we discuss in Section 8.
Our empirical results, detailed in that section, point against social conformity as an explanation for the behaviors
we find, and, thus, we exclude it from the description of the model below.
8

5

2.1

Direct Effect of Incentives

Consider first the direct effect of incentives, I on the incentivized person:
∂Bi ∂C
∂E[U (Gi = 1) − U (Gi = 0)]
=
−
∂I
∂I
∂I
The first right-hand side term,

∂Bi
∂I ,

(2)

is the effect of introducing (or increasing) the incentive

on the child’s belief on the relative value of grapes over cookies. The sign of this effect is
indeterminate. For example, in Bénabou and Tirole (2003), being incentivized (or having a
higher-valued incentive) signals “bad news” – e.g., that the action is unpleasant, perhaps because
grapes do not taste as good as cookies.9 This may make her revise her prior beliefs about the
benefits of grapes downward. On the other hand, the incentive may signal that the experimenter
thinks grapes are really good for the child (maybe despite not tasting as good as the cookie),
inducing her to revise her prior belief of the benefits of grapes upward.
Conversely, the second right-hand side term,

∂C
∂I ,

which represents the effect of the incentives

on cost, is positive, as compensating the child to pick grapes over cookies reduces its cost.
In sum, the sign of the direct effect is unknown, due to the ambiguity of the sign of

∂Bi
∂I .

Note the direct effect we modeled allows for peer influences. For example, a child may
initially choose cookies because she wants to be popular.

2.2

Spillover Effects of Incentives

Now consider the effect of the fraction incentivized. This is what we call the spillover effect. To
do that, consider an increase in the proportion of children who are incentivized to pick grapes,
T P , which affects the fraction of her peers who initially choose grapes over cookies, Ḡ−i , and
who initially choose incentivized grapes, I¯−i .
∂Bi ∂ Ḡ−i
∂Bi ∂ I¯−i
∂E[U (Gi = 1) − U (Gi = 0)]
=
+ ¯
∂T P
∂ Ḡ−i ∂T P
∂ I−i ∂T P
The first right-hand side term,

∂Bi ∂ Ḡ−i
,
∂ Ḡ−i ∂T P

(3)

is the spillover effect of incentives through watching

others pick grapes and has an indeterminate sign. The sign of

∂Bi
∂ Ḡ−i

is positive, if an increase

in the proportion picking grapes sends a positive signal about the value of grapes.10 Therefore,
9

In Bénabou and Tirole (2003), a principal has private information about attractiveness of an action and
may offer larger incentives for less attractive tasks. The agent, therefore, expects larger incentives to signal more
unpleasant tasks and may be less motivated to do it.
10
i
The sign of ∂∂B
can also be negative. We do not explicitly model this option because it would increase the
Ḡ−i
number of possible cases, and thus lengthen the exposition, without adding to our main point that the direct and
i
is positive in our data, so modelling this
spillover effects may have opposite signs. Moreover, the sign of ∂∂B
Ḡ
−i

6

the sign of this first term depends on how increasing the proportion incentivized affects the
∂ Ḡ−i
∂T P . This has the same sign as the direct effect of incentives.
¯
i ∂ I−i
, is the spillover effect of incentives through watchterm, ∂∂B
I¯−i ∂T P

proportion picking grapes initially,
The second right-hand side

ing others pick incentivized grapes. It has an indeterminate sign because the signs of its two
parts are both indeterminate. The sign of

∂Bi
∂ I¯−i

depends on how children interpret the experi-

menter’s intent to incentivize children to pick grapes and, therefore, has the same sign as
∂ I¯−i
∂T P

∂Bi
∂I .

has the same sign as the direct effect.

There are, therefore, the following 3 cases, also summarized in Table 1:
i
Case 1: Incentives send a weakly positive signal on the value of grapes ( ∂B
∂I ≥ 0). When

this happens, the direct effect of incentives is positive, as

∂Bi
∂I

−

∂C(I)
∂I

> 0. If the direct effect is

positive, then increasing the proportion incentivized increases the proportion choosing grapes,
Ḡ−i
incentivized or not, ( ∂∂T
P > 0 and

∂ I¯−i
∂T P

> 0). Moreover, if the incentive sends a weakly positive

signal on value of grapes, then the belief of the value of grapes grows with the proportion of
children choosing incentivized grapes,

∂Bi
∂ I¯−i

≥ 0, and, therefore, the spillover effect of incentives

is also positive. That is, in this case the spillover effects reinforce the direct effects.
i
Case 2: Incentives send a negative signal on the value of grapes ( ∂B
∂I < 0), but the direct

effect is positive, because the cost reduction more than offsets the negative signal for incentivized
children,

∂Bi
∂I

<

∂C(I)
∂I .

If the incentive sends a negative signal on value of grapes, then the belief

of the value of grapes decreases with the proportion of children choosing incentivized grapes,
∂Bi
∂ I¯−i

< 0. Moreover, if the direct effect is positive, then increasing the proportion incentivized

Ḡ−i
increases the proportion choosing grapes, incentivized or not, ( ∂∂T
P > 0 and

∂ I¯−i
∂T P

> 0). Because

of these opposite effects, the sign of the spillover effect is indeterminate: the first term is positive,
while the second is negative. That is, in this case the spillover effects may either reinforce or
offset the direct effects.
i
Case 3: Incentives send a negative signal on the value of grapes ( ∂B
∂I < 0) and the direct

effect is negative, because the cost reduction is offset by the negative signal for incentivized
children,

∂Bi
∂I

<

∂C(I)
∂I .

If the incentive sends a negative signal on value of grapes, then the belief

of the value of grapes decreases with the proportion of children choosing incentivized grapes,
∂Bi
∂ I¯−i

< 0. Moreover, if the direct effect is negative, then increasing the proportion incentivized

Ḡ−i
reduces the proportion choosing grapes, incentivized or not, ( ∂∂T
P < 0 and

∂ I¯−i
∂T P

< 0). Because

of these effects, the sign of the spillover effect is indeterminate: the first term is negative, the
second positive. That is, in this case the spillover effects may either reinforce or offset the direct
effects.
option is not essential in this application.

7

In sum, we have the following 3 broad conclusions. First, we have shown that incentives may
have both a positive and a negative direct effect.11 Second, when incentives are “bad news”
i
( ∂B
∂I < 0), the spillover effects of incentives can have both a positive and negative component.

Third, when incentives are “bad news,” the direct and spillover effects of incentives may
offset each other. Therefore, in this model, the direct effect may be a poor approximation of the
overall effect of incentives.
Based on this model, we can use our experiment to identify the direct and spillover effects
of incentives. The actual grape choice, G2 , is the sum of the grape choice in the absence of
spillover effects, G1 (the direct effect) and the spillover effects ∆G. That is, G2 = G1 + ∆G.
Before we proceed to describe how we identify and estimate the direct and spillover effects
of incentives, note that a model with perfect information but with a short term cost and a long
term benefit of choosing grapes over cookies would generate similar predictions, if the public
incentives make the short term cost more prominent and hence reduce the likelihood of choosing
grapes. This would change the mechanisms behind our findings, but not our empirical setup.

3

Background and Experimental Design

To measure the direct and spillover effects of incentives, we designed an artefactual field experiment (Harrison and List, 2004) in which we offer grapes and cookies to children and randomly
offer incentives to choose grapes.12 This field experiment took place in school cafeterias during
lunch. Nine elementary schools in Chicago Heights, Illinois participated. Lunch is administered
in much the same way in each of these schools. Depending on their size, schools hold either 2,
3 or 4 lunch periods each day, assigning kids to periods based on their school grade. Children
arrive for lunch during their designated lunch period together with their class. They go through
a lunch line where they receive a school lunch and then sit at a table in the cafeteria. Except
for kindergartners, students can typically sit with any other children from their grade and tend
to form groups of 3-10 students at each table. In this school district, children do not have a
choice about their lunch. Moreover, Chicago Heights, Illinois is in a low-income neighborhood
and most children qualify for free or reduced-price lunch, meaning that all kids eat the same
school-provided meal each day.
We conducted the experiment after children had collected their lunch trays and sat down
to eat at their table. Once children were seated, members of the research team came to the
11

In empirical settings such as ours, we cannot separately identify the positive and negative direct effects of
incentive, as we observe only their sum.
12
Grapes, but not cookies, are sometimes served at lunch.

8

table and read a script announcing the procedures of the experiment.13 To minimize cross-table
contamination, we treated adjacent tables simultaneously. Each child was asked to pick both a
grape card (green on the back) and a cookie card (blue on the back) from a card deck (see Figure
1). To facilitate data collection, each child’s ID number from the experiment was written on
each of his or her cards. Then, each child made a choice: he or she could either choose to have
grapes as an additional food (by placing the grape/green card down on the table), or he or she
could choose to have cookies as an additional food (by placing the cookie/blue card down on the
table). Children were told that they could only choose one snack, and that the actual food item
they had selected would be delivered to their table immediately at the end of the experiment.
The initial choice was always made simultaneously and children were asked not to talk during
the experiment. After the initial choice, children were given a chance to play a different card
after having observed their peers’ choices.
We randomized 1) which child received an incentive to choose grapes, 2) which fraction of
each lunch table received an incentive to select grapes, and 3) in which tables choosing incentivized grapes is visible by peers (public treatment) or not (private treatment). In particular,
for each table, we had a stack of cards, which had either 0, 50, or 100% of cards with incentives.
At tables with the 50% of incentivized cards, the actual fraction of children receiving incentives
varies between 11 and 80 percent. This variation is seen in Table 2.
In all treatments, children were alerted to the possibility that they may be eligible for a
prize depending on the card they draw, and a poster with all possible prizes was displayed to
the kids. The value of the prizes was roughly 50 cents. The prizes included glow-in-the-dark
bouncy balls, small trophies, and bracelets and pens of different types.
If students were eligible for an incentive, their grape card depicted a small gold token. For
the 50 percent incentive treatment, the cards came from a deck where 50 percent of the grape
cards portrayed a gold token. In the 100 percent incentives treatment, all the grapes cards
depicted the coin.
In the private treatment, children play their cards face down, so that children can observe
only the color of the card, but not the presence or absence of the incentives. In the public
treatment, on the other hand, children play their cards face up, so that anyone at the table can
observe whether the chosen grapes are incentivized or not.
With the three levels of randomization, we can divide children into eight groups:
• Private-0 (Group 1): Children in the Private treatment in which none of the grape cards
were incentivized.
13

The script of the experiment is reported in Appendix 9.

9

• Public-0 (Group 2): Children in the Public treatment in which none of the grape cards
were incentivized.
• Private-50-no incentive (Group 3): Children in the Private treatment in which 50% of the
grape cards were incentivized but the child’s own card was not incentivized.
• Private-50-incentive (Group 4): Children in the Private treatment in which 50% of the
grape cards were incentivized and the child’s own card was incentivized.
• Public-50-no incentive (Group 5): Children in the Public treatment in which 50% of the
grape cards were incentivized and the child’s own card was not incentivized.
• Public-50-incentive (Group 6): Children in the Public treatment in which 50% of the grape
cards were incentivized and the child’s own card was incentivized.
• Private-100-incentive (Group 7): Children in the Private treatment in which all of the
grape cards were incentivized.
• Public-100-incentive (Group 8): Children in the Public treatment in which all of the grape
cards were incentivized.
We designed the experiment by randomizing each school-by-period table is such a way as to
have one quarter of the school-by-period tables assigned to the 0% and 100% treatments each,
and the remaining half to the the 50% treatment, cross randomizing the public and private
treatment to have half of the school-by-period tables in each group.
We record both the initial food choice, G1 , and the final food choice, G2 . We use G1 to
measure the direct effect of incentives because this choice occurs simultaneously and, therefore,
before children can observe their peers’ choices and incentives. We use G2 to measure the
spillover effect of incentives because this final choice occurs after having observed peers’ choices
and incentives.

4
4.1

The data
Sample

A total of 1,771 children participated in the experiment, conducted during lunch in the school
cafeteria. Children choose a table to sit at. We drop 14 tables of 10 from the main analysis
because we do not believe that kids can see all others’ decisions at such a large table. The results
in the next section are qualitatively unchanged if we include tables with 10 children.
10

We complement the experimental data with a short survey assessing the social networks of
kids (available upon request). The survey included questions asking children to name up to 5
of their friends. The survey also included questions about each child’s perceived social status
relative to other children, and asked children to name the most popular kid boy and girl in their
class. A total of 1,286 children filled out the questionnaire.
After dropping large tables, our final sample consists of 1,631 children, of whom 1,187 completed the questionnaire, sitting at 270 school-by-period tables.14
The final size of each of the 8 groups varies because some of the tables in the cafeteria were
empty. Moreover, in various instances we ran out of time and could not reach all the occupied
tables.

4.2

Descriptives, balance tests, and food choice

Table 3 shows the mean and standard deviations of several socioeconomic variables for each
of the eight groups. Lunch tables have on average 6.45 children of which 47 percent are boys.
The average grade is fourth grade, 39% of children at each table are African American and 52%
are Hispanic, and 87% of the children at each table are on the free lunch program. Overall,
looking at Table 3 it appears that these variables are balanced across groups. This is confirmed
in lower panel of Table 3, which shows the F-test of joint significance of the 8 group dummies,
when regressed on each of these variables together with school-by-period strata. All variables
are balanced across groups, consistent with random assignment, since none of the F-tests are
significant at conventional levels.
We also check for balance using the actual fraction of student incentivized. Recall, while the
grape cards for the 50% incentivized tables were drawn from a deck where half of the cards were
incentivized, the actual fraction incentivized deviated from 50%. We regress the proportion of
children incentivized at each table on table size and children’s age, gender, race, grade, and
school lunch status (free, reduced, or none), as well as on school-by-period strata. The F-test of
joint significance of the coefficients of the socioeconomic variables has a p-value of 0.087. This
is driven by a smaller table proportion incentivized for third and six graders. Once we exclude
grade, the F-test of joint significance of the coefficients of the remaining socioeconomic variables
has a p-value of 0.543. For this purpose, and to improve the precision of the estimates, we
control for all the aforementioned variables in all our specifications. The results are qualitatively
unchanged whether we add these variables or not.
14

Non-participation in the survey is also due to a number of reasons: either children were too young, or teachers
overseeing the lunch period asked us not to administer the survey, or not enough time was available for all children
to complete the survey.

11

Our two main variables of interest are the initial and final choice of grapes. For the initial
choice, the only systematic variation in grape choice should be due to whether or not the child was
incentivized. At this point of the experiment, the choices of peers are not observed. A student’s
final choice will possibly be the combination of incentive and spillover effects. Table 4 shows that
overall 62% of children choose grapes initially (combining the incentivized and non-incentivized
groups). Not surprisingly, the proportion differs for incentivized and non-incentivized children.
However, the p-value of the F-test of joint significance of the group dummies regressed on initial
choice and controlling for being incentivized is 0.168, consistent with random assignment. The
final snack choice does differ across each of the incentivized groups and separately across the
non-incentivized groups. This is our first evidence of the presence of spillover effects, which we
explore further in detail.

5

Direct effects of incentives

Our first task is to establish the effect of incentives on the recipients, that is, whether receiving
the incentives changes the recipients’ likelihood of initially choosing grapes. This is what we
refer to as the direct effect of the incentives.
We test the hypothesis that incentives have direct effects by comparing the initial grape
choice of incentivized and non-incentivized children. To do so, we regress child i’s initial grape
choice, G1 , on a dummy variable, I, that equals 1 for children who receive incentives. To improve
the precision of the estimates, we further condition on the following variables X: school-byperiod strata, table size, child age, gender, race, grade, and school lunch status.

G1i = α0 + α1 Ii + α2 Xi + ǫi

(4)

The coefficient α1 identifies the average treatment effect of incentives on initial grape choice.
This parameter is identified under random assignment, which ensures independence between the
variable I and the error term ǫ. We estimate the parameters of this equation by OLS, clustering
the standard errors by table. We use the same estimator, controls, and clustering for all the
regressions in this paper.
We can also interact the incentive dummy by a dummy for the public (P = 1) and private
(P = 0) treatments:
G1i = λ0 + λ1 Ii + λ2 Pi + λ3 Ii Pi + λ4 Xi + ǫi
12

(5)

This way, we can test i) whether the direct effects of incentives are identical in the public and
private treatment (λ3 = 0) and ii) whether the initial grape choice is identical in the public and
private treatments for non-incentivized children (λ2 = 0) and incentivized children (λ2 +λ3 = 0).
Table 5 shows the direct effects of incentives on the initial choice of incentivized children
(the estimate of α1 from equation (4)). This estimate is a 26 percentage point, statistically
significant increase in initial grape take-up over a 49.5% take-up rate among non-incentivized
children, i.e. a 53% increase in take-up.
These findings are comparable in size with Just and Price (2013), who increase children’s
consumption of salad by 80% after offering up to $0.25 (or a lottery ticket with the same expected
value), and smaller, but consistent, with List and Samek (2014, 2015), whose incentives have a
two- to four-fold increase in the choice of healthy snacks. Conversely, our effects are larger than
the ones in Belot, Jonathan and Patrick (2013), whose piece-rate incentives to choose an extra
vegetables side dish have a small, statistically insignificant effect.
A child’s initial choice may depend on whether others can observe her incentive status.
Recall that in private treatment, the cards are played face down and, therefore, one can infer
other children’s choices from the color of the card, but not whether a child was incentivized. On
the other hand, for the public treatment, the cards are played face up and the incentives can
be observed. To test whether children behave differently when they know others can observe
whether or not they are incentivized, the second row of Table 5 provides the estimate of the
difference in effect sizes in the public and private treatment (the estimate of λ2 from equation
(5)). This difference is only 0.013 and is statistically insignificant.
The third and fourth rows of the tables show that the initial grape choice is 8.4 and 7.1
percentage point lower in public treatments for both non-incentivized and incentivized children
(the estimates of λ2 and λ2 + λ3 from equation (5)). This is broadly consistent with the views
that incentives may signal “bad news” (e.g., Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel (2011)) or make the
short term costs of picking grapes over a cookie more salient.15

6

Spillover effects of incentives

Finding positive direct effects of incentives corresponds to cases 1 and 2 from our theory: seeing
peers choose grapes may have a positive spillover effect on own grape take-up, while seeing
others choose incentivized grapes may have either positive or negative spillover effects. Armed
with this knowledge, we proceed to test how, conditional on one’s initial choice, seeing other
15
Note, however, that we cannot separate out the effects of making incentives salient from the effect of playing
the cards face up rather than down, which is the other major difference between the public and private treatments.

13

children pick grapes or pick incentivized grapes affects a child’s likelihood of ending up picking
grapes.
Since spillovers affect the likelihood that a child may change the card played after seeing
others, our dependent variable is the difference between the final and initial grape choice, ∆G =
G2 − G1 . Therefore, we begin our analysis of spillover effects by estimating how exogenously
varying the table proportion incentivized, T P ∈ [0, 1], affects ∆G:
∆Gi = β0 + β1 T Pi + β2 T Pi ∗ Pi + β3 Ii + β4 Pi + β5 Ii Pi + β6 Xi + ǫi

(6)

Children do not observe the variable T P . However, this variable is under the control of the
policy maker, and thus its impact is of policy relevance. Moreover, it is positively correlated
with the fraction of table mates choosing grapes.16 The dummy variable P equals 1 for the public
treatment and 0 for the private treatment. We condition on being incentivized (I) and on the
public treatment dummy because they affect the initial grape choice, which, in turn, affects the
likelihood of ending up with grapes. We add the interaction with the public treatment dummy
because we estimate different parameters for the two treatments.17,18
Under random assignment, the parameter β1 identifies the marginal effect of the proportion
of incentivized children at one’s table in the private treatment, while β2 identifies the difference
in the effect of this proportion between the public and private treatments. β1 and β2 are two
separate spillover effects on one’s own choice: β1 is the reduced-form effect of observing peers’
choices and β2 is the reduced-form effect of observing whether peers’ choices are incentivized.
Table 6 shows the estimates of our parameters of interest, β1 and β2 from equation (6).
Column 1 shows that a 1% increase in the proportion incentivized in the private treatment
increases the likelihood of switching to grapes by 0.09 percentage points (s.e. 0.05). A positive
effect in the private treatment, in which children can observe the food choices of others but not
whether these choices are incentivized, suggests that watching other children pick grapes has a
positive spillover effect on the likelihood of switching to grapes. The second row of estimates in
column 1 shows that the effect of the proportion incentivized changes when the incentives are
public. Relative to private incentives, a 1% increase in the proportion incentivized additionally
decreases one’s likelihood of switching to grapes by 0.18 percentage points (s.e. 0.08). Therefore,
16

The correlation coefficient is 0.27.
The results do not change whether we interact by public treatment or not, or whether we estimate the
parameters of equation 6 or of equation G2i = β0 + β1 T Pi + β2 T Pi ∗ Pi + f (βIP G Ii Pi G1i ) + β3 Xi + ǫi , where
the term f (βIP G1 Ii Pi G1i ) is the triple interaction of the incentive treatment, public treatment, and initial grape
choice dummies.
18
In unreported regressions, we replace the table proportion incentivized with the table proportion incentivized
other than self and the results are qualitatively unchanged.
17

14

the net spillover effect of public incentives (i.e., the effect from increasing the table proportion
who is incentivized), in the third row, is negative (−0.09 = 0.09 − 0.18; s.e. 0.06).
These marginal effects of the table proportion incentivized in public and private treatments
may be non-linear. That is, the effect of the proportion of students who are incentivized does
not have to be linear, as specified in equation (6). To test this hypothesis, we restrict the
sample to tables with a positive proportion of incentivized children (column 2) and with at least
50% of incentivized children (column 3), in which case the overall table proportion incentivized
increases from 50% to 66% (column 2) and to 80% (column 3).19 When we do that, we find that
the two marginal effects become considerably larger (in absolute value), especially the negative
effect of observing other children’s incentivized choices. For this reason, we re-estimate equation
(6), adding the square of the table proportion incentivized and interacting it with the public
dummy: β4 T Pi2 + β5 T Pi2 ∗ Pi . Figure 2 shows the marginal effects of fraction incentivized from
this equation (i.e., estimates of β1 + β2 ∗ Pi + 2β4 T Pi + 2β5 T Pi ∗ Pi ) . If the effects were linear,
each of those graphs would depict a horizontal line, which they do not. The figure confirms
that the marginal effects grow in absolute level with the proportion incentivized. The marginal
effects become statistically different from zero when 40 to 50 percent of the table is incentivized.

6.1

Heterogeneity in the spillover effects

In this subsection, we consider how the effects can differ along several dimensions: i) the type
of switch - to grapes or to cookies, ii) gender and school grade, and iii) table size.
First, recall that the parameter ∆G is the difference between switching from cookie to grapes,
SG, and from grapes to cookie, SC: ∆G = SG − SC. To have a better understanding of how
spillover effects work in our setting, Table 7 considers both the separate choices of switching from
cookies to grapes and from grapes to cookies. We also examine how these effects vary across
incentivized and non-incentivized children. The estimated marginal effects are consistent with
the main results: the likelihood of switching to grapes increases with the proportion choosing
grapes (i.e., βb1 is positive) and decreases with the proportion choosing incentivized grapes (i.e.,
βb2 is negative). The opposite is true for the likelihood of switching to cookies. The primary
action is on the dimension of switching to grapes and not switching to cookies, as expected.
Second, we explored how the direct and spillover effects of incentives differ by gender and
grade. We discuss these results in Appendix 9. In short, the direct effects of incentives do not
differ by gender, but the spillover effects of others’ behaviors is stronger for females and the
19
The sample restrictions in columns 2 and 3 drop approximately the first quartile and the first two quartiles
of the fraction incentivized distribution.

15

negative spillover effect of observing others’ incentivized choices is more substantial for boys.
The direct and spillover effects do not differ significantly across grades, although both spillover
effects seem driven by younger children.
Third, a priori one might expect that the effects would differ across table size. For example,
there may be less interaction at a larger table. We divide the sample into two - above and below
median table size. We note that table size and proportion incentivized are uncorrelated (the
correlation coefficient is 0.005). There is no systematic difference by table size (results available
upon request).

7

Non-linear effects and maximizing take-up

Recall that the total effect of incentives on the final grape choice is the sum of the net direct
effect on the initial choice, G1 , which we found to be positive, and the two spillover effects on
changing choice, ∆G, which we found to be one positive and the other negative. We can now
compare the estimates of the direct and spillover (Tables e 5 and 6) effects, as well as compute
their sum, which is the overall effect of incentives.
A 1 percent increase in the proportion of incentivized children has a direct effect on the
likelihood of choosing grapes of 0.26 percentage points (p-value of 0.000) and two spillover
effects. First, observing other people choosing grapes in the private treatment has a positive
effect on one’s likelihood of ending up with grapes. A 1 percent increase in the proportion
incentivized to pick grapes further increases one’s likelihood of ending up with grapes by 0.09,
0.12, and 0.16 percentage points when the proportion of children incentivized are 50, 66, and
80%.20 Therefore, the fraction incentivized that maximizes the likelihood of ending up with
grapes in the private treatment is 100%, as both the direct and spillover effects of incentives are
positive over all ranges of the fraction incentivized. However, the effects of this treatment are
likely to have limited policy relevance. That is, in most environments, the knowledge that one’s
peers are being incentivized would likely diffuse. Therefore, the public, rather than the private
treatment, is likely to be more realistic in a real world policy situation.
In the public treatment, besides the positive spillover effect discussed above, observing that
some of the chosen grapes are incentivized has an additional negative effect on the likelihood of
ending up with grapes. The corresponding point estimates are -0.18, -0.22, and -0.45 percentage
points when the proportion of children incentivized are 50, 66, and 80%. Using the point
estimates above, we find that a 1 percent increase in the proportion incentivized overall increases
20
These cutoffs denote the mean incentivized, the threshold for the top 3 quartiles, and the threshold for the
top 2 quartiles.

16

in grapes take-up of 0.17 (0.26+0.09-0.18) and 0.16 (0.26+0.12-0.22) percentage points when
the mean incentivized is 50% and 66%, but reduces grapes take-up by -0.03 (0.26+0.16-0.45)
percentage points when the mean incentivized is 80%. Therefore, the incentive share that
maximizes grape take-up is between 66 and 80% in our experiment.
We can see these total effects (i.e., the combined direct and spillover effects) in Figure 3. This
figure plots the semiparametric total effect of proportion table incentivized on the likelihood
of ending up with grapes for the private and public treatments.21 While the total effect of
incentives grows with the table proportion incentivized in the private treatment, this effect is
non-monotonic in the public treatment. The total effect of incentives grows with proportion
incentivized up until this proportion is about 70%, and declines for higher proportions, to the
extent that there is no statistically significant difference in final grapes take-up between tables
with 0 and 100% incentives.
We can also examine group means. We do this in Figure 4, which reiterates our main findings
that the final grape take-up increases with the proportion of incentivized children in the private
treatment but not in the public treatment.22

8

Interpretation

There are multiple channels through which spillover effects may occur. Two possible mechanisms for the positive spillover effects are learning and social conformity. The latter occurs if
children derive utility from conforming to their peers’ behavior (Sherif, 1937; Asch, 1958; Goeree and Yariv, 2014; Haun, Rekers and Tomasello, 2014). For example, consider the theory
discussed earlier, in which we modelled the choice of grapes or cookies for child i in a setting
with asymmetric information. Here we augment the model to include a social conformity term
in the utility function. As before, the child decides to pick grapes over cookies if the expected
private benefits of this choice exceed its costs. In addition, the child may also derive utility from
conforming to her peers’ behavior (Sherif, 1937; Asch, 1958; Goeree and Yariv, 2014; Haun, Rekers and Tomasello, 2014). In that case, her expected utility depends also on a social conformity
parameter γ, which is positive.
21

To do so, we use the Robinson’s semiparametric estimator (Robinson, 1988) to control for the effect of the
covariates and then smooth the effect of incentive proportion on final grape choice using a local linear regression
with a Gaussian kernel and a rule-of-thumb bandwidth. The results are robust to changes in the kernel and
bandwidth. We report both the 83% and the 95% confidence intervals. If the 83% confidence intervals around
two point estimates do not overlap, the parameters are statistically different from each other at the 95% level
(Peyton, Greenstone and Schenker, 2003).
22
This Figure shows the difference, conditional on baseline covariates, in the fraction ending up choosing
grapes between each group and the fraction choosing grapes in group 1 (i.e., private treatment in which nobody
is incentivized), which is 0.64.

17

With social conformity, the expected utility of choosing grapes over cookies becomes:
E[U (Gi = 1) − U (Gi = 0)] = Bi (τi , Ḡ−i (T P ), I¯−i (T P ), I) + γi (Ḡ−i (T P ), I¯−i (T P )) − C(I) (7)
While the direct effect of incentives is as already described, the spillover effects of incentives,
which affect the final choice of grapes, G2 , depends also on conformity, the third and fourth
right-hand-side terms in the equations below:
∂Bi ∂ Ḡ−i
∂Bi ∂ I¯−i
∂γi ∂ Ḡ−i
∂γi ∂ I¯−i
∂E[U (G2i = 1) − U (G2i = 0)]
=
+ ¯
+
+ ¯
∂T P
∂ Ḡ−i ∂T P
∂ I−i ∂T P
∂ Ḡ−i ∂T P
∂ I−i ∂T P

(8)

Children may conform to picking grapes, and, if they are incentivized, also to picking incentivized
grapes. Its first parts,

∂γi
∂ I¯−i

and

∂γi
,
∂ I¯−i

are positive, as children have a taste for conformity. Its

second parts, as we saw, have the same sign as the direct effect. Therefore, the spillover effects
of incentives from conformity have always the same sign as the direct effects of incentives and
do not change the three general cases we considered earlier.
Since incentives increase initial grape take-up, the higher the initial take-up, the more children will want to conform, ending up picking grapes too. That is, conformity could explain why
there are positive spillover effects in the private treatment. On the other hand, conformity cannot explain the negative spillover caused by seeing children pick incentivized grapes. Therefore,
even if children have a taste for conformity, receiving a negative signal about the benefits of
grapes over cookies more than dominates the effect deriving from a preference for conformity.
While conformity cannot explain our findings, we can nevertheless test specific aspects of
social conformity and see to what extent it affects children’s behavior. One way to test for
conformity is to exploit the data collected on best friends, “popular kids,” and the table gender
composition.23 This test is based on the premise that children want to conform the most to their
best friends, to children they perceive as being popular, and to children of their own gender.
If that is the case, the choices of best friends, popular kids, and children of own gender should
affect ones’ choice beyond the effect of the table’s choices as a whole. Conversely, if behaviors
are consistent with our model sketched earlier, then the choices of peers may be equally weighted
leaving the choices of best friends, popular kids, and children of own gender having no additional
effect.
Under social conformity, seeing one’s best friends (or popular kids, or children of own gender)
pick grapes has a positive spillover effect over and above the effect of the proportion of children
incentivized at the table, as the behavior of the best friend (or popular kid, or child of own
23

Children report the names of up to 5 best friends and of the boy and girl they consider most popular.

18

gender) induces more conformity than the behavior of the other children at the table. In addition,
seeing one’s best friends (or popular kids, or children of own gender) pick the incentivized grape
has an additional positive spillover effect for incentivized children.
To estimate these effects, we focus on children with at least one best friend (or popular kid,
or child of own gender) sitting at their table. Because of our experiment, whether the best friend
(or popular kid, or child of own gender) is incentivized is random.
To measure the spillover effect of social conformity in picking grapes, we estimate the parameters of the spillover effect equation, equation (6), adding variables for the table proportions
of best friends (or popular kids, or children of own gender) incentivized:24
∆Gi = δ0 + δ1 T Pi + δ2 T Pi Pi + δ3 T PiBF + δ4 T PiBF Pi + δ5 Ii + δ6 Pi + δ7 Ii Pi + δ8 Xi + ǫi , (9)
where the variable T P BF is the table proportion of incentivized best friends (or popular kids,
or children of own gender), while the other variables are as discussed before.25,26 Under social
conformity of the type described above, the parameter δ3 is positive.
To measure the additional spillover effects of social conformity due to picking incentivized
grapes, we further interact the variable T P BF by the child’s incentive status, T P BF ∗ I:
∆Gi = θ0 + θ1 T Pi + θ2 T Pi Pi + θ3 T PiBF + θ4 T PiBF Pi + θ5 T PiBF Ii + θ6 T PiBF Ii Pi
+θ7 Ii + θ8 Pi + θ9 Ii Pi + θ10 Xi + ǫi

(10)

Under social conformity of the type described above, the parameter θ6 is positive.
Table 8 reports the estimates from these regressions, using, alternatively, the entire sample,
only tables with at least one incentivized child, and tables in which at least half the children are
incentivized. This table shows that none of the estimates of the parameters of interest (i.e., δ3
and θ6 ) are statistically significant and that many have also a negative, rather than a positive
sign. We interpret this evidence as being inconsistent with a theory of social conformity in
which the children have preferences for conforming with their best friends, with the children
24

Before doing that, we checked whether spillover effects vary for children who did not name any best friend
or popular kid, for children who did not fill in the questionnaire, and for children without kids of the same gender
sitting at the table. The effects for these subgroups do not differ statistically from the main effects. So the fact
that we are dropping these children from the regressions may not be as disconcerting.
25
For example, if in a table of size 5 there are two child j’s best friends, and one of them is incentivized, for
child j the table proportion of incentivized best friends is 51 = 0.2.
26
The variable T P is the table proportion of incentivized children, which varies from 0 to 100%, and the dummy
variable P equals 1 for the public treatment and 0 for the private treatment, in which the cards are played face
down and, therefore, one can infer other children’s choices from the color of the card, but not whether a child was
incentivized or not, and one for public treatment, in which the cards are played face up and the incentives can
be observed. The X variables are as defined before.

19

they perceive as being popular, or with children of their own gender.
The children’s behavior, and in particular the negative spillover effects, do not seem to be
driven by a form of envy by which non-incentivized children would initially pick grapes, observe
the incentive status of their peers, and then switch to cookies. We rule this out by noticing that
the largest negative spillover effects occur in tables in which everybody is incentivized.

9

Discussion

This paper studies the spillover effects of incentives when incentives act as signals. We decompose
these spillover effects into two components: one due to peers’ behaviors and the other due to
peers’ incentive status. We postulate that spillover effects of the second type could be negative,
leading to an overall effect of incentives of indeterminate sign even when the direct effects of
incentives are positive.
We study these effects in one context in which we expect the spillover effects of incentives
to be large: children’s food choices – specifically, grapes v. cookie – during the school lunch.
The direct effects of incentives are large, increasing grapes takeup by about 50%. However, the
spillover effects of incentives are also large, especially the negative effect caused by observing
peers’ incentivized choices. When peer incentives are visible, the overall effect of incentives
(i.e., combining the direct and spillover effects) initially grows with the fraction of table mates
incentivized, peaking at 70% incentivized, but decreases beyond that. The magnitude of this
non-monotonic effect is such that takeup of grapes for the 100% incentivized group is not statistically different from that of the 0% incentivized group.
Our findings have several implications for other studies, particularly work on incentives.
First, the possibility of negative spillover effects that counteract the positive direct effects of
incentives should not be overlooked. Since these negative spillover effects can occur in response
to learning about peers’ incentives, it may be preferable not to make incentives public, when
possible. Spillover effects of this kind may occur in environments where the value of the incentivized action is not well-known (e.g., adoption of new technologies or new behaviors), there is a
tradeoff between short-run costs and long-run benefits (e.g., exercise), and pro-social behaviors
are present. Second, separately measuring spillover effects and how these effects vary with the
fraction treated is important for understanding how experimental results may scale-up when
introduced more broadly.

20

Appendix A: Experimental instructions
We are going to play a choice game where you can win these fun prizes!
(Point to the prizes)
Each of you gets two cards. Keep your cards a secret. You cannot trade cards.
One of your cards will be a cookie card and one of them will be a grape card. The game is
to play one of these cards face up (down) on the table.
If you play a cookie card, you get a cookie. If you play a grape card, you get some grapes.
(Point to grapes and cookies)
After you play your card, you will have 20 seconds to change your mind. You may look at
what your neighbors played. After 20 seconds, you cannot change your choice!
Some of the grape cards might have gold tokens on them. If you get a card with a gold token
on it and you play it, you get a prize with your grapes! Here are the prize choices.
(Point to prize board)
You get your prize at the end of the game.
Ok, let me ask everyone a few questions to make sure we all know how to play.
(Have students say out loud answers, and always correct at the end: either, “Yes, each person
gets 2 cards” or “No, each person gets 2 cards” and “Yes, if you play a grape card you get
grapes’)
1. How many cards does each person get? (answer is 2, one cookie one grape)
2. How many cards can each person play? (answer is 1 only)
3. How do you play a card? (answer is put it on the table)
4. What happens if you play a cookie card? (you get a cookie)
5. What happens if you play a grape card? (you get grapes)
6. What happens if you play a grape card with a token? (you get grapes plus a prize)
21

Good job! Let’s play!
Here are your cards. Remember to keep them hidden.
(Wait 10 seconds)
Choose the card you are going to play now. Remember if you play a card you should put it
on the table face UP (DOWN) like this (demonstrate).
(Wait for children to play their cards)
Ok is that your final choice? You can change your mind if you want to.
(Wait exactly 20 seconds)
Ok, the game is over, you can’t change your choice now.
Everyone who played a card with a token on it will get a prize sheet, please fill it out to
claim your prize.

Appendix B: Heterogeneity by child and peer gender and age
We test whether the effects of incentives differ by gender and age, proxied by school grade, as
has been found in different contexts, as we discuss below. While Table B1 shows that we do
not detect any gender or age difference in the direct effect of incentives, Table B2 show that
spillover effects vary by gender. Specifically, the positive effects of seeing others choose grapes is
stronger for girls, while the negative effects of seeing the incentivized choices of others is stronger
for boys. When we pool the two effects we find that the overall spillover effect of incentives is
statistically more negative (and grows faster) for boys than for girls. The magnitude of this
difference is large, with the net effect for boys being at least twice as large (in absolute value)
as the effect for girls. This gender differences in the response to incentives has been also found
in other contexts (e.g., Angrist and Lavy (2009); Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos (2009); Croson
and Gneezy (2009); Dohmen and Falk (2011)). However, this finding is not consistent in the
literature (as, e.g., neither Lacetera, Macis and Slonim (2013) nor Royer, Stehr and Sydnor
(2015) find evidence of gender differences in the effects of incentives for pro-social or healthful
behavior).
In addition, Table B3 show weak evidence that the spillover effects of incentives are stronger
for younger children: the point estimates of the positive and negative spillover effects are closer
22

to zero for children in above median grades than for younger children. However, the differences
between these two groups are not statistically significant.

References
Acland, Dan, and Matthew Levy. 2015. “Naiveté, projection bias, and habit formation in
gym attendance.” Management Science, 61(1): 146–160.
Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2004. “Networks or neighborhoods? Correlations in the use
of publicly-funded maternity care in California.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(12): 2573–
2585.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Giacomo De Giorgi. 2009. “Indirect Effects of an Aid Program:
How do Cash Injections Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?” The American Economic Review,
99(1): 486–508.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Vincenzo Di Maro. 2015. “Programme evaluation and spillover
effects.” Journal of Development Effectiveness, 0(0): 1–22.
Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The effects of high stakes high school achievement
awards: Evidence from a randomized trial.” The American Economic Review, 1384–1414.
Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and services
for college achievement: Evidence from a randomized trial.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 136–163.
Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier. 2009. “Doing good or doing well? Image motivation and monetary incentives in behaving prosocially.” The American Economic
Review, 544–555.
Asch, S. E. 1958. “Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification and Distortion of Judgements.” Readings in Social Psychology, E. E. Maccoby, T. M. Newcomb, and E. L. Hartley,
eds, 174–183.
Babcock, Philip, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, and Heather Royer.
forthcoming. “Letting Down the Team? Evidence of Social Effects of Team Incentives.” Journal of European Economics Association.

23

Babcock, Philip S, and John L Hartman. 2010. “Networks and workouts: treatment size
and status specific peer effects in a randomized field experiment.” NBER Working Paper No.
16581.
Baird, Sarah, J Aislinn Bohren, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Ozler. 2014. “Designing
Experiments to Measure Spillover Effects.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, ,
(6824).
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. 2013. “Team incentives: evidence
from a firm level experiment.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(5): 1079–
1114.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson.
2013. “The Diffusion of Microfinance.” Science, 341(6144).
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden, and Francisco PerezCalle. 2011. “Team incentives: evidence from a firm level experiment.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 167–195.
Beaman, Lori. 2012. “Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labour Market Outcomes: Evidence from Refugees Resettled in the U.S.” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 128–161.
Belot, Michèle, James Jonathan, and Nolen Patrick. 2013. “Changing Eating Habits-A
Field Experiment in Primary Schools.”
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.” The Review
of Economic Studies, 70(3): 489–520.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo FP Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2000. “Network
Effects and Welfare Cultures.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 1019–1055.
Bettinger, Eric P. 2012. “Paying to learn: The effect of financial incentives on elementary
school test scores.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3): 686–698.
Bobonis, Gustavo J., and Frederico Finan. 2009. “Neighborhood Peer Effects in Secondary
School Enrollment Decisions.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 695–716.
Borjas, George J, and Lynette Hilton. 1996. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 111(2): 575–604.

24

Cawley, John, and Joshua A Price. 2013. “A case study of a workplace wellness program
that offers financial incentives for weight loss.” Journal of Health Economics, 32(5): 794–803.
Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Incentives to exercise.” Econometrica, 77(3): 909–
931.
Chen, Jiehua, Macartan Humphries, and Vijay Modi. 2010. “Technology Diffusion and
Social Networks: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Uganda.” Working Paper.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Udry. 2010. “Gender differences in preferences.”
American Economic Review, 100(1): 35–69.
Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender differences in preferences.” Journal of
Economic literature, 448–474.
deCharms, Richard. 1968. Personal Causation. Academic Press.
Deci, Edward L, Richard Koestner, and Richard M Ryan. 1999. “A meta-analytic
review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation.”
Psychological bulletin, 125(6): 627.
Dohmen, Thomas, and Armin Falk. 2011. “Performance pay and multidimensional sorting:
Productivity, preferences, and gender.” The American Economic Review, 556–590.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “Participation and investment decisions in a
retirement plan: the influence of colleagues choices.” Journal of Public Economics, 85(1): 121–
148.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “The Role of Information and Social Interactions
in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(3): 815–842.
Fehr, Ernst, and John A List. 2004. “The hidden costs and returns of incentivestrust and
trustworthiness among CEOs.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(5): 743–771.
Fischer, Greg, Dean Karlan, Margaret McConnell, and Pia Raffler. 2014. “To Charge
or Not to Charge: Evidence from a Health Products Experiment in Uganda.” NBER Working
Paper No. 20170.
Fryer Jr, Roland G. 2011. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from
Randomized Trials.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 1755–1798.
25

Glaeser, Edward L, Bruce I Sacerdote, and Jose A Scheinkman. 2003. “The social
multiplier.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(2-3): 345–353.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “Pay enough or don’t pay at all.” Quarterly journal
of economics, 791–810.
Gneezy, Uri, and John A List. 2006. “Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for
gift exchange in labor markets using field experiments.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1365–1384.
Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2011. “When and why incentives
(don’t) work to modify behavior.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 191–209.
Goeree, Jacob K., and Leeat Yariv. 2014. “Conformity in the Lab.” The Journal of the
Economic Science Association, forthcoming.
Guiteras, Raymond, James Levinsohn, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. 2015. “Encouraging sanitation investment in the developing world: A cluster-randomized trial.” Science,
348(6237): 903–906.
Harrison, Glenn W, and John A List. 2004. “Field experiments.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 1009–1055.
Haun, Daniel BM, Yvonne Rekers, and Michael Tomasello. 2014. “Children conform
to the behavior of peers; other great apes stick with what they know.” Psychological science,
0956797614553235.
John, Leslie K, George Loewenstein, Andrea B Troxel, Laurie Norton, Jennifer E
Fassbender, and Kevin G Volpp. 2011. “Financial incentives for extended weight loss: a
randomized, controlled trial.” Journal of general internal medicine, 26(6): 621–626.
Just, David R, and Joseph Price. 2013. “Using incentives to encourage healthy eating in
children.” Journal of Human Resources, 48(4): 855–872.
Kamenica, Emir. 2012. “Behavioral economics and psychology of incentives.” Annu. Rev.
Econ., 4(1): 427–452.
Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. 2010. “Do all material incentives for pro-social activities
backfire? The response to cash and non-cash incentives for blood donations.” Journal of
Economic Psychology, 31(4): 738–748.

26

Lacetera, Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2013. “Economic rewards to motivate
blood donations.” Science, 340(6135): 927–928.
Lalive, Rafael, and M. A. Cattaneo. 2009. “Social Interactions and Schooling Decisions.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 457–477.
Levitt, S, J List, and Sally Sadoff. 2011. “The effect of performance-based incentives on
educational achievement: Evidence from a randomized experiment.” Unpublished Manuscript,
University of Chicago.
Levitt, Steven D, John A List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. 2011. “The
impact of short-term incentives on student performance.” Unpublished mimeo, University of
Chicago.
List, John A, and Anya Savikhin Samek. 2014. “A Field Experiment on the Impact of
Incentives on Milk Choice in the Lunchroom.” Available at SSRN 2558604.
List, John A, and Anya Savikhin Samek. 2015. “The Behavioralist as Nutritionist: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Child Food Choice and Consumption.” Journal of
Health Economics, 39: 135–146.
Macours, Karen, and Renos Vakis. 2008. “Changing Households’ Investments and Aspirations through Social Interactions: Evidence from a Randomized Transfer Program in a
Low-Income Country.” World BankWorking Paper 5137.
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1986. “Price and advertising signals of product quality.”
The Journal of Political Economy, 796–821.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Social learning and peer effects in consumption: Evidence from movie
sales.” The Review of Economic Studies, 78(1): 356–393.
Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S.
Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 549–599.
Nelson, Phillip. 1970. “Information and consumer behavior.” The Journal of Political Economy, 311–329.
Neumark-Sztainer, Dianne, Mary Story, Michael D Resnick, and Robert Wm Blum.
2012. “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Peer Effects in Menstrual Cup Take-Up.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(6): 1263–1293.

27

Ogden, Cynthia L, Margaret D Carroll, Lester R Curtin, Molly M Lamb, and
Katherine M Flegal. 2010. “Prevalence of high body mass index in US children and adolescents, 2007-2008.” Jama, 303(3): 242–249.
Peyton, Mark E, Matthew H Greenstone, and Nathaniel Schenker. 2003. “Overlapping
confidence intervals or standard error intervals: What do they mean in terms of statistical
significance?” Journal of Insect Science, 3(1): 34.
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle, and Mark Votruba. 2009. “The effect of plant downsizing on
disability pension utilization.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(4): 754–785.
Robinson, Peter M. 1988. “Root-N-consistent semiparametric regression.” Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, 931–954.
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. “Incentives, Commitments and
Habit Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune500 Company.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3): 51–84.
Shapiro, Carl. 1983. “Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations.” The
quarterly journal of economics, 659–679.
Shearer, Bruce. 2004. “Piece rates, fixed wages and incentives: Evidence from a field experiment.” The Review of Economic Studies, 71(2): 513–534.
Sherif, M. 1937. “An experimental approach to the study of attitudes.” Sociometry, 1: 90–98.
Sorensen, Alan T. 2006. “Social learning and health plan choice.” RAND Journal of Economics, 929–945.
Volpp, Kevin G, Andrea B Troxel, Mark V Pauly, Henry A Glick, Andrea Puig,
David A Asch, Robert Galvin, Jingsan Zhu, Fei Wan, Jill DeGuzman, et al. 2009.
“A randomized, controlled trial of financial incentives for smoking cessation.” New England
Journal of Medicine, 360(7): 699–709.
Volpp, Kevin G, Leslie K John, Andrea B Troxel, Laurie Norton, Jennifer Fassbender, and George Loewenstein. 2008. “Financial incentive–based approaches for weight
loss: a randomized trial.” Jama, 300(22): 2631–2637.

28

Figure 1: Cookie card, fruit card, and fruit card with token.

29

-1

-.5

0

.5

Private

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

.6

.8

1

.6

.8

1

-1

-.5

0

.5

Public minus private

0

.2

.4

-1

-.5

0

.5

Public

0

.2

.4

Proportion of table incentivized
Prediction

95% CI

Figure 2: Marginal spillover effects of proportion table incentivized on the conditional likelihood
of ending up with grapes. Estimates from a quadratic version of equation (6)
.

30

.9
Final grapes take-up
.6
.7
.8
.5
0

.2

.4
.6
Proportion of children incentivized
83% CI
83% CI

.8

1

Private
Public

Notes:
Residuals are partialled out from a parametric fit.
Estimates unconditional on the initial choice of grapes.

Figure 3: Net effect (direct and spillover) of proportion incentivized on final grapes take-up G2

Ending up with grapes
-.075
0% of table incentivized, public
.053
50% of table incentivized, private
-.0076
50% of table incentivized, public
.18
100% of table incentivized, private
-.016
100% of table incentivized, public

-.3

-.2

-.1
0
.1
Estimated coefficient
95%

.2

.3

83%

The above estimates are each group's percentage point difference from
group 1 (0% of table incentivized, private treatment), whose mean is 0.64.

Figure 4: Ending up with grapes, differences across groups

31

Table 1: Direct, Spillover, and Overall Effects of Incentives
Sign of
direct effect:

Spillover effect:

−i

Case 1:
Signs, case 1:

(+)

(+ × +) +
Case 2:

Signs, case 2:

(+)

(-)

∂Bi
∂I

∂Bi
∂I

Sign of

Sign of

spillover effect:

overall effect:

>0

(+ × +) =

(+)

(+)

(+ or -)

(+ or -)

(+ or -)

(+ or -)

< 0 and direct effect > 0

(+ × +) +
Case 3:

Signs, case 3:

∂ Ḡ−i
∂ I¯
i
)+ ( ∂∂B
)
× ∂T−i
∂T P
P
I¯−i
∂Bi
>
0
and
direct
effect
∂I

i
( ∂∂B
×
Ḡ

(− × +) =

< 0 and direct effect < 0

(+ × −) +

(− × −) =

Table 2: Table Proportion Incentivized - Distribution by Child Incentive Status
Table Proportion incentivized
0.000
0.111
0.167
0.200
0.250
0.286
0.333
0.375
0.400
0.429
0.444
0.500
0.556
0.571
0.600
0.625
0.667
0.800
1.000
Total observations:

Observations by child type:
Incentivized Not incentivized
398
0
8
1
15
3
16
4
15
5
15
6
38
19
50
30
33
22
36
27
10
8
60
60
8
10
39
52
16
24
24
40
25
50
1
4
0
459
807
824

32

Table 3: Descriptive statistics by group
Group

N. obs

Table size

% of boys

Grade

Black

Hispanic

Private-0

130

Public-0

268

Private-50-no incentive

171

Private-50-incentive

159

Public-50-no incentive

238

Public-50-incentive

206

Private-100-incentive

288

Public-100-incentive

171

Total

1631

6.23
[1.37]
6.51
[1.53]
6.66
[1.84]
6.74
[1.71]
6.42
[1.3]
6.51
[1.26]
6.49
[1.44]
5.98
[1.66]
6.45
[1.52]

0.34
[0.48]
0.47
[0.5]
0.48
[0.5]
0.46
[0.5]
0.47
[0.5]
0.47
[0.5]
0.52
[0.5]
0.49
[0.5]
0.47
[0.5]

3.86
[2.37]
4.07
[1.95]
4.12
[2.45]
4.26
[2.42]
3.68
[2.58]
3.69
[2.66]
4.27
[2.28]
3.83
[2.6]
3.99
[2.4]

0.39
[0.49]
0.34
[0.47]
0.45
[0.5]
0.38
[0.49]
0.39
[0.49]
0.37
[0.48]
0.41
[0.49]
0.39
[0.49]
0.39
[0.49]

0.55
[0.5]
0.58
[0.49]
0.44
[0.5]
0.49
[0.5]
0.48
[0.5]
0.49
[0.5]
0.54
[0.5]
0.56
[0.5]
0.52
[0.5]

0.77
0.62

Test of balance across groups
0.88
1.66
0.45
0.18
0.53
0.12
0.87
0.99

F-test∗
p-value
Standard deviations reported in brackets.
∗

F-test test for joint significance of groups controlling for school-by-period strata.

a

Child is eligible for Free/Reduced National School Lunch Program.

33

Free
luncha
0.92
[0.28]
0.87
[0.34]
0.89
[0.32]
0.84
[0.37]
0.83
[0.38]
0.85
[0.36]
0.9
[0.31]
0.89
[0.31]
0.87
[0.34]

0.36
0.93

Table 4: Children’s choices across groups
Group

N

Initial
grape choice

Switching
to grape

Switching
to cookie

Ending up
with grape

Private-0

130

0.646
[0.480]

0.062
[0.241]

0.062
[0.241]

0.646
[0.480]

Public-0

268

0.429
[0.496]

0.104
[0.306]

0.067
[0.251]

0.466
[0.500]

Private-50-no incentive

171

0.485
[0.501]

0.088
[0.284]

0.070
[0.256]

0.503
[0.501]

Private-50-incentive

159

0.792
[0.407]

0.019
[0.136]

0.069
[0.255]

0.742
[0.439]

Public-50-no incentive

238

0.466
[0.500]

0.076
[0.265]

0.059
[0.236]

0.483
[0.501]

Public-50-incentive

206

0.752
[0.433]

0.058
[0.235]

0.073
[0.26]

0.738
[0.441]

Private-100-incentive

288

0.760
[0.428]

0.052
[0.223]

0.052
[0.223]

0.760
[0.428]

Public-100-incentive

171

0.655
[0.477]

0.029
[0.169]

0.105
[0.308]

0.579
[0.495]

Total

1631

0.616
[0.486]

0.064
[0.244]

0.068
[0.252]

0.612
[0.487]

14.12
0.000
1.53
0.168

2.51
0.016
1.46
0.192

0.82
0.571
0.81
0.562

10.62
0.000
1.82
0.095

F-test∗
p-value
F-test∗ (conditional on being incentivized)
p-value
Standard deviations reported in brackets.
∗

F-test for joint significance of groups controlling for school-by-period strata, table size, grade,

sex, race and lunch type.

34

Table 5: Direct effect of incentives (I) and public treatment (P ) on initial grape choice (G1 )
G1i = α0 + α1 Ii + α2 Xi + ǫi
(1)
G1i = λ0 + λ1 Ii + λ2 Pi + λ3 Ii Pi + λ4 Xi + ǫi
(2)
Initial choice Initial choice
of grapes
of grapes
(1)
(2)
Direct effect of incentives (α1 in (1) or λ1 in (2))
0.259
0.241
[0.031]***
[0.048]***
Difference in incentive effect between public and private treatments (λ3 )

0.013
[0.067]

Effect of public treatment for non-incentivized children (λ2 )

-0.084
[0.048]*

Effect of public treatment for incentivized children (λ2 + λ3 )

-0.071
[0.051]
0.495
1631

Control group mean
N

0.495
1631

***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. Column (1) depicts OLS estimates of equation (1) listed on table and Column (2) depicts OLS
estimates of equation (2) listed on table. Standard errors are clustered by tables. Regressions control for school-by-period strata, table size,
grade, sex, race and lunch type.

35

Table 6: Spillover effects of proportion of table incentivized on switching
∆Gi = β0 + β1 T Pi + β2 T Pi ∗ Pi + β3 Ii + β4 Pi + β5 Ii Pi + β6 Xi + ǫi
(1)
(2)
All children % of incentivized
children > 0%
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (β1 )
0.093
0.125
[0.049]*
[0.066]*
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized∗public (β2 )
-0.183
-0.223
[0.107]**
[0.08]**
Total spillover effect
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public (β1 + β2 )
-0.091
-0.098
[0.08]
[0.06]
Average proportion of table incentivized
0.505
0.668

(3)
% of incentivized
children ≥ 50%
0.163
[0.08]**
-0.454
[0.127]***
-0.291
[0.101]***
0.802

***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. OLS estimates control for school-by-period strata, table size, grade, sex, race and
lunch type. Standard errors are clustered by table.

36

37
-0.085
[0.039]**

-0.070
[0.051]

-0.172
[0.069]***

0.101
[0.044]**

-0.100
[0.063]

-0.134
[0.090]

0.034
[0.063]

p-value
0.878

p-value
0.609

p-value
0.365

0.006
[0.045]

0.026
[0.062]

-0.020
[0.041]

0.007
[0.074]

0.087
[0.093]

-0.080
[0.054]

0.005
[0.055]

-0.057
[0.082]

0.061
[0.057]

p-value
0.851

p-value
0.207

p-value
0.065

Switching to cookies (SC)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Incentivized
NonEquality of
incentivized
columns (6) & (7)

***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. OLS estimates control for school-by-period strata, table size, grade, sex, race and lunch type. Standard errors are clustered by table.

Total spillover effect
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public
(β1 + β2 )

-0.157
[0.056]***

0.073
[0.036]**

SC or SG = β0 + β1 T Pi + β2 T Pi ∗ Pi + β3 Ii + β4 Pi + β5 Ii Pi + β6 Xi + ǫi
Switching to grapes (SG)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
All
Incentivized
NonEquality of
All
incentivized columns (2) & (3)

Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized∗public (β2 )

Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (β1 )

Children:

Dependent variable:

Table 7: Spillover effects of proportion of table incentivized on switching to grapes and cookies

Table 8: Testing for conformity in the proportion of incentivized children
(1)
All kids

(2)
% of incentivized
children > 0%
Panel A: Effect of same-gender incentivized kids
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (δ3 )
0.061
0.123
[0.137]
[0.136]
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion of group incentivized*incentive*public (θ6 )
-0.047
0.013
[0.218]
[0.219]
Number of observations
1549
1163
Panel B: Effect of incentivized best friends
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (δ3 )
0.041
0.037
[0.079]
[0.077]
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion of group incentivized*incentive*public (θ6 )
0.27
0.29
[0.161]
[0.163]
Number of observations
1631
1233
Panel C: Effect of incentivized popular kids
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (δ3 )
-0.029
-0.041
[0.095]
[0.091]
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion of group incentivized*incentive*public (θ6 )
0.085
0.077
[0.168]
[0.169]
Number of observations
1631
1233

(3)
% of incentivized
children ≥ 50%

0.054
[0.154]
-0.126
[0.24]
825

-0.163
[0.111]
0.157
[0.17]
872

0.015
[0.093]
0.27
[0.144]
872

***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. We report the estimates of the estimates of δ3 and θ6 from the following equations: ∆Gi =
δ0 + δ1 T Pi + δ2 T Pi Pi + δ3 T PiBF + δ4 T PiBF Pi + δ5 Ii + δ6 Pi + δ7 Ii Pi + δ8 Xi + ǫi and ∆Gi = θ0 + θ1 T Pi + θ2 T Pi Pi + θ3 T PiBF +
θ4 T PiBF Pi + θ5 T PiBF Ii + θ6 T PiBF Ii Pi + θ7 Ii + θ8 Pi + θ9 Ii Pi + θ10 Xi + ǫi . OLS estimates control for school-by-period strata, table size,
grade, sex, race and lunch type. Standard errors are clustered by table.

38

Table B1: Heterogeneity in the direct effects of incentives on initial grape choice, by gender and
grade
Incentive dummy
Incentive*male

Initial grape choice
0.260
[0.040]***
0.007
[0.055]

Initial grape choice
0.284
[0.039]***

Incentive*above median grade
Control group mean
N

-0.045
[0.062]
0.495
1631

0.495
1631

***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. OLS estimates control for school-by-period strata, table size, grade,
sex, race and lunch type. Standard errors are clustered by table. Column (1) estimates also include a dummy for
male and column (2) estimates include a dummy for grades above the median grade.

39

Table B2: Heterogeneity in spillover effect of proportion of table incentivized on switching to
grapes, by gender
∆Gi = η0 + η1 T Pi + η2 T Pi Pi + η3 T Pi malei + η4 T Pi Pi malei + η5 malei + η6 Ii + η7 Pi + η8 Ii Pi + η9 Xi + ǫi
(1)
(2)
(3)
% of incentivized
All children % of incentivized
children >0%
children ≥ 50%
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (η1 )
0.174
0.252
0.279
[0.104]**
[0.123]**
[0.077]**
Effect of table proportion incentivized*male (η3 )
-0.143
-0.232
-0.241
[0.118]*
[0.149]
[0.104]
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized*public (η2 )
-0.226
-0.217
-0.367
[0.117]*
[0.154]
[0.168]**
Effect of table proportion incentivized*public*male (η4 )
0.08
-0.028
-0.13
[0.178]
[0.245]
[0.148]
Total spillover effect
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public (η1 + η2 )
-0.052
0.034
-0.088
[0.114]
[0.121]
[0.084]
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public male (η3 + η4 )
-0.063
-0.26
-0.371
[0.135]*
[0.195]*
[0.106]
Average proportion table incentivized
0.505
0.668
0.802
***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. OLS estimates control for school-by-period strata, table size, grade, sex, race and lunch type.
Standard errors are clustered by table.

40

Table B3: Heterogeneity in spillover effect of proportion of table incentivized on switching to
grapes, by grade
∆Gi = η0 + η1 T Pi + η2 T Pi Pi + η3 T Pi gi + η4 T Pi Pi gi + η5 gi + η6 Ii + η7 Pi + η8 Ii Pi + η9 Xi + ǫi
(1)
(2)
(3)
All children % of incentivized % of incentivized
children >0%
children ≥50%
Spillover effect of peers choosing grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized (η1 )
0.169
0.195
0.188
[0.102]*
[0.135]
[0.069]**
Effect of table proportion incentivized*above median grade (η3 )
-0.135
-0.139
-0.07
[0.134]
[0.155]
[0.098]
Spillover effect of peers choosing incentivized grapes
Effect of table proportion incentivized*public (η2 )
-0.245
-0.377
-0.538
[0.107]**
[0.147]**
[0.195]***
Effect of table proportion incentivized*public*above median grade (η4 )
0.121
0.339
0.233
[0.21]
[0.265]
[0.162]
Total spillover effect
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public (η1 + η2 )
-0.076
-0.182
-0.351
[0.108]*
[0.143]**
[0.077]
Effect of table proportion incentivized for public above median grade
-0.014
0.200
0.163
[0.165]
[0.208]
(η3 + η4 )
[0.122]
Average proportion of table incentivized
0.505
0.668
0.802
***,**,* = significant at the 1,5,10% level. gi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if above median grade and 0 otherwise. OLS estimates control
for school-by-period strata, table size, grade, sex, race and lunch type. Standard errors are clustered by table.

41

