                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EFFICIENCY AND INFORMATION TRANSMISSION IN BILATERAL TRADING

                                            Robert Shimer
                                            Iván Werning

                                        Working Paper 21495
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21495


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2015




This research was supported by a grant from the Global Markets Institute at Goldman Sachs. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of Goldman Sachs, the Global Markets Institute, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful for comments and discussions with Xavier Gabaix,
Robert Hall, Pablo Kurlat, John Leahy, Guido Lorenzoni, Matthew Rognlie and Juuso Toikka, as
well as conference and seminar participants.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21495.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Robert Shimer and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Efficiency and Information Transmission in Bilateral Trading
Robert Shimer and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 21495
August 2015
JEL No. D82,D83,G14

                                             ABSTRACT

We study pairwise trading mechanisms in the presence of private information and limited commitment,
whereby either trader can walk away from a proposed trade when he learns the trading price. We show
that when one trader's information is relevant for the other trader's value of the asset, optimal trading
arrangements may necessarily conceal the traders' information. While limited commitment itself may
not be costly, it shapes how prices transmit information.


Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E17-234
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
1    Introduction
How does dispersed information get transmitted and aggregated by financial
markets? What are the impediments to information revelation? Is information
passed on from informed to uninformed traders? Is information transmission
always desirable?
    Economists have important paradigms to address these classical questions.
Grossman (1976) first showed that rational expectation models aggregate dispersed
information through prices, formalizing the ideas in Hayek (1945). Indeed, under
some conditions, prices may reveal information perfectly. This leads to a paradox:
if private information is instantly revealed then there are no incentives to gather it.
In response, Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Kyle (1985) introduced noise traders,
alongside informed and uninformed traders. Informed traders do their part to
reveal information, but their effect on the price is distorted by the presence of noise
traders. An alternative recent approach considers decentralized settings where
information takes time to percolate through the entire market (see e.g. Duffie and
Manso, 2007; Duffie, Malamud and Manso, 2014). Traders learn from each other
in each meeting, but it takes time for this information to get around. In all these
theories information transmission enhances the efficiency of the market, but it may
be hindered by noise traders or delayed by illiquid markets.
    The purpose of this paper is to propose and explore a different paradigm for
thinking about these questions. We also focus on decentralized over-the-counter
markets; however, we take a step back from the slow diffusion of information
across the market in order to zoom in on how information is transmitted within a
bilateral meeting. To avoid ad hoc assumptions on trading arrangements, we use
a mechanism design approach (Kennan and Wilson, 1993). Any specific trading
arrangement, such as a particular bargaining protocol, is a special case of the mech-
anisms we consider. Our main results question the assumption that information is
revealed in bilateral trades. Indeed, we argue that efficient trading arrangements,
including many forms of bargaining, prevent the revelation of information in order
to enhance the bilateral gains from trade. Information revelation is imperfect by


                                          2
design, not because of external impediments or constraints.
    Our approach is firmly rooted in classical microeconomic information theory
and recent advances in mechanism design. Indeed, we will leverage several useful
concepts and results from this literature. However, our focus and perspective is
quite different, since the existing literature has focused on the impediments to
efficient trading due to private information, rather than addressing the questions
about information transmission in trade.
    We focus on a bilateral trade situation under incomplete information. A single
buyer and a single seller meet and there are gains from trade. Each trader may
have some private information that is possibly relevant to both traders’ valuations.
The two traders negotiate over a trading price, but each retains the option to walk
away from the negotiation at any time. We ask whether the negotiation process,
including the trading price, reveals each trader’s information to the other. We find
that the answer depends on how negotiations are structured, by which we mean
the mechanism that links the structure of the model, including the traders’ private
information, to the terms of trade. There are mechanisms that fully reveal each
trader’s information to the other. However, sometimes Pareto efficient mechanisms
must hide some information. As a result, Pareto efficient mechanisms may some-
times allow one trader to profit at the expense of the other. This is true even though
there exist feasible (but Pareto inefficient) mechanisms where all information is
revealed and no individual ever regrets a trade. If existing arrangements strive
for trading efficiency, then our results imply that information transmission may be
purposefully prevented in the marketplace.
    We believe this insight may be useful for understanding trading patterns and
information revelation in over-the-counter securities markets. A key attribute of
these markets is that many buyers and sellers are financially sophisticated traders
who, under certain circumstances, may have private information about an asset’s
cash flow. The information may not be directly about the quality of the asset they
are trading, but instead might be about the underlying economic environment. For
example, traders may disagree about how to model the stochastic process for a
new security’s cash flow. Over time, ample historical data may limit the scope for

                                          3
disagreement, but then a highly unusual stream of cash flows—a rare event—may
lead traders to conclude that the old cash flow model is misspecified. Sophisticated
traders will respond to this uncertainty by undertaking research to improve their
model. They will also recognize that other sophisticated traders will perform their
own research, obtaining their own model. These competing models are the traders’
private information.
     This discussion also suggests that both sides of the market may be privately
informed with useful information. While it may be reasonable that a car’s owner
has unique insight into the car’s quality to the extent a car is an experience good,
this assumption seems less plausible for many financial assets.1 Any trader can try
to model an asset’s cash flow, whether he owns that asset or not. Although we start
with the simpler one-sided private information scenario, we will also consider a
situation with two-sided private information.
     The critical issue is the winner’s curse: a rational buyer will fear that if a seller
is willing to sell him an asset at a low price, the seller’s model suggests that the
assets’s value is low, reducing the buyer’s willingness to pay. The more information
is conveyed through prices, the more acute this fear will be and the greater will be
the reduction in the willingness to pay. Similarly a seller will rationally worry that
if a buyer is willing to purchase an asset at a high price, the buyer’s model suggests
that that the asset’s value is high. These concerns can lead to a breakdown in trade,
even if it is common knowledge that there are gains from trade at some price. If
less information is conveyed through prices, the response of willingness-to-pay to
price is weaker, potentially allowing for more trade.
     Trading mechanisms that obscure private information mitigate this problem.
If a buyer knows only that his own signal is low, his willingness-to-pay is higher
than if he knows both signals are low; and similarly a seller who knows only
   1A   large literature applies the Akerlof ’lemons’ model to macroeconomic settings. A non-
exhaustive list includes Eisfeldt (2004); Daley and Green (2012); Philippon and Skreta (2012); Tirole
(2012); Kurlat (2013b); Chari, Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2014); Chiu and Koeppl (2014); Guerrieri
and Shimer (2014); Camargo and Lester (2014); Kurlat (2013a); Chang (2014); Guerrieri and Shimer
(2015). To our knowledge all of these papers assume that buyers are either uninformed or have
knowledge that is only a subset of the sellers’.



                                                 4
that her own signal is high has a lower reservation price than a seller who knows
both signals are high. In fact, under certain conditions, a constant sales price will
ensure that trade always occurs yet will reveal no information between the trading
partners, while a fully revealing trading mechanism will necessitate a complete
breakdown in trade. Randomized prices are another instrument for concealing
information and may be optimal in some cases. This illustrates the tension between
trading efficiency and information revelation.
     This tension might seem counterintuitive. A reduction in asymmetric infor-
mation alleviates the lemons problem in Akerlof (1970), so one might expect that
Pareto optimal trading mechanisms would induce traders to reveal their infor-
mation to each other. This conclusion would be warranted if there were policies
that could costlessly force traders to reveal their information. In our environment,
however, information revelation is endogenous. It is possible to construct trading
mechanisms that induce traders to reveal their information to each other, but we
find that Pareto optimal mechanisms generally do not have this property.
     In the standard mechanism design approach to bargaining (Myerson, 1979),
each trader observes his own signal and makes a report to the mechanism, which
then instructs the traders on whether and at what price to trade as a function of
those reports. Mechanisms must satisfy participation constraints, so both traders
are willing to enter the mechanism ex ante, before observing their signal, or at the
interim stage, after observing their signal.
     A distinguishing feature of our approach is that we also impose ex post partici-
pation constraints: after the mechanism recommends that trade takes place at a
particular price, both traders have the option to walk away, given all the informa-
tion available at that time. For example, if a buyer is only willing to buy an asset at
some price in the event that the seller would refuse to sell at that same price, trade
will not occur at that price. We assume this lack of commitment because we believe
it is natural in over-the-counter markets. In these settings, it find it difficult to
imagine market participants being committed to trade before they know the price
at which trade takes place. It is also an immediate implications of any standard
bargaining protocol.

                                          5
    The lack of commitment assumption is critical to our results and puts informa-
tion transmission at center stage. The key issue is that ex post constraints depend
on the information revealed by the price. If traders are committed to trade before
the mechanism gives its instructions, it is costless for the mechanism to reveal each
trader’s information to the other. Ex post participation constraints capture how
learning from prices constrains the set of feasible trades. Formally, we look at the
set of veto-incentive-compatible mechanisms (Forges, 1999). Veto incentive com-
patibility constraints allow for the possibility that an trader misreports his type and
then decides not to trade upon learning the recommendation of the mechanism.
    Interestingly, the lack of commitment not to walk away may or may not affect
the efficiency of trade. In some cases the maximum feasible gains from trade
is unaffected by whether traders have a commitment technology. That lack of
commitment is costless may explain why real-world trading arrangements allow
traders to back away from a trade and do not introduce institutional arrangements
to create more commitment.
    Even if the lack of commitment does not affect attainable allocations or the
gains from trade, it is crucial for our main conclusion, that information revelation
is costly. Thus, it potentially affects the way we implement allocations, to hide
information. One way to hide information is through randomization: we find that
the optimal price should at times be a noisy function of the reported signals, so
as to reduce the ability to deduce others’ information. Interestingly, rather than a
nuisance due to noisy traders as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), efficient trading
between rational trader may require noisy prices.
    We do not view our paper as offering actual proposals for a mechanism that will
improve the efficiency of trade, although it may be possible to use our approach to
construct such a mechanism. Instead, we are interested in understanding what a
pair of traders can accomplish on their own and what features real-world trading
outcomes might have. Our main conclusions are (i) we should not expect that
pairwise optimal trading mechanisms will induce information revelation; (ii) we
should not be surprised by the ability of either party to walk away from a trade
based on the information they learn through bargaining; and (iii) we should not

                                          6
expect that equilibrium prices will depend only on fundamentals, including the
economic environment and the trader’s signals, but instead they may be random.
    Also important for our results is that traders hold information that the other
party cares about. We prove in Section 4 that revealing information is costless
in pure private values environment, such as Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983).
This is because traders never learn anything from the mechanism which changes
their willingness to trade at a particular price. The trade-off between information
transmission and trading efficiency is only important when at least one of the
traders has information that is valuable to the other. Nevertheless, we believe that
this common values case is the most natural one in asset markets since everyone
would like to have a better model of an asset’s cash flow.
    This paper is related to a growing literature that examines information diffusion
in over-the-counter markets. To focus on information diffusion, these papers often
assume that traders share all of their information in every meeting. Some treat
this assumption as a primitive (Duffie, Malamud and Manso, 2009), but others
generate this from the trading mechanism. For example, Duffie and Manso (2007)
and Duffie, Giroux and Manso (2010) assume that traders observe each others’
bids in a second price auction. They can invert those to infer each others’ beliefs,
which they use to update their own beliefs in future meetings. Duffie, Malamud
and Manso (2014) assume pairwise meetings with prices determined by a double
auction. Under the assumption that bids are monotone in beliefs, each trader can
again invert the other’s bid to update their own beliefs.
    In other papers, not all information is transmitted in every meeting. The classic
example of such a situation is Wolinsky (1990). A large number of individuals meet
in pairs to bargain over an indivisible asset. If they reach an agreement, they trade
and each exits the market. If they fail to reach an agreement, they wait one period
and are matched with another randomly selected trader in the following period.
Wolinsky (1990) proves that, even in the limit as the delay between trading rounds
disappears, trading prices do not reflect all of the available information. In contrast,
Green (1991) shows that it is feasible for a patient uninformed trader to elicit
the private information held by informed competitive traders. In a more recent

                                           7
paper, Golosov, Lorenzoni and Tsyvinski (2014) relax the assumption that assets
are indivisible and that traders exit after trade. They conclude that information
gradually diffuses through the economy, with the value of information converging
to zero.
    Our environment is much simpler than the ones in these papers, since there is
only one buyer and one seller. But in contrast to the existing literature, we study
optimal trading arrangements to explore the tension between information diffusion
and trading efficiency. Any particular trading protocol may not reveal information
fully, but this leaves open the possibility that other better mechanisms reveal more
information. Our results show that the very best mechanisms purposefully do not
reveal information fully. We leave the issue of merging these two approaches to
future research.
    An important recent theoretical contribution exploring ex post participation
constraints and veto incentive compatible mechanisms is Gerardi, Hörner and
Maestri (2014), who consider an environment with one-sided private information.
They compare the set of allocations attainable in this environment to those attain-
able in the standard mechanism design problem with commitment. Although we
use the same theoretical concepts, such as veto incentive compatibility, their focus
on allocations is quite different from our focus on information revelation, indeed,
in some sense the opposite. For example, even in cases where the no-commitment
and commitment allocation coincide, the implications for information revelation
are different. Their main result provides a characterization of veto incentive com-
patibility constraints showing these can be reduced to a set of linear constraints
expressed directly in terms of the allocation, casting information transmission
entirely to one side.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 considers the one-
sided private information case. Section 3 sets up the two-sided information case.
Section 4 then discusses the special case of private values while Section 5 treats the
case of common values. We conclude briefly in Section 6.




                                          8
2      One-Sided Private Information
There is a single asset and two traders. One of the traders, the seller, initially owns
the asset. The other trader, the buyer, has some cash that he could use to purchase
the asset. Each trader is risk-neutral and their valuations for the asset depend on
signals that each receives.
    Throughout this section, we assume that the seller privately observes a signal
and so has more information than the buyer. This is the classical “lemons” as-
sumption. For example, the asset may be an experience good, and so the seller
has learned its quality by owning it, as might be the case for automobiles (Akerlof,
1970). The one-sided private information assumption is perhaps harder to justify
in the context of financial markets, since buyers and sellers can each observe some
public information about the asset and can conduct research that may grant them
access to other signals. One case where the one-sided private information assump-
tion might be reasonable is for a mortgage originator, who might have private
information about the quality of a mortgage pool.2
    We assume without loss of generality that the seller’s signal is her expected
value of the asset s. Let F denote the cumulative distribution of s with convex
support [s, s̄]. The buyer’s expected value conditional on the seller’s signal is b(s),
which we assume is nondecreasing with b(s) ≥ s for all s. The seller privately
observes s, while the buyer only knows the functions F and b.
    Rather than study any particular trading or bargaining protocol, we adopt
a mechanism design approach and focus on constrained-efficient mechanisms.
Following Kennan and Wilson (1993), we view the mechanism design approach
as informative about what traders may accomplish through any mechanism, in-
cluding bargaining, given the restrictions implied by private information and
technology. One-sided private information is a useful theoretical starting point
because Samuelson (1984) provides an exhaustive study of Pareto efficient interim
    2 For
        some empirical evidence on this hypothesis, see Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2010),
Demiroglu and James (2012), Jiang, Nelson and Vytlacil (2014a), Jiang, Nelson and Vytlacil (2014b),
and Piskorski, Seru and Witkin (2015).



                                                9
mechanisms in this context. Although we are interested in mechanisms which sat-
isfy an additional constraint, that the uninformed buyer is willing to participate in
the mechanism after learning whatever information is revealed by the mechanism,
our results still build on his characterization.


2.1   Interim Optimal Mechanisms
We start by analyzing Pareto optimal trading mechanisms. Using the revela-
tion principle (Myerson, 1979), we know that any trading mechanism is payoff-
equivalent to a direct revelation mechanism. The seller observes s and makes a
report ŝ to the mechanism. The mechanism then instructs the seller to give the
asset to the buyer with probability q(ŝ) and instructs the buyer to give the seller a
transfer of t(ŝ). Moreover, without loss of generality, the mechanism ensures that
the seller truthfully reports her type, ŝ = s.
   Any interim optimal mechanism solves the following problem:
                               ˆ       s̄
                      max                   (t(s) − q(s)s)dF (s),                 (1)
                    {t(s),q(s)} s
                               ˆ       s̄
                  subject to                (q(s)b(s) − t(s))dF (s) ≥ u,
                                   s

                               t(s) − q(s)s ≥ 0 for all s,
                               t(s) − q(s)s ≥ t(ŝ) − q(ŝ)s for all s, ŝ.

The objective is to maximize the seller’s expected profit. The first constraint
imposes that the buyer’s expected profit is at least u; by varying u we trace out the
Pareto frontier between the expected profit for the seller and buyer. The second
constraint is that the seller’s expected profit must be nonnegative conditional
on her signal s. The third constraint is that a seller with signal s weakly prefers
reporting it rather than any other signal ŝ, the incentive compatibility constraint.
We treat u as a free parameter, but it makes sense to restrict attention to u ≥ 0 to
ensure the buyer’s voluntary participation. The case with u = 0 corresponds to the


                                                     10
seller-optimal allocation. We also restrict attention to low values of u for which the
constraint set is nonempty.3
    The following result follows immediately from Samuelson (1984) and so we
omit its proof:
                                ´s
Proposition 1. If u > maxs s (b(v) − s)dF (v), the constraint set in problem (1) is
empty. Otherwise, there exists numbers s1 , s2 , and q with s ≤ s1 ≤ s2 ≤ s̄ and q ∈ (0, 1)
such that the following policy solves problem (1):
                                        
                    
                    
                     1                  
                                         
                                          (1 − q̄)s1 + q̄s2               s ≤ s ≤ s1
                                        
              q(s) = q̄        and t(s) = q̄s2                        if   s1 < s ≤ s2
                    
                                        
                                         
                    0                   0                                s2 < s ≤ s̄.
                                        


     Intuitively, keeping q piecewise constant is useful because it reduces the number
of incentive constraints. The incentive constraints t(s) − q(s)s ≥ t(s0 ) − q(s0 )s and
t(s0 ) − q(s0 )s0 ≥ t(s) − q(s)s0 imply t(s) = t(s0 ) whenever q(s) = q(s0 ). This
implies that if a seller with some other signal s00 has an incentive to truthfully
report s00 rather than s, he also has an incentive to truthfully report s00 rather than s0 .
In contrast, if the three signals s, s0 , and s00 all result in different trading probabilities,
we must separately verify each pair of incentive constraints. We emphasize that
this logic has nothing to do with the transmission of information from seller to the
buyer, but instead with reducing the dimensionality of the constraints on the seller.


2.2    Information Revelation and Ex Post Participation
The mechanism design problem (1) is a technical device for characterizing possible
trading arrangement given the constraints implied by private information. In our
view, problem (1) ignores an important constraint on real world trading arrange-
ments. The buyer can refuse to purchase the asset if, after he learns the terms of
trade, he anticipates losing money by buying it. In making this decision, the buyer
   3 The   constraint set is nonempty when u = 0 since q(s) = t(s) = 0 is always feasible.



                                                  11
can use any information that he learns from the mechanism, in particular the terms
of trade. To capture this, we modify problem (1) by adding an ex post participation
constraint for the buyer. In this section we describe the constraint intuitively and
defer a precise statement until we get to the two-sided private information problem
in Section 3.
    Ex post participation constraints are tightly connected to information transmis-
sion. Problem (1) is silent about the buyer’s beliefs after trade occurs. For example,
the mechanism could tell the buyer the seller’s report, or it could tell the buyer
the transfer t(s) and trading probability q(s), or it could try to hide some of that
information from the buyer, for example by using a lottery. In contrast, modeling
ex post participation constraints requires us to be explicit about what a buyer learns
from the mechanism. This puts information transmission front and center.
    Problem (1) already imposes that the buyer’s ex ante profit is at least equal to
u ≥ 0. Thus on average the buyer is willing to trade. If a trading mechanism can
hide all of the seller’s information, there is no additional constraint coming from
the requirement that buyers are willing to trade ex post. We require that, at a bare
minimum, a mechanism reveals one piece of information to the buyer, the trading
price when there is supposed to be trade. In fact, optimal mechanisms only give
the buyer this piece of information.
    More precisely, a mechanism with ex post participation constraints takes the
seller’s report and recommends either a (possibly random) trading price or no
trade. If the mechanism recommends trading at a price p, the buyer uses Bayes
rule and his understanding of the economic environment and the mechanism to
update his beliefs about the seller’s signal. He then decides whether he is willing
to accept the trade given his posterior belief about the seller’s signal. The ex post
participation constraint imposes that the buyer earns nonnegative profits at any
trading price p, an additional constraint on feasible trading mechanisms.
    The ex post participation constraint makes information revelation costly. The
more prices that a mechanism uses, the more a buyer learns about the seller’s
report and so the tighter are the ex post participation constraints. This is the
tension between information transmission and trading efficiency.

                                         12
    Adding ex post participation constraints to problem (1) leads to three logical
possibilities. First, the constraints may have no impact on either the trading
mechanism or the allocation. Second, the constraints may affect the way the
trading mechanism implements an allocation, requiring a careful partial disclosure
of information to the buyer, but not affect the allocation itself. Third, it may render
a given allocation infeasible, requiring a change in the allocation.
    The next result provides necessary and sufficient condition to be in the first two
cases.
                                     ´s
Proposition 2. Assume u ≤ maxs s (b(v) − s)dF (v) so the constraint set in problem (1)
is nonempty. It is feasible to implement the allocation solving problem (1) while satisfying
the buyer’s ex post participation constraints if and only if
                               ˆ    s2
                                         (b(v) − s2 )dF (v) ≥ 0,                        (2)
                                   s1

where s1 ≤ s2 are the thresholds described in Proposition 1. When condition (2) holds,
there exists a feasible implementation that uses at most two trading prices.

     We view condition (2) as being quite weak. It holds trivially whenever s1 = s2 ,
so the interim mechanism never involves probabilistic trading. This is the case, for
example, for the buyer-optimal interim mechanism. It is also the case when F (s) is
uniform on [0, 1] and b(s) is linear. The condition may also hold when s1 < s2 , but
it is possible to construct examples where condition (2) fails.
     The finding that buyer’s ex post participation constraint often does not affect the
value of trade might be surprising. It suggests an explanation for why real-world
trading mechanisms allow traders to walk away after learning the transaction price:
this lack of commitment may be costless. Nevertheless, the lack of information
is still important for shaping how information is transmitted through trade, as
illustrated in our proof of the result, which we now proceed to sketch to emphasize
this point (the full proof can be found in the appendix).
     Our proof of sufficiency is constructive. When condition (2) holds, we construct
mechanisms that recommend the buyer and seller either trade or don’t trade. When

                                                 13
the mechanism recommends trade, it proposes either a single trading price or one
of two prices. The buyer learns the recommended trading price and updates his
beliefs about the seller’s signal using that price. We prove that the buyer is still
willing to purchase the asset at the proposed price conditional on his updated
beliefs, and that the expected transfers and trading probabilities coincide with
those in Proposition 1. Crucially, the buyer is left with a coarser information set
than the seller, for example sometimes learning only that the seller’s expected
valuation is below the trading price. Our proof of the necessity of condition (2)
leverages results in Gerardi, Hörner and Maestri (2014). In the interim optimal
mechanism, the buyer pays an average price of s2 whenever the seller’s signal lies
between s1 and s2 . When condition (2) is violated, buyers are unwilling to pay this
price in order to buy an asset in this quality range. This leads to a violation of the
buyer’s ex post participation constraint.
     When condition (2) fails, optimal mechanisms satisfying ex post participation
constraints must reveal a bit more information. For example, they may involve
trade a low price p if the seller’s signal is below some low threshold s1 , probabilistic
trade at the buyer’s valuation b(s) if the seller’s signal lies in between the thresholds
s1 and a slightly higher threshold s10 , and probabilistic trade at a still higher price p̄
if the seller’s signal is in between s10 and a higher threshold s2 , with no trade above
s2 . With such a mechanism, the buyer is left with a coarser information set than the
seller, sometimes knowing only that the seller’s report was smaller than s1 , other
times knowing only that it lay in between s10 and s2 . Optimal trading mechanisms
with ex post participation constraints hide information.


2.3   Cost of Full Information Revelation
Proposition 2 establishes that, under certain circumstances, it is possible to imple-
ment the solution to problem (1) while satisfying the buyer’s ex post participation
constraint. To do so, the optimal mechanism recommends either no trade or trade
at one of at most two prices. Here we address a related issue: suppose we confine
attention to mechanisms that fully reveal the seller’s information to the buyer and


                                            14
that satisfy the buyer’s ex post participation constraint. For example, the mech-
anism recommends trade at a higher price whenever the seller reports a higher
signal. The buyer must also be willing to trade at that price, correctly interpreting
how that price was influenced by the seller’s signal. We prove that full information
revelation reduces the value of the seller.
   To show this, we modify problem (1) by adding one more constraint,

                                    q(s)b(s) − t(s) ≥ 0 for all s.                                         (3)

The buyer must earn nonnegative profit at each value of the seller’s signal.4 We first
prove that whenever b(s) = s, the solution to the full revelation problem, given
by problem (1) with the additional constraint (3), has no trade, except possible at
s = s:

Proposition 3. Assume b(s) = s and consider the full revelation problem. Then u > 0 is
not feasible and the unique solution with u = 0 has q(s) = t(s) = 0 for all s > s.

In contrast, it is easy to construct examples with trade in the interim problem, even
when b(s) = s.5 In such cases, full information revelation completely destroys
all the gains from trade. By implication, there is a strict benefit from preventing
information revelation. Efficient trading mechanisms must hide some information.
    The logic of Proposition 3 is simple. At the lowest valuation, there are no gains
from trade. The buyer’s and seller’s participation constraint then pins down the
trading price, t(s)/q(s) = b(s) = s. For trade to take place at higher signals, s > s,
the price must be higher than the seller’s signal. But then the seller with the lowest
signal prefers to misreport her signal. The only feasible allocation involves zero
   4 We  do not directly impose that different reports induce different prices, although this is an
important practical way for prices to reveal information. Instead, we allow for the possibility that
the mechanism directly transmits the seller’s report to the buyer. This approach is more convenient
but has little practical impact on our results.
                                                                          ´ ∗
    5 Assume b ( s ) > s for almost all s and there exists an s∗ > s with s ( b ( v ) − s∗ ) dF ( s ) ≥ 0. This
                                                                           s
is the case when F (s) = s on [0, 1] and b(s) = ks for some k ≥ 2. Then setting q(s) = 1 and t(s) = s∗
                                                                     ´ s∗
if s ≤ s∗ and q(s) = t(s) = 0 otherwise is feasible when u ≤ s (b(v) − s∗ )dF (s) and gives the
seller positive expected value.


                                                     15
trade. In contrast, mechanisms that hide information from the buyer allow for the
possibility that the buyer loses money when the seller has the lowest signal. And
prices above the seller’s signal are useful for providing the seller with the incentive
to truthfully reveal her signal.
    Even if there are gains from trade, b(s) > s for all s, full revelation reduces the
highest value that the informed seller can attain:

Proposition 4. Assume u = 0, b(s) < s̄, and there exists an ε > 0 such that b(s) ≥ s + ε
for all s. The addition of constraint (3) strictly reduces the value of problem (1).

This result is driven by the following observations. When u = 0 the buyer must
not gain from trade ex ante. This implies that in a fully revealing mechanism, the
buyer must not get any gain from trade ex post, after learning the seller’s valuation.
This effectively restricts the price to equal the buyer’s valuation, while incentive
compatibility for the seller requires that the trading probability is always strictly
positive. This implies that the seller has a positive gain from trade, even when he
has the highest signal. However, in the solution to the interim problem (1), the
seller has zero gain from trade when she has the highest signal.
    Once again, this Proposition implies that there are strict benefits from hiding
information. Efficient trading mechanisms avoid full revelation. Recall from the
discussion surrounding Proposition 2 that this is accomplished by a combination
of not having the price not react fully to the seller’s information (e.g. pooling at
one or two prices) and sometimes by making the price noisy (random prices).
    Although these two propositions establish that information revelation may be
costly, there are a few cases when it is costless to transmit the seller’s information
to the buyer. For example, if the buyer’s value of the asset for any possible signal
is higher than the seller’s value for any possible signal, b(s) ≥ s̄, then the first best
allocation can be obtained. The buyer is willing to pay some price regardless of the
seller’s signal and the seller is willing to accept the same price, regardless of her
signal. But in most interesting cases, the model with one-sided private information
highlights the tension between trading efficiency and information revelation.
    A standard concept of informational efficiency in asset markets is that “security

                                           16
prices fully reflect all available information” (Fama, 1970, 1991). Of course Fama
focuses on exchanges and other markets with many participants, while we look
at a market with two traders, and so the analogy we develop here is inexact.
Nevertheless, one might conjecture from the existing literature that Pareto optimal
mechanisms would be fully-revealing. We reject that hypothesis. Restricting
attention to fully-revealing mechanisms generally leads to inferior allocations.


3     Two-Sided Private Information
We turn next to the realistic case where both the buyer and seller have private
information. The basic structure of the model is unchanged, except for the fact that
the buyer now also has a signal. After briefly describing the economic environ-
ment, we formally discuss the constraints on mechanisms that arise from private
information and the lack of commitment from both parties. We then provide a
characterization that allows us to limit attention to mechanisms that randomize
over a finite number of prices. We end the section by discussing the additional
constraints imposed by full information revelation.


3.1    Preferences and Information
Both the buyer and seller receive a signal and we assume for analytical convenience
that the signal is binary, b ∈ {0, 1} denotes the buyer’s signal and s ∈ {0, 1} denotes
the seller’s. Let πbs denote the ex ante joint probability that the buyer receives
signal b and the seller receives signal s. To avoid trivial cases, we assume πbs > 0
for all b and s.
    The buyer’s expected value for the asset is vbs  B when the buyer’s signal is b and

the seller’s signal is s. The seller’s expected value is vSbs . If the seller gives the asset
to the buyer with probability q in return for a certain cash transfer of t, the buyer’s
expected profit is qvbsB − t and the seller’s is t − qvS , where we normalize the profit
                                                       bs
from no trade to zero.
    The buyer privately observes his signal b and the seller privately observes

                                             17
                                           B depends only on b and vS depends
her signal s. In the private values case, vbs                             bs
only on s, so the willingness of a trader to accept a transfer t in exchange for
trade with probability q depends only on her own signal. But more generally, each
trader’s willingness to trade depends on their belief about the other traders’ signals.
Different trading mechanisms allow a trader to refuse to trade based on different
information sets.


3.2   Feasible Mechanisms
We are interested in understanding the set of feasible trades given the constraints
imposed both by private information and by the ability of either trader to walk
away from the deal after learning the terms of trade. This again motivates a
mechanism design approach. Using the Revelation Principle (Myerson, 1979), we
focus without loss of generality on a direct revelation mechanism, where each
trader is induced to truthfully report his signal to a mechanism.
   More precisely, the traders observe their signals and make a report to the
mechanism. The mechanism then either recommends that they trade at some
(possibly random) price p or that they don’t trade. If the mechanism recommends
trade at price p, both traders must be willing to trade in order for trade to occur.
In making this decision, each knows her own signal and report, the outcome
recommended by the mechanism, and the structure of the mechanism itself. She
may use this to update her beliefs about the other trader’s signal and hence about
her own desire to trade.
   The equilibrium expected profit of the traders’ are

                     V B = EB (vbs
                                B
                                   − p) and V S = ES ( p − vSbs ),                 (4)

where the buyer’s expectations EB and the seller’s expectations ES are taken over
the buyer’s signal b, the seller’s signal s, their truthful reports b̂ = b and ŝ = s,
and the price p. The price depends on the mechanism and is potentially a random
variable conditional on the buyer’s and seller’s reports.


                                          18
   We focus attention on mechanisms that satisfy ex post participation constraints.
Each trader must be willing to trade after he learns the trading price, under the
assumption that the other trader truthfully reported her signal. This imposes

                  EB (vbs
                       B
                          − p|b, p) ≥ 0 and ES (vbs
                                                 B
                                                    − p|s, p) ≥ 0,               (5)

where now the buyer’s expectations EB are now taken with respect to the seller’s
signal, conditional on the buyer’s signal b, truthful report b̂ = b, and the price p.
The seller’s expectations ES are similarly constructed. We contrast this with the
standard interim constraints,

                     EB (vbs
                          B
                             − p|b) ≥ 0 and ES (vbs
                                                 B
                                                    − p|s) ≥ 0,

which require that the trader’s expected profits are nonnegative only at the interim
stage, before they learn the price recommended by the mechanism. The ex post
participation constraints imply the interim participation constraints, since the
former has to hold for every signal and price combination, while the latter holds
only signal by signal.
    Finally, the veto incentive compatibility constraint states that the buyer and
seller earn higher profits by truthfully reporting their signal rather than misrepre-
senting it, conditional on the other trader truthfully reporting her signal:
                                   h n                         o        i
              EB (vbs
                   B
                      − p|b) ≥ EB max EB (vbs
                                           B
                                              − p|b, b̂, p), 0 |b, b̂           (6a)
                                   h n                         o       i
               S        S        S     S       S
              E ( p − vbs |s) ≥ E max E ( p − vbs |s, ŝ, p), 0 |s, ŝ          (6b)

The left hand side is the expected payoff conditional on the trader’s truthfully re-
ported signal, taken with respect to the other trader’s signal and the recommended
price. The inner expectation on the right hand side is taken with respect to the
other trader’s signal, conditional on the trader’s own signal and report as well
as the recommended price. The max operator reflects the possibility that a trader
misreports her signal and then refuses to trade upon observing a particular price


                                          19
recommendation. The outer expectation is taken over prices, conditioning only on
the trader’s own signal and report.
    In the standard interim incentive problem, we drop the possibility of refusing
to trade after observing the recommended price. This reduces the value of the
right hand side of inequalities (6), relaxing the constraint. Using the law of iterated
expectations, we can express the interim incentive constraint as

       EB (vbs
            B
               − p|b) ≥ EB (vbs
                             B
                                − p|b, b̂) and ES ( p − vSbs |s) ≥ ES ( p − vSbs |s, ŝ),

where the left hand side is the trader’s expected profit if he truthfully reports his
signal and the right hand side is his expected profit if he makes any other report.
    A Pareto optimal veto incentive compatible mechanism maximizes a Pareto
weighted average of V B and V S , defined in equation (4) subject to the ex post
participation constraint (5) and the veto incentive compatibility constriant (6).6 As
explained above, this is a constrained version of the standard mechanism design
problem, which imposes only an interim participation constraint and an interim
incentive compatibility constraint. We exploit the fact that the interim problem is a
relaxed version of the veto incentive compatible problem in our characterization of
optimal trading mechanisms.


3.3    Formal Characterization of Mechanisms
This section provides a formal characterization of veto incentive compatible mech-
anisms. We start by noting that mechanisms only need use a finite number of
prices:
Proposition 5. Take any feasible veto incentive compatible mechanism. There exists a
feasible veto incentive compatible mechanism with the same trading probabilities and
expected payoffs conditional on any signals (b, s), in which the recommendation is always
of the form p ∈ { p1 , p2 , . . . , p13 , ∅}.
   6 Formally, the buyer’s ex post participation constraint follows from the buyer’s veto incentive
compatibility constraints with b = b̂, and similarly for the seller. We find it conceptually convenient
to keep this constraints separate.

                                                  20
    The finding that we use at most 13 prices depends on the dimension of the
signals that the buyer and seller receive. In general, if the buyer has N B possible
signals and the seller has N S possible signals, we need at most N ≡ ( N B )2 +
( N S )2 + N B N S + 1 prices. In practice, we find that far fewer prices are sufficient in
our examples.
    Our proof shows that any veto incentive compatible mechanism is completely
characterized by the payoff of a trader who receives some signal and makes a
(possibly different report) and by the trading probabilities conditional on the signal
pair (b, s). This outcome is of dimension N − 1, linear in the probability measure
over prices. We can therefore express the outcome as the weighted average of at
most N extreme points of this set, i.e. by putting weight onto at most N such prices,
in addition to the option not to trade.
    Building on this proposition, we denote a veto incentive compatible mecha-
nism by a set of prices pn , n ∈ {1, . . . , N }, and probabilities ωn|bs such that the
mechanism recommends trading at price pn with probability ωn|bs when the buyer
reports signal b and the seller reports signal s. Naturally ωn|bs ≥ 0 for all (b, s).
We allow that ∑n ωn|bs < 1, in which case 1 − ∑n ωn|bs is the probability that the
mechanism recommends no trade following the reports (b, s).




                                            21
   We use this notation to write the veto incentive compatibility problem as

                       ∑    φ( pn − vSbs ) + (1 − φ)(vbs
                                                      B
                                                               
          max                                            − pn ) ωn|bs πbs                               (7)
      { pn ,ωn|bs n,b,s
                     }

    subject to        ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|bs πbs ≥ 0 for all b and n,
                       s

                      ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bs πbs ≥ 0 for all s and n,
                       b

                      ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|bs πbs
                      n,s
                                         (                                  )
                             ≥ ∑ max         ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|b̂s πbs , 0        for all b and b̂, and
                                n             s

                      ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bs πbs
                      n,b
                                         (                                  )
                             ≥ ∑ max         ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bŝ πbs , 0       for all s and ŝ.
                                n             b


The objective function is equal to φV S + (1 − φ)V B , where the seller’s and buyer’s
expected profits are defined in equation (4) and φ is the seller’s Pareto weight. The
exact expression uses the observation that ωn|bs πbs is the probability that the price
is pn , the buyer’s signal is b, and the seller’s signal is s.
    The first two constraints are the ex post participation constraints (5). Using
Bayes rule,
                                           Pr( pn |b, s) Pr(s|b)
                        Pr(s|b, pn ) =                                ,
                                        ∑s0 Pr( pn |b, s0 ) Pr(s0 |b)
where Pr(s|b, pn ) is the probability that the seller’s signal is s conditional on the
buyer’s signal and report b and the price pn ; Pr( pn |b, s) = ωn|bs is the probability
that the price is pn given the the buyer’s signal and report b and the seller’s signal
s; and Pr(s|b) = πbs / ∑s0 πbs0 is the probability that the seller’s signal is s given the
buyer’s signal b. It follows that

                                                                             B − p )ω
                                                                        ∑s (vbs   n    n|bs πbs
      E   B     B
              (vbs   − pn |b, pn ) = ∑     B
                                         (vbs     − pn ) Pr(s|b, pn ) =                         .
                                     s                                       ∑s ωn|bs πbs

                                                        22
The first constraint drops the irrelevant denominator. The second constraint is an
analogous condition for the seller.
   The final two constraints are the veto incentive compatibility constraints (6).
The proof is similar, again using Bayes rule and dropping irrelevant terms from
the denominator. There are two important differences. First, the participation
constraint holds after the traders learn the trading price, while the incentive com-
patibility constraint holds before they learn the trading price and so sums across the
possible prices pn . Second, the right hand side distinguishes between the trader’s
signal, b or s, which affects the probability distribution over the other trader’s signal
through π, and the trader’s report b̂ or ŝ, which affect the probability distribution
over the price through ω.
   We can also write the analogous interim problem as

                  ∑       φ( pn − vSbs ) + (1 − φ)(vbs
                                                    B
                                                             
        max                                            − pn ) ωn|bs πbs                    (8)
      { pn ,ωn|bs n,b,s
                }

   subject to     ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|bs πbs ≥ 0 for all b,
                  n,s

                  ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bs πbs ≥ 0 for all s,
                  n.b

                  ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|bs πbs ≥ ∑(vbsB − pn )ωn|b̂s πbs for all b and b̂, and
                  n,s                          n,s

                  ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bs πbs ≥ ∑( pn − vSbs )ωn|bŝ πbs for all s and ŝ.
                  n,b                          n,b


As we have already argued, the interim problem is a relaxed version of the veto
incentive compatible problem.


3.4    Fully-Revealing Mechanisms
A fully-revealing veto incentive compatible mechanism is a feasible veto incen-
tive compatible mechanism in which the mechanism is constrained to reveal each
trader’s report to the other trader before a trade is consummated. If the mechanism
recommends trading at a price pbs when the buyer’s report is b and the seller’s


                                                 23
report is s, then both the buyer and seller must be willing to trade at that price
knowing the other trader’s signal. This imposes vbs     B ≥ p ≥ vS . It is straightfor-
                                                              bs bs
ward to verify that a fully-revealing mechanism needs to use at most one price per
report pair (b, s), i.e. at most four prices in our scenario.
   We write the full revelation problem as

               ∑       φ( pbs − vSbs ) + (1 − φ)(vbs
                                                  B
                                                            
      max                                            − pbs ) ωbs πbs                                         (9)
    { pbs ,ωbs n,b,s
             }
             B
subject to (vbs − pbs )ωbs ≥ 0 for all b and s,
              ( pbs − vSbs )ωbs ≥ 0 for all b and s,
               ∑(vbsB − pbs )ωbs πbs ≥ ∑ max{vbsB − pb̂s , 0}ωb̂s πbs for all b and b̂, and
                s                             s
                                                      n                     o
               ∑    ( pbs − vSbs )ωbs πbs   ≥ ∑ max       pb̂s − vSbs , 0       ωbŝ πbs for all s and ŝ.
                b                             s


Here ωbs is the probability that the mechanism recommends trade when the buyer’s
report is b and the seller’s report is s. The objective function is essentially un-
changed from the interim and veto-incentive compatible problems. The first two
constraints impose that the buyer and seller earn nonnegative profits conditional
on both reports. The final two constraints ensure that neither trader wishes to
misrepresent his signal, allowing for the possibility that the trader then refuses to
trade following certain reports by the other trade.


4     Private Values
We briefly comment on the private values case, a common simplifying assumption
in the mechanism design literature (Myerson and Satterthwaite, 1983; McAfee and
Reny, 1992). We show that information revelation is costless in this case:
                                       B = v B and vS = vS for all b and s. The value
Proposition 6. Assume private values, vbs    b      bs   s
of problems (7) and (9) are the same.

Note that the buyer’s and seller’s value may still be correlated because their signals

                                                  24
are correlated; however, neither trader cares directly about the other trader’s signal.
    The proof shows that the constraint set is the same in the two problems. In-
tuitively, the benefit of hiding information is that doing so prevents traders from
learning something that makes them not want to trade. A buyer with signal b may
in general only be willing to pay a price p if he believes the seller’s signal takes on
a particular value of s. But with private values, this is not the case. The buyer’s
willingness to pay depends only on his own signal and so telling him the seller’s
signal does not alter the ex post participation constraint. The same is true for the
seller.
    This highlights the importance of common values for the trade-off between
information revelation and trading efficiency. Suppose both traders’ valuations
are increasing in the other trader’s signal. If the buyer knows the seller has a low
signal, he will be unwilling to pay a high price for the asset. Similarly if the seller
knows the buyer has a high signal, she will be unwilling to accept a low price for
the asset. This may imply that prices are sensitive to traders’ reports, which makes
it difficult to induce truthful information revelation. The solution is to penalize a
seller who reports a low signal or a buyer who reports a high signal by not trading,
even if trading is efficient. In contrast, it may be possible to sustain more efficient
trading arrangements by keeping some information private. The remainder of the
paper shows how this works.


5    Common Values
We now turn to the case with common values. We start by introducing a useful
example which parametrizes the information structure in a way that lends itself
easily to interpretation and assumes a constant gain from trade. We then solve
for mechanisms that maximize the sum of utilities, or equivalently, the gains from
trade. In our example, this is equivalent to maximizing the probability of trade. We
then turn to mechanisms that impose full information revelation and show that
this restriction is costly. Finally, we study other efficient mechanisms that trace out


                                          25
the Pareto frontier between the buyer and seller.


5.1   An Example
We focus on a particular example which illustrates some general properties of the
model. Assume that the traders’ binary signals are correlated:
                                    
                                     1 ( α2 + (1 − α )2 )         b=s
                                      2
                          πbs =                               if
                                     α (1 − α )                   b 6= s,

        1
where   2   < α < 1. The seller’s payoff is
                                    
                                         (1− α )2
                                    
                                    
                                     α 2 +(1− α )2          b=s=0
                                    
                           vSbs =     2
                                       1
                                                        if   b 6= s
                                    
                                           α2
                                    
                                                             b = s = 1,
                                    
                                    
                                       α2 +(1−α)2

                              B = γ + vS for all ( b, s ) where γ > 0.
while the buyer’s payoff is vbs            bs
    As motivation for the payoff structure, suppose that the state of the world is
δ ∈ {0, 1}, taking on each value with equal probability. The seller values the asset
at δ, while the buyer values it at δ + γ. Here γ denotes the constant gains from
trade. Neither trader knows the true value of δ, but instead each receives a binary
signal. The signals are independent conditional on the asset’s payoff, but they are
only imperfectly correlated with the payoff. In particular, the buyer (seller) receives
the “accurate” signal b = δ (s = δ) with probability α and otherwise receives the
inaccurate signal b = 1 − δ (s = 1 − δ). One can easily verify that these signals give
rise to the correlation structure and signal-conditional expected values defined
above.
    To put a more economic interpretation on the example, we view the buyer’s
and seller’s signals as models of the asset’s cash flow. Each trader is more likely
to believe the asset is valuable if it is valuable, but their models are distinct and
so each can potentially learn from the other. Although it is common knowledge

                                                   26
that there are gains from trade, γ > 0, private information may prevent them
from recognizing the gains from trade at any particular price p. Nevertheless, we
show below that obscuring that private information is better for trade than the
alternative possibility, setting up a fully revealing trading mechanism.


5.2    Trade Maximization
We start by describing the solution to the veto incentive compatible problem (7)
with equal Pareto weights, φ = 1/2. Since the difference between the buyer’s and
seller’s valuation is constant in this example, the equal Pareto-weighted problem
is equivalent to maximizing the probability of trade, a natural benchmark. The
following proposition characterizes the optimal mechanism:

Proposition 7. Consider the example in Section 5.1. There exists a solution to problem (7)
                                              B , 1 (1 + γ ), and vS :
with φ = 1/2 that uses at most three prices, v00  2                11

   1. If γ ≥ 2α − 1, trade occurs at price 21 (1 + γ) for sure.
                              α(α(3−2α)−1)
   2. If 2α − 1 > γ >     (1−α(1−α))(1−2α(1−α))
                                                ,    an optimal mechanism is as follows:

                                      B with prob. µ and p = 1 (1 + γ ) with prob. 1 − µ;
             (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 0) ⇒ p = v00                     2
                                      S with prob. µ and p = 1 (1 + γ ) with prob. 1 − µ;
             (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 1) ⇒ p = v11                     2

             (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 0) ⇒ p = 21 (1 + γ);
             (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 1) ⇒ p = 12 (1 + γ) with prob. λ and no trade with prob. 1 − λ.
               α(α(3−2α)−1)
   3. If   (1−α(1−α))(1−2α(1−α))
                                   ≥ γ > 0, an optimal mechanism is as follows:
                                         B with prob. λ and no trade with prob. 1 − λ;
             If (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 0) ⇒ p = v00
                                         S with prob. λ and no trade with prob. 1 − λ;
             If (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 1) ⇒ p = v11
             If (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 0) ⇒ p = 12 (1 + γ);
             If (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 1) ⇒ no trade.



                                                27
    Figure 1 shows the three regions of the parameter space. When the gains from
trade are large, γ ≥ 2α − 1, the first best can be attained by trading at a constant
price. In this case, a buyer who knows only that he received the signal b is willing
to accept the price 12 (1 + γ) if he doesn’t know the seller’s signal, and similarly for
the seller with signal s who does not know the buyer’s signal. A constant price
successfully keeps this information hidden from each trader.
    Note, however, that if a buyer had the low signal and knew the seller had the
low signal, she would refuse to trade at this price whenever v00      B < 1 (1 + γ ) or
                                                                            2
                   α2 −(1−α)2
equivalently γ <   α2 +(1−α)2
                              .   Similarly a seller with the high signal would refuse to
                                                                           S >
sell to a buyer with the high signal if he knew this information whenever v11
1                                                                    α2 −(1−α)2
2 (1 + γ ).This reduces to the same parameter restriction. Since α2 +(1−α)2 > 2α − 1,
information revelation is costly in some of this region. The next section explores
this insight more carefully.
    For intermediate gains from trade, the previous trading arrangement breaks
down. A seller with the high signal would refuse to sell at the intermediate price
if she doesn’t know the buyer’s signal, and similarly a buyer with the low signal
would refuse to buy at the intermediate price if he doesn’t know the seller’s signal.
Any veto incentive compatible trading arrangement must reveal some information.
The optimal mechanism reveals as little as possible.
    When the mechanism recommends trading at the extreme prices v00       B or vS , the
                                                                                11
two reports are common knowledge. In contrast, some uncertainty remains when
the mechanism recommends trading at the intermediate price, with each trader
updating his beliefs about the other trader’s signal. The mechanism randomizes
across recommendations so as to leave a seller with the the high signal and a
buyer with the low signal indifferent about trading when instructed to trade at the
intermediate price. A buyer with the low signal is sufficiently confident that the
seller has the high signal that he is willing to pay a high price, and conversely for a
seller with the high signal.
    This mechanism partially aligns the expected trading price with the traders
reports. This gives traders and incentive to lie to get a better price. To keep the
traders honest, the mechanism punishes them when their reports differ in the

                                             28
                                1


          gains from trade γ   0.8


                               0.6
                                                            ling
                                                        vea
                                                    -re
                               0.4
                                                non
                                                                     aling
                                                     i a l l y -reve
                                                part
                               0.2

                                                fully-revealing
                                0
                                 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95   1
                                                   signal quality α


Figure 1: Regions of the parameter space in which different types of veto incentive
compatible mechanisms are trade-maximizing. The details of the mechanisms are
given in Proposition 7.

direction of self interest. When the seller reports a high signal and the buyer
reports a low signal, there is a possibility that trade breaks down.
   Finally, with low gains from trade, the mechanism is deterministic and fully-
revealing. In this case, the probability of trade is low. Hiding information is feasible
but turns out to be counterproductive.
   Our proof of Proposition 7 is constructive. We define the probabilities λ and
µ and show that the proposed mechanism satisfies the constraints of the veto
incentive compatible problem (7). We then solve the relaxed interim problem (8)
and prove that the maximized value of this problem is the same as the value we
obtained for an interim mechanism. This recalls Proposition 2, where we proved
that the veto incentive compatibility constraints need not affect the value of the


                                                        29
one-sided private information problem. In that environment, the constraints were
important for understanding information transmission, and this remains true with
two-sided private information.


5.3    Fully Revealing Mechanisms
We highlight the cost of information revelation by solving the full revelation
problem (9). With very large or very small gains from trade, the solution in
Proposition 7 is consistent with full information revelation, but otherwise there is a
cost from such a policy.
                                                  2α−1
     To prove this, first assume that γ ≥ α2 +(     1− α )2
                                                            so vSbs ≤ vbB0 s0 for all b, b0 , s, and
s0 . This is a tighter restriction than the first case in Proposition 7. A constant price
1 S         B
2 ( v22 + v11 ) achieves the first best, always trading, even if both traders know the
other trader’s signal. Conversely, in the third case in Proposition 7, we proposed
implementing the optimum using a fully revealing mechanism. It follows that
there is no cost to information revelation.
     But at intermediate values of the gains from trade,

                       2α − 1                 α(α(3 − 2α) − 1)
                                    >γ>                               ,
                  α2   + (1 − α ) 2     (1 − α(1 − α))(1 − 2α(1 − α))

trade maximization necessarily entails hiding information. The solution to prob-
lem (9) is as follows:
                               B ;
      (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 0) ⇒ p = v00
                               S ;
      (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 1) ⇒ p = v11

      (b̂, ŝ) = (1, 0) ⇒ p = 12 (1 + γ);

      (b̂, ŝ) = (0, 1) ⇒ p = 21 (1 + γ) with prob. λ and no trade with prob. 1 − λ.

In contrast, the solution to problem (7) puts positive weight onto the intermediate
price 12 (1 + γ) in the first two cases. This is impossible with a fully revealing
mechanism. If the buyer knew when both traders received the low signal, he

                                                30
                                1                                   l
                                                                ima
                                                        opt               - re vealin
                                                                                      g
                                                                 fu l l y
         trading probability   0.8


                               0.6


                               0.4


                               0.2


                                0
                                     0    0.1    0.2   0.3        0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7                 0.8   0.9    1
                                                                gains from trade γ


Figure 2: Trading Probability with α = 3/4. The solid line shows the trading
probability under the trade-maximizing veto incentive compatible mechanism, the
solution to problem (7). The dashed line imposes the additional constraint that the
mechanism is fully-revealing, the solution to problem (9).

would refuse to pay more than v00      B ; and if the seller knew when both traders

received the high signal, he would refuse to accept less than v11 S . The probability of

trading when the buyer reports a low signal and the seller reports a high signal, λ,
is set so as to ensure that the seller has an incentive to report a low signal when he
receives one and similarly for a buyer who receives a low signal. We illustrate this
through the incentive constraint of a seller who receives the low signal:

   B     S                               1             S                  1             S                S     S
                                                                                                               
  v00 − v00   π00 +                      2 (1 + γ ) − v10       π10 =     2 (1 + γ ) − v00       λπ00 + v11 − v10   π10 .

The left hand side is the expected profit of a seller who truthfully reports the low
signal. The probability that the buyer gets the low signal conditional on the seller’s

                                                                     31
low signal is π00 /(π00 + π10 ). In this event, the seller’s gain from trade under the
proposed mechanism is v00  B − vS . Alternatively, with complementary probability,
                                  00
the buyer gets the high signal and the seller’s gain from trade is the intermediate
price minus the intermediate valuation. If the seller misrepresents his signal, he
changes the price and trading probability but doesn’t change the buyer’s signal
distribution or his own valuation. This is illustrated on the right hand side of the
equality.
    This incentive constraint is tighter in the fully revealing mechanism than the
optimal mechanism because prices are more sensitive to reports. As a result, the
trading probability λ is lower when the buyer has the low signal and the seller has
the high signal. For example, when α = 3/4 and γ = 1/2, the probability of trade
is 1 under the optimal mechanism and falls to 0.88 under the best fully-revealing
mechanism. Figure 2 shows the increased efficiency of a partially-revealing mecha-
nism for this value of the accuracy parameter α.


5.4   Pareto Frontier
We close by exploring the set of feasible payoffs more generally. We maintain the
assumption that the traders’ signals are binary but we drop the particular payoff
structure in Section 5.1. We find that the solutions to the veto incentive compatible
problem (7) and the standard interim problem (8) do not generally coincide. The
additional constraints on transfers and trading probabilities in the former problem
sometimes have a real bite.

Proposition 8. Assume vbs  B and vS are nondecreasing in b and s. Consider any mechanism
                                   bs
{ p, ω } in the constraint set of problem (7). Let qbs ≡ ∑n ωn|bs and tbs ≡ ∑n pn ωn|bs
denote the trading probability and expected transfer conditional on the reports in this
mechanism. Then

                              S         B
                      tbs ∈ [v0s qbs , vb1 qbs ] for all (b, s) ∈ {0, 1}2 .        (10)




                                              32
                 S q > t ,
In addition, if v11 11  11

                            B q −t                B q −t
                                                                 
                           v01 01  01        π11 v01 11  11
                            S q −t
                                         ≥              S q
                                                                 ;                     (11)
                           v11 11  11        π01 t11 − v01  11

              B q ,
and if t00 > v00 00
                                  S q                  S q
                                                              
                           t01 − v01  01   π00 t00 − v01   00
                                  B q
                                         ≥       B q −t
                                                              .                        (12)
                           t00 − v00  00   π01 v01  00     00

The restrictions (10)–(12) are necessary for implementing the solution to the in-
terim problem in a manner consistent with limited commitment. In numerical
simulations, we have not found any other binding constraints.
     Condition (10) is the analog of condition (2) from the model with one-sided
private information. Consider a seller who receives signal s. She believes that the
value of the asset is at least v0sS , regardless of the buyer’s signal, and so would never

accept a lower price in any veto incentive compatible mechanism. That is, for any
pn < v0s  S , the seller’s ex post participation constraint implies ω
                                                                       n|bs = 0 for all buyer
reports b. Since tbs = ∑n pn ωn|bs and qbs = ∑n ωn|bs , it follows that tbs /qbs ≥ v01     S

whenever qbs > 0. This proves tbs ≥ v0s     S q . The proof that t ≤ v B q is symmetric,
                                               bs                  bs     b1 bs
using the fact that a buyer who receives a signal b would never pay more than vb1          B

for the asset, regardless of his beliefs.
     The constraints (11) and (12) have no analog in the one-sided problem but may
also bind. The basic issue is that an optimal mechanism in the interim problem may
set a higher expected price when the buyer reports the low signal than when he
reports the high signal: t0s /q0s > t1s /q1s for some s. But this means that the seller
with signal s can infer from a low trading price that the buyer most likely got a high
signal, which raises the minimum price that the seller is willing to accept above
  S . This places an additional restriction on the relationship between transfers and
v0s
trading probabilities which those constraints capture.
     It is easy to construct examples of economies in which these constraints bind.
Figure 3 illustrates one such case, using the payoff structure in Section 5.1 and
setting α = 0.6 and γ = 0.2. The lightest shaded region illustrates the entire set


                                             33
                                           0.14


                                           0.12
        seller’s ex ante expected profit




                                            0.1


                                           0.08


                                           0.06


                                           0.04


                                           0.02


                                             0
                                                  0   0.02    0.04    0.06    0.08    0.1    0.12   0.14
                                                             buyer’s ex ante expected profit


Figure 3: The set of feasible payoffs with 2-sided private information. The figure
assumes the payoff structure in Section 5.1 with α = 0.6 and γ = 0.2. The lightest
shaded area is the set of payoffs obtainable using a fully revealing veto incentive
compatible mechanism. The intermediate shaded area is the set of payoffs that can
additional be obtained using an arbitrary veto incentive compatible mechanism.
The darkest area shows the set of payoffs that can additionally be obtained using
an interim mechanism.




                                                                       34
of payoffs that can be obtained using a feasible fully-revealing mechanism, i.e. a
feasible policy in problem (9). The intermediate shaded region is the set of payoffs
that can additionally be obtained using a veto incentive compatible mechanism, i.e.
a feasible policy in problem (7). And the darkest shaded region is the set of payoffs
that can be obtained using an interim mechanism, a feasible policy in problem (8).
    The constraints (10), (11), and (12) sometimes bind in this example. The pos-
sibility that the first constraint binds could be anticipated from Gerardi, Hörner
and Maestri (2014), and so we focus on the more novel constraints. Consider the
problem of maximizing the seller’s profit subject to giving the buyer at least 0.09. In
the interim problem, we find q00 = q11 = q10 = 1 and q01 = 0.875, with t00 = 0.512,
t11 = 0.543, t10 = 0.708, and t01 = 0.622. This gives the seller expected profit 0.214.
But this policy violates the constraint (12) for the buyer (and none of the other
constraints).
    Instead, the veto-incentive compatible problem yields a lower trading proba-
bility, q00 = q11 = q10 = 1 and q01 = 0.830, with t00 = 0.564 and t11 = 0.616, both
higher, and t10 = 0.625 and t01 = 0.520, both lower. The reduction in the trading
probability implies that the seller’s profit is lower, 0.212. It is still the case that the
expected trading price tbs /qbs is higher when the buyer and seller have different
signals than when they both have the high signal, but the gap is smaller than in
the interim mechanism.
    Figure 3 also highlights the important role played by concealing information in
veto incentive compatible mechanisms. The smallest shaded region indicates the
set of payoffs obtainable by a fully-revealing veto incentive compatible mechanism.
With fully-revealing mechanisms, a trader always knows his trading partner’s
signal, and so the veto incentive compatibility constraints require that prices
are sensitive to information. To offset this, the incentive constraints reduce the
probability of trade when the buyer reports the low signal or the seller reports the
high signal, reducing overall efficiency.




                                            35
6    Conclusion
This paper highlights the transmission of information within a single trade. We
find a tension between pairwise efficient trading arrangements and information
revelation. In some cases, we can obtain the unconstrained optimum by trading at
a constant price, independent of the traders’ signals. This blocks all information
transmission. In other cases, the unconstrained optimum is unattainable, but
efficient trading arrangements still conceal information by making the trading
price insensitive to information and possibly random conditional on all available
information. In many cases, mechanisms that fully reveal all information reduce
trading efficiency.
    We close with some thoughts on how this single trade can fit into a dynamic
environment with learning and retrading. First, suppose that the same buyer
and seller trade in two or more periods without obtaining any new information.
Optimality requires that they use a single trading mechanism, with reports in
the first period dictating trades in both period. Thus our basic approach trivially
carries over to this environment.
    A more interesting case occurs when the buyer in one period has an option
to resell the asset in a later period. For example, a mortgage originator with
private information about the quality of a mortgage pool may sell a mortgage-
backed security to an insurance company. The insurance company might later
decide to sell the security to a pension fund. In this case, the insurance company
has an incentive to credibly design a first period mechanism that prevents it
from learning the mortgage originator’s information. Doing so eliminates private
information in the secondary market, which simplifies the resale process (Gorton
and Pennacchi, 1990). The primary market is then an example of one in which there
is no tension between trading efficiency and information transmission. Minimizing
the information that the insurance company learns from the mortgage originator
enhances both trading and retrading efficiency.
    It is also easy to construct examples in which information transmission is
privately and socially useful. For example, the buyer’s belief that house prices


                                        36
are over-valued may reduce the price of mortgage-backed securities as well as
the amount of new mortgage origination. On the one hand, an optimal economy-
wide trading mechanism in this environment trades off the benefits of placing the
already-created security against the Hayekian benefit of information transmission
through prices. On the other hand, contracts that are privately optimal bilaterally
may not internalize the proper value of information transmission and may look
closer to the contracts studied in the present paper. Although a complete dynamic
analysis is outside our present reach, we conjecture, extrapolating from our current
results, that in some cases information transmission may come to a halt, with
diffusion stopping short of full revelation even in the long run, in contrast to the
results in Duffie and Manso (2007) and Golosov, Lorenzoni and Tsyvinski (2014).
Studying such extensions is an interesting avenue for future research.


References
Akerlof, George A., “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the
 Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488–500.

Camargo, Braz and Benjamin Lester, “Trading Dynamics in Decentralized Mar-
  kets with Adverse Selection,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2014, 153, 534–568.

Chang, Briana, “Adverse Selection and Liquidity Distortion,” 2014. Wisconsin
 Mimeo.

Chari, V.V., Ali Shourideh, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones, “Reputation and Persistence
 of Adverse Selection in Secondary Loan Markets,” American Economic Review,
 2014, 104 (12), 4027–70.

Chiu, Jonathan and Thorsten V. Koeppl, “Trading Dynamics with Adverse Se-
 lection and Search: Market Freeze, Intervention and Recovery,” 2014. Bank of
 Canada Mimeo.




                                        37
Daley, Brendan and Brett Green, “Waiting for News in the Dynamic Market for
 Lemons,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (4), 1433–1504.

Demiroglu, Cem and Christopher James, “How Important is Having Skin in
 the Game? Originator-Sponsor Affiliation and Losses on Mortgage-backed
 Securities,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25 (11), 3217–3258.

Duffie, Darrell and Gustavo Manso, “Information Percolation in Large Markets,”
 American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 203–209.

  , Gaston Giroux, and Gustavo Manso, “Information Percolation,” American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2010, 2 (1), 100–111.

  , Semyon Malamud, and Gustavo Manso, “Information Percolation With Equi-
  librium Search Dynamics,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1513–1574.

  , , and , “Information Percolation in Segmented Markets,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 2014, 153, 1–32.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., “Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets,” Journal of Finance,
  2004, 59 (1), 1–30.

Fama, Eugene F., “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
  Work,” Journal of Finance, 1970, 25 (2), 383–417.

  , “Efficient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, 1991, 46 (5), 1575–1617.

Forges, Francoise, “Ex Post Individually Rational Trading Mechanisms,” in Ahmet
  Alkan, Charalambos D. Aliprantis, and Nicholas C. Yanneli, eds., Current Trends
  in Economics, Springer, 1999, pp. 157–175.

Gerardi, Dino, Johannes Hörner, and Lucas Maestri, “The role of commitment in
 bilateral trade,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2014, 154, 578–603.

Golosov, Mikhail, Guido Lorenzoni, and Aleh Tsyvinski, “Decentralized Trad-
 ing with Private Information,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (3), 1055–1091.

                                          38
Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
 Creation,” The Journal of Finance, 1990, 45 (1), 49–71.

Green, Edward J., “Eliciting Traders’ Knowledge in “Frictionless” Asset Market,”
 1991. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 144.

Grossman, Sanford, “On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where
 Trades Have Diverse Information,” Journal of Finance, 1976, 31 (2), 573–585.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “On the Impossibility of Informa-
 tionally Efficient Markets,” American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (3), 393–408.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Robert Shimer, “Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory
 of Illiquidity, Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality,” American Economic Review, 2014,
 104 (7), 1875–1908.

  and , “Markets with Multidimensional Private Information,” 2015. University
  of Chicago Mimeo.

Hayek, F.A., “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic Review, 1945,
 35 (4), 519–530.

Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil, “Liar’s loan? Effects of
   origination channel and information falsification on mortgage delinquency,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (1), 1–18.

  , , and , “Securitization and Loan Performance: A Contrast of Ex Ante and
  Ex Post Relations in the Mortgage Market,” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27
  (2), 454–483.

Kennan, John and Robert Wilson, “Bargaining with Private Information,” Journal
 of Economic Literature, 1993, 31 (1), 45–104.

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did Secu-
 ritization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 306–362.

                                        39
Kurlat, Pablo, “Asset Markets with Heterogeneous Information,” 2013. Stanford
 Mimeo.

  , “Lemons Markets and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1463–1489.

Kyle, Albert S., “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica, 1985,
 53 (6), 1315–1335.

McAfee, R. Preston and Philip J. Reny, “Correlated Information and Mechanism
 Design,” Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2), 395–421.

Myerson, Roger B., “Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem,” Econo-
 metrica, 1979, 47 (1), 61–73.

  and Mark A. Satterthwaite, “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trading,” Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 1983, 29 (2), 265–281.

Philippon, Thomas and Vasiliki Skreta, “Optimal Interventions in Markets with
  Adverse Selection,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 1–28.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, “Asset Quality Misrepresenta-
  tion by Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from RMBS Market,” 2015. Forthcom-
  ing, Journal of Finance.

Samuelson, William F., “Bargaining under Asymmetric Information,” Economet-
  rica, 1984, 52 (4), 995–1005.

Tirole, Jean, “Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Re-
  store Market Functioning,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 29–59.

Wolinsky, Asher, “Information Revelation in a Market with Pairwise Meetings,”
 Econometrica, 1990, 58 (1), 1–23.




                                      40
                                          Appendix

A     Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2. First assume s1 = s2 . In this case, Samuelson (1984) notes
that the optimal mechanism can be implemented through a single price p = s1 ,
with the seller allowed to decide whether to sell the asset at that price. Given
the choice between selling for s1 or not selling, the seller chooses to sell the asset
whenever his signal is smaller than the price, s ≤ p. The buyer’s expected profit
conditional on knowing that the seller is willing to sell the asset is therefore
                                         ´ s1
                                          s     (b(v) − s1 )dF (v)
                                                                     .
                                                    F ( s1 )

Using the first constraint in problem (1) and the fact that there is no trade when
s > s1 , this is at least equal to u/F (s1 ). This proves the buyer is willing to trade
even conditional on the information that the seller is willing to trade.
   From now we assume s1 < s2 . In the next step, assume that condition (2) holds
and                       ˆ s1
                               (b(v) − (1 − q)s1 − qs2 )dF (v) ≥ 0
                           s

The outcome of the optimal mechanism can be implemented using two prices,
p1 = (1 − q)s1 + qs2 and p2 = s2 . If the seller reports s ≤ s1 , trade occurs at the
low price p1 . If the seller reports s1 < s ≤ s2 , trade occurs the high price with
probability q and otherwise there is no trade. Now the trading price conveys
information to the buyer, but the buyer is still willing to buy at either price, even
though he understands that the price conveys information about the seller’s signal.
   In the third step, we assume that condition (2) holds and
                       ˆ       s1
                                    (b(v) − (1 − q)s1 − qs2 )dF (v) < 0.
                           s




                                                      41
We still implement the optimal mechanism using two prices. If the seller reports
s ≤ s1 , trade occurs at a low price p1 with probability 1 − ρ and at the high price
p2 with probability ρ. If the seller reports s1 < s ≤ s2 , trade occurs the high price
with probability q and otherwise there is no trade. The high price is still p2 = s2 ,
so the expected transfer when the seller reports s1 < s ≤ s2 is qs2 . The low price
ensures that the buyer breaks even when offered the low price,
                                                  ´ s1
                                                   s     b(v)dF (v)
                                           p1 =                          .
                                                         F ( s1 )

Note that this implies p1 < (1 − q)s1 + qs2 , since we have assumed that the buyer
would lose money if forced to pay (1 − q)s1 + qs2 to a seller with signal s ≤ s1 .
Finally, the trading probability ρ ensures that the expected transfer when the seller
reports a signal s ≤ s1 is (1 − q)s1 + qs2 :

                                             (1 − q)s1 + qs2 − p1
                                        ρ=                        .
                                                   p2 − p1

This defines ρ ∈ (0, 1). We can verify that the buyer’s profit is nonnegative when
offered the high price,
                   ˆ       s1                             ˆ    s2
               ρ                (b(v) − p2 )dF (v) + q              (b(v) − p2 )dF (v) ≥ u,
                       s                                      s1


since the buyer earns zero profits in the other circumstances.
   Finally, suppose condition (2) is violated. Gerardi, Hörner and Maestri (2014)
prove that an ex post mechanism can implement the interim optimal solution if
and only if
                     ˆ s̄
                          (q(v)b(v) − t(v))dF (v) ≥ 0 for all s.
                                  s
We break this condition into three regions. First, if s ≥ s2 , this holds trivially.




                                                         42
Second, if s2 > s ≥ s1 , the condition reduces to
                                         ˆ       s2
                                     q                (b(v) − s2 )dF (v) ≥ 0.
                                             s

The integrand is equal to zero when s = s2 and it is concave in s since b is nonde-
creasing; Therefore if the condition holds at s = s1 , it holds at all s ∈ [s1 , s2 ]. In the
third region, s1 > s ≥ s and the condition reduces to
          ˆ       s1                                                 ˆ    s2
                       (b(v) − (1 − q)s1 − qs2 )dF (v) + q                     (b(v) − s2 )dF (v) ≥ 0.
              s                                                          s1

Again, the first integrand is equal to zero when s = s1 and it is concave in s;
therefore if this condition holds at s = s, it holds at all s ∈ [s, s1 ]. But the condition
at s = s is just the requirement that the buyer earns nonnegative profits, a condition
that we know holds.



Proof of Proposition 3. Observe

                              t(s) − q(s)s ≥ t(s) − q(s)s ≥ q(s)(s − s),

where the first inequality uses the incentive compatibility constraint of a seller
with signal s and the second uses the participation constraint of a seller with
signal s. Moreover, t(s) = q(s)s whenever b(s) = s: the buyer’s and seller’s
participation constraints at signal s jointly imply q(s)b(s) − t(s) ≥ 0 ≥ q(s)s − t(s),
and both inequalities bind when b(s) = s. This proves q(s)(s − s) ≤ 0, so q(s) = 0
for all s ≥ s. The buyer’s and seller’s participation constraints at s then imply
t(s) = 0.



Proof of Proposition 4. We first prove that the buyer’s profit is zero in problem (1)
when u = 0. First, Myerson (1979) proves that the seller’s incentive constraint is

                                                             43
equivalent to imposing that q(s) is nonincreasing and
                                              ˆ       s̄
                    t(s) = q(s)s +                         q(v)dv + t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄ for all s.                      (13)
                                                  s

Substitute this into problem (1) and use integration-by-parts to rewrite it as
                     ˆ       s̄
            max                   q(v) F (v)dv + t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄,
          {t(s̄),q(s)} s
                     ˆ       s̄                                      ˆ       s̄
       subject to                 q(v)(b(v) − v)dF (v) −                          q(v) F (v)dv ≥ t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄,
                         s                                               s

                    t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄ ≥ 0,
                    q(s) nonincreasing,

where we simplify the first constraint using u = 0. If the first constraint were slack,
we could increase t(s̄) and raise the value of the objective function. It follows that
the buyer’s gain from trade is zero in any solution to problem (1).
   Next, substitute the binding constraint into the objective function to rewrite the
previous problem as
                     ˆ       s̄
            max                   q(v)(b(v) − v)dF (v),
          {t(s̄),q(s)} s
                     ˆ       s̄                                      ˆ       s̄
       subject to                 q(v)(b(v) − v)dF (v) −                          q(v) F (v)dv ≥ t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄,
                         s                                               s

                    t(s̄) − q(s̄)s̄ ≥ 0,
                    q(s) nonincreasing.

If t(s̄) > q(s̄)s̄, reducing t(s̄) relaxes the first constraint. Thus we can impose




                                                                44
t(s̄) = q(s̄)s̄ without loss of generality. The problem reduces to
                          ˆ       s̄
                   max                 q(v)(b(v) − v)dF (v),
                   {q(s)} s
                          ˆ       s̄                            ˆ       s̄
             subject to                q(v)(b(v) − v)dF (v) −                q(v) F (v)dv ≥ 0,
                              s                                     s

                          q(s) nonincreasing.

Note, however, that the solution only necessarily has t(s̄) = q(s̄)s̄ when the first
constraint in this problem binds.
      If the first constraint is slack, the solution to the problem is q(s) = 1 for all s.
Using integration by parts on the constraint that this is the first constriant holds
                                             ´ s̄                       ´ s̄
when q(s) = 1 for all s if and only if s b(v)dF (v) ≥ s̄. When s b(v)dF (v) < s̄,
t(s̄) = q(s̄)s̄.
      Now consider problem (1) and suppose, in order to find a contradiction, that the
                                                                             ´ s̄
addition of constraint (3) does not affect the solution. First assume s b(v)dF (v) ≥
s̄, so the solution to problem (1) has q(s) = 1. Condition (3) evaluated at s = s
requires b(s) ≥ t(s). The third constraint of problem (1) evaluated at s = s
and ŝ = s̄ requires t(s) ≥ t(s̄). And the second constraint evaluated at s = s̄
requires t(s̄) ≥ s̄. This contradicts the assumption that b(s) < s̄. The addition of
                                                                    ´ s̄
constraint (3) strictly reduces the value of problem (1) when s b(v)dF (v) ≥ s̄ >
b ( s ).
                                ´ s̄
      Alternatively, assume s b(v)dF (v) < s̄. We have proven that the buyer’s
                      ´ s̄
gain from trade, s (q(v)b(v) − t(v))dF (v), is zero and t(s̄) = q(s̄)s̄ in the interim
problem. Suppose we can implement the same value in problem (1) with the
additional constraint (3). Since this problem imposes q(s)b(s) ≥ t(s) for all s, the
constraint must bind for all s. In particular, t(s̄) = q(s̄)b(s̄). This coincides with
the solution to the interim problem if and only if q(s̄) = 0.
      To rule this out, again note that the seller’s incentive constraint implies equa-
tion (13). Eliminate t(s) between this equation and t(s) = q(s)b(s) and differentiate



                                                    45
to get dq(s)(b(s) − s) + q(s)db(s) = 0 or
                                                          ˆ       s
                                                                                    !
                                                                         1
                                q(s) = k exp −                                 db(v) ,
                                                              s       b(v) − v

where k is a constant of integration. We require k ∈ [0, 1] in order for q(s) to be
a valid probability. It is easy to verify that setting k = 1 maximizes (and k = 0
minimizes) the objective function in problem (1) with constraint (3) within this
class of policies. Since b(v) > v, q(s̄) > 0, completing the contradiction.



Proof of Proposition 5. A deterministic veto incentive compatible mechanism is a
report-conditional measure µbs over sets of prices. In particular, for any P ⊂ R+ , let
µbs ( P) denote the probability that the mechanism recommends trading at a price
p ∈ P conditional on the reports (b, s), with 1 − µbs (R+ ) denoting the conditional
probability of no trade.
    Take any measures {µbs } that satisfy the ex-post participation and nonnegative
constraints:
                 ˆ
                    ∑(vbsB − p)πbs dµbs ( p) ≥ 0 for all b and P ⊂ R+ ,
                   P s
                 ˆ
                    ∑( p − vSbs )πbs dµbs ( p) ≥ 0 for all s and P ⊂ R+ ,
                        P b

      ´
and       P   dµbs ( p) ≥ 0 for all P ⊂ R+ . Define

                                          ˆ          (                                    )
                                B
                              V̄bb 0 ≡
                                          R+
                                               max       ∑(vbsB − p)πbs dµb0 s ( p), 0        ,
                                                          s
                                          ˆ          (                                    )
                              V̄ssS 0 ≡
                                          R+
                                               max       ∑( p − vSbs )πbs dµbs0 ( p), 0       ,
                                                          b
                                          ˆ
                       and Qbs ≡               dµbs ( p).
                                          R+



                                                              46
These are the profit of a buyer who receives signal b and reports b0 , the profit of a
seller who receives signal s and reports s0 , and the probability of trade when the
buyer reports signal b and the seller reports signal s. The outcome

                                        B           S
                                x ≡ ({V̄bb 0 }, {V̄ss0 }, { Q bs }),



a vector of dimension ( N B )2 + ( N S )2 + N B N S , contains all the information neces-
sary to evaluate a mechanism’s feasibility and compute the welfare for the buyer
and seller. In particular, the measures are a feasible veto incentive compatible
mechanisms if and only if

                           B      B
                         V̄bb ≥ V̄bb 0,   V̄ssS ≥ V̄ssS 0 , and            1 ≥ Qbs

for all b, b0 , s, and s0 ; and the expected payoffs from the mechanism are V B = ∑b V̄bb
                                                                                       B

and V S = ∑s V̄ssS .
    Now define the set of prices P̄ such that p ∈ P̄ ⇔ {dµbs ( p)} 6= 0. For each
p ∈ P̄, define
                                            B                S
                              x̃ ( p) ≡ ({V̄bb 0 ( p )}, {V̄ss0 ( p )}, { γbs }),


where
                                              (                                            )
                           B
                         Ṽbb 0 ( p ) ≡ max       ∑(vbsB − p)πbs γb0 s ( p), 0                 ,
                                                       s
                                              (                                            )
                         ṼssS 0 ( p) ≡ max       ∑( p − vSbs )πbs γbs0 ( p), 0                ,
                                                       b
                                        dµbs ( p)
                    and γbs ( p) =                       .
                                     ∑b0 s0 dµb0 s0 ( p)
                                                                     B − p ) π dµ ( p )
                                    B ( p) =                    ∑s (vbs       bs    b0 s        B ( p ) = 0, and
Note that for each p ∈ P̄, either Ṽbb 0
                                                                   ∑b00 ∑s dµb00 s ( p)
                                                                                           or Ṽbb 0

likewise for ṼssS 0 ( p). This implies that
                                              ˆ
                                      x=               x̃ ( p)dµ( p),
                                                  P̄


                                                           47
where µ( P) ≡ ∑bs µbs ( P) for all P ⊂ P̄. Thus x̃ is a Radon-Nikodym derivative
and the outcome x is obtained by choosing a measure µ over the vectors x̃ indexed
by p ∈ P̄. In other words, x is in the convex cone generated by the vectors
{ x̃ ( p)} p∈ P̄ . It follows by Carathéodory’s Theorem that there are is a finite subset
( p1 , p2 , . . . , p N ) ⊂ P̄, with N ≡ ( N B )2 + ( N S )2 + N B N S + 1, such that

                                           N
                                   x=   ∑ x̃( pn )ωn
                                        n =1


for ωn ≥ 0 and ∑nN=1 ωn = 1.



Proof of Proposition 6. Take any mechanism { pn , ωn|bs } that satisfies the con-
straints of problem (7). We construct a fully revealing mechanism { pbs , ωbs } that
satisfies the constraints of problem (9) and achieves the same value of the objective
function. We propose setting ωbs = ∑n ωn|bs and

                                           ∑n pn ωn|bs
                                   pbs =
                                              ωbs

whenever ωbs > 0, with pbs arbitrary when ωbs = 0. With these assumptions and
the private values restrictions, the two participation constraints in problem (7)
reduce to the two participation constraints in problem (9). Similarly, the two
incentive constraints in problem (7) reduce to the two incentive constraints in
problem (9). This proves that any payoff that can be obtained in the veto incentive
compatible program can also be obtained using a fully revealing mechanism.
Conversely, the mechanism { pbs , ωbs } is clearly feasible in problem (7), proving
the two constraint sets are equivalent.



Proof of Proposition 7. We divide the parameter space into three regions. In each
region, we first verify that the proposed mechanism is feasible and then prove

                                               48
that it achieves the same trading probability as the trade-maximizing interim
mechanism.


Non-revealing Region: Assume γ ≥ 2α − 1. Under the proposed mechanism,
the participation constraint of a buyer with the low signal b = 0 and a seller with
the high signal s = 1 hold if and only if γ ≥ 2α − 1. The remaining participation
constraints in problem (7) always hold, and the incentive constraints hold trivially.
This mechanism is therefore feasible. It obtains the first best amount of trade and
hence solves problem (7).


Partially-Revealing Region:       Next assume

                                          α(α(3 − 2α) − 1)
                    2α − 1 > γ >                                  .                  (14)
                                    (1 − α(1 − α))(1 − 2α(1 − α))

We first determine the probabilities µ and λ. These are pinned down by two
equations. The first is the the binding participation constraint of the buyer who
receives and reports the low signal b = 0 and is instructed to trade at 12 (1 + γ):

                B − 1 (1 + γ ) (1 − µ ) π + v B − 1 (1 + γ ) λπ
                                                           
               v00  2                    00  01   2             01
                                                                   = 0.
                                   π00 + π01

The buyer believes that with probability π00 /(π00 + π01 ), seller also received
the low signal, in which case they were instructed to trade at the intermediate
price with probability 1 − µ; and he believes the seller received the high signal
with probability π11 /(π00 + π01 ), in which case they were instructed to trade at
the intermediate price with probability λ. Thus the left hand side is the buyer’s
expected profit conditional on this event.
    Because of the symmetry of the mechanism, the participation constraint of the
seller who receives the high signal and is instructed to trade at 12 (1 + γ) is identical.
The remaining participation constraints are slack.
    The second equation is the binding incentive constraint of a seller who receives


                                           49
the low signal:

    B                             S                       S
       µ + 12 (1 + γ)(1 − µ) − v00    π00 + 21 (1 + γ) − v10
                                                            
   v00                                                         π10 =
                        1              S            S     1                   S
                                                                               
                        2 (1 + γ ) − v00 λπ00 + v11 µ + 2 (1 + γ )(1 − µ ) − v10 π10 .


The left hand side is the seller’s interim expected payoff conditional on receiving
and reporting the signal s = 0. With probability π00 /(π00 + π01 ), the buyer also
received the low signal, in which case the seller earns v00  B with probability µ and
1                                                S
2 (1 + γ ) with probability 1 − µ, but gives up v00 . With probability π10 / ( π00 + π01 ),
the buyer received the high signal, in which case trade occurs at the intermediate
                                S . The right hand side is the seller’s interim expected
price and the seller gives up v10
payoff conditional on receiving the signal s = 0 but reporting s = 1. This changes
the probability distribution over trade and trading prices but it doesn’t affect the
seller’s opportunity cost.
    Again, symmetry of the mechanism ensures that the incentive constraint of
a buyer who receives the high signal is identical. The remaining two incentive
constraints are slack.
    These equations are linear in λ and µ and admit a unique solution. Under
condition (14), both are valid probabilities, lying strictly between 0 and 1. Thus the
proposed mechanism is feasible.
    Next solve problem (8) in this region. The incentive constraints of the seller
with a high signal and a buyer with a low signal are slack, as are the participation
constraint of the other traders, the seller with a low signal and the buyer with a
high signal. The remaining constraints bind as well as the constraints on trading
probabilities q00 ≤ 1, q11 ≤ 1, and q10 ≤ 1. This gives seven equations in eight
unknowns. Generically there are a continuum of mechanisms that implement the
trade-maximizing allocation, each with a different distribution of profits between
the buyer and seller. Our veto incentive compatible mechanism implements a
particular one, where the buyer and seller earn equal profits.
    In the symmetric trade-maximizing interim mechanism, q00 = q10 = q11 = 1
and q01 < 1. The value of q01 is pinned down from three observations. First,

                                            50
symmetry implies the gains from trade are distributed equally, so t00 + t11 = 1 + γ
and t01 /q01 = t10 = 21 (1 + γ). Second, the interim participation constraint of
the buyer with the low signal binds, as does the symmetric interim participation
constraint of the seller with the high signal. Third, the incentive constraint of the
buyer with the high signal binds, as does the symmetric incentive constraint of the
seller with the low signal. Together these results imply

        B                 B
      (v00 − t00 )π00 + (v01 q01 − t01 )π01 = 0 and
                 S                 S                 S                     S
         (t00 − v00 )π00 + (t10 − v10 )π10 = (t01 − v00 q01 )π00 + (t11 − v10 )π10 .

The solution to this pair of equations uniquely defines t00 and q01 , with q01 ∈ [0, 1]
under condition (14). Finally, these equations imply λ = q01 . Therefore the
proposed veto incentive compatible mechanism achieves the same trade probability
as the interim trade-maximizing mechanism and so is trade-maximizing among all
veto incentive compatible mechanisms.


Fully-Revealing Region:       Now assume

                             α(α(3 − 2α) − 1)
                                                     ≥ γ > 0.                          (15)
                       (1 − α(1 − α))(1 − 2α(1 − α))

The proposed mechanism is fully revealing and so trivially satisfies the ex post
participation constraint. The binding incentive constraint of the seller who receives
the low signal pins down the parameter λ:

              B     S             1             S               S     S
                                                                        
            (v00 − v00 )λπ00 +    2 (1 + γ ) − v10       π10 = v11 − v10   λπ10 .

Under condition (15), this defines λ ∈ (0, 1]. This is equivalent to the bidning
incentive constraint of the buyer who receives the high signal.
   Next turn to the interim problem. Once again, the incentive constraints of
the seller with s = 1 and the buyer with b = 0 are slack, as are the participation
constraint of the seller with s = 0 and the buyer with b = 1. The remaining


                                           51
constraints bind, as well as the constraints q01 ≥ 0 and q10 ≤ 1. Again, there are
generically a continuum of mechanisms that implement the trade-maximizing
allocation, each with a different distribution of profits between the buyer and seller.
Our veto incentive compatible mechanism implements the symmetric one.
    In the symmetric trade-maximizing mechanism, q10 = 1, q01 = 0, and q00 =
q11 < 1. The value of q00 = q11 is pinned down from three observations. First,
symmetry implies t00 + t11 = q00 (1 + γ), t01 = 0, and t10 = 12 (1 + γ). Second,
the participation constraint of the buyer with the low signal binds, as does the
(symmetric) participation constraint of the seller with the high signal. Third, the
incentive constraint of the buyer with the high signal binds, as does the (symmetric)
incentive constraint of the seller with the low signal. Together these results imply

                                   B
                                               
                                  v00 q00 − t00 π00 = 0 and
                       S                     S                 S
               (t00 − v00 q00 )π00 + (t10 − v10 )π10 = (t11 − v10 q11 )π10 .

The solution to this pair of equations uniquely defines q11 = q22 = λ, which
again proves that the proposed veto incentive compatible mechanism is trade-
maximizing among all such mechanisms.



Proof of Proposition 8. A seller who receives signal s knows that the value of
                        S and so the ex post participation constraint ensures that
the asset is at least v0s
ωn|bs = 0 for all pn < v0s S . Then either q = 0, in which case t = 0, or q > 0
                                             bs                        bs          bs
                 S                      S
and tbs /qbs ≥ v0s . This proves tbs ≥ v1s qbs . Similarly, a buyer who receives signal b
knows that the value of the asset is no more than vb1  B and so the ex post participation

constraint ensures that ωn|bs = 0 for all pn > vb1    B . Then either q = 0, in which
                                                                          bs
                                          B . This proves t ≤ v B q .
case tbs = 0, or qbs > 0 and tbs /qbs ≤ vb1                   bs    b2 bs
                      S
   Now suppose v11 q11 > t11 . The seller’s participation constraint when she has
the signal s = 1 and is instructed to trade at the price pn is

                            S                       S
                    ( pn − v01 )ωn|01 π01 + ( pn − v11 )ωn|11 π11 ≥ 0.

                                            52
                                          S and ω
This implies ωn|01 = ωn|11 = 0 when pn < v01      n|11 = 0 when the inequality
               S . For p ≥ vS ,
is weak, pn ≤ v01       n    01

                                  B
                                (v01 − pn )ωn|01 ≥ φS ( pn )ωn|11 ,                                         (16)

where                          S        B
                         π11 (v11 − p)(v01 − p)                    S < p ≤ min{ vS , v B }
                                                                   v01
               S                          S )
                                 π01 ( p−v01                                      11 01
             φ ( p) ≡                                      ⇔
                        0                                                  S , v B }.
                                                                   p > min{v11   01

Then

           t01 = ∑n|vS             B    pn ωn|01
                        01 ≤ pn ≤ v01
                  B                         B − p )ω
               = v01 q01 − ∑n|vS ≤ pn ≤vB (v01   n   n|01
                                        01            01
                    B
               ≤   v01 q01   − ∑n|vS < pn ≤vB φS ( pn )ωn|11
                                        01            01
                    B
               =   v01 q01   − ∑n|vS < pn ≤vB φS ( pn )ωn|11
                                        01            11
                                         ∑ n|vS
                                                                           !
                                                           B    pn ωn|11
                  B                             01 < pn ≤ v11
               ≤ v01 q01 − φS                                                  ∑ n|vS          B    ωn|11
                                             ∑ n|vS          B    ωn|11             01 < pn ≤ v11
                                                  01 < pn ≤ v11
                  B
               = v01 q01 − φS (t11 /q11 )q11

The first equation is the definition of t01 , using the fact that a seller with signal s = 1
would never accept a price below v01     S and a buyer with signal b = 0 would never

pay a price above v01   B . The second equation rewrites the sum in a more convenient

form. The first inequality uses condition (16) and ωn|11 = 0 if pn = v01       S . The third

equality uses the definition of φS , together with the fact that ωn|01 = ωn|11 = 0 for
pn ∈ (v01B , vS ] if v B < vS . The second inequality uses Jensen’s inequality, since
              11      01      11
  S
φ is convex. The final equality uses the definitions of t11 and q11 . Now using the
definition of φS , we obtain condition (11).
    Similarly, suppose t00 > v00   B q . The buyer’s participation constraint when he
                                      00
has signal b = 0 and is instructed to trade at the price pn is:

                       B                      B
                     (v00 − pn )ωn|00 π00 + (v01 − pn )ωn|01 π01 ≥ 0.

                                                           53
                                        B , ω                        B
This implies ωn|00 = 0 for all pn > v01       n|01 = 0 for all pn ≥ v01 , while for
      B ,
pn ≤ v01
                                S
                        ( pn − v01 )ωn|01 ≥ φ B ( pn )ωn|11 ,                  (17)

where                              B )( p − vS )
                          π00 ( p−v00        01                        B , vS } ≤ p < v B
                                                                   max{v00
                                        B − p)                               01         01
            φ B ( p) ≡            π01 (v01
                                                           ⇔
                         0                                                  B , v S }.
                                                                    p < max{v00    01

Then

          t01 = ∑n|vS               B    pn ωn|01
                         01 ≤ pn ≤ v01
                 S                               S )ω
              = v01 q01 + ∑n|vS ≤ pn ≤vB ( pn − v01   n|01
                                         01         01
                   S
              ≥   v01 q01   + ∑n|vS ≤ pn <vB φ B ( pn )ωn|00
                                         01         01
                   S
              =   v01 q01   + ∑n|vS ≤ pn <vB φ B ( pn )ωn|00
                                         00         01
                                          ∑ n|vS
                                                                            !
                                                            B    pn ωn|00
                 S                               00 ≤ pn < v01
              ≥ v01 q01 + φ B                                                   ∑ n|vS          B    ωn|00
                                              ∑ n|vS          B    ωn|00             00 ≤ pn < v01
                                                   00 ≤ pn < v01
                 S
              = v01 q01 + φB (t00 /q00 )q00

The steps exactly parallel the previous step, with the inequalities exploiting con-
ditions (17) and convexity of φ B . Using the definition of φ B , we obtain condi-
tion (12).




                                                         54
