                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    PEER-TO-PEER MARKETS

                                            Liran Einav
                                          Chiara Farronato
                                          Jonathan Levin

                                        Working Paper 21496
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21496


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2015




We appreciate support from the National Science Foundation, the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research, the Toulouse Network on Information Technology, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21496.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Peer-to-Peer Markets
Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin
NBER Working Paper No. 21496
August 2015
JEL No. D02,D47,L86

                                             ABSTRACT

Peer-to-peer markets such as eBay, Uber, and Airbnb allow small suppliers to compete with traditional
providers of goods or services. We view the primary function of these markets as making it easy for
buyers to find sellers and engage in convenient, trustworthy transactions. We discuss elements of market
design that make this possible, including search and matching algorithms, pricing, and reputation systems.
We then develop a simple model of how these markets enable entry by small or flexible suppliers,
and the resulting impact on existing firms. Finally, we consider the regulation of peer-to-peer markets,
and the economic arguments for different approaches to licensing and certification, data, and employment
regulation.


Liran Einav                                         Jonathan Levin
Stanford University                                 Stanford University
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                      Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                             and NBER
and NBER                                            jdlevin@stanford.edu
leinav@stanford.edu

Chiara Farronato
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
chiarafarronato@gmail.com
1         Introduction
In 1995, Pierre Omidyar started the consumer auction website that became eBay. An often
cited story is that he recognized its potential when he put a broken laser pointer up for
sale, and it sold for $14.83. The buyer turned out to be a collector of broken laser pointers.
As the story suggests, the internet is a powerful tool to help buyers and sellers nd each
other. It has enabled the creation of marketplaces for local goods and services (e.g. Craiglist),
computer programming (Freelancer, oDesk), consumer loans (Prosper, Lending Club), crafts
(Etsy), start-up nancing (Kickstarter), accommodation (Airbnb), baby-sitting (Care.com)
and currency exchange (Transferwise, CurrencyFair). These days, hundreds of companies
are trying to create markets for “on demand” services such as rides (Uber, Lyft, Blabla Car),
deliveries (Instacart, Postmates), and household tasks (TaskRabbit, Handy).1
        While these businesses each have speci c features, they share common and innovative
elements. They lower entry costs for sellers, allowing individuals and small businesses to
compete with traditional rms. They rely on spot transactions, often eschewing long-term
contracts or employment relationships. They take advantage of technology to improve the
matching of buyers and sellers, or to implement ‡exible or auction-based pricing. They
frequently do little up-front screening or certi cation, and instead try to maintain quality
by using reputation and feedback mechanisms. And at least in some cases, they have made
inroads by skirting regulatory barriers.
        For economists, the rise of marketplace businesses has provided a fascinating set of exam-
ples of innovative market design. Companies such as eBay, Etsy and Airbnb allow thousands
of sellers to experiment with prices, selling mechanisms, and advertising strategies. Finance
platforms such as Prosper or Kickstarter use a variety of public good mechanisms to enable
individuals to collectively fund loan or project investments. Labor markets such as oDesk
    1
    As of June 2015, there were 583 peer-to-peer start-ups listed on Angel List, a website that tracks early-
stage investment opportunities. Trying to gure out which of these are viable turns out to be an enjoyable
form of procrastination. We were delighted to learn about Drizly, a Uber-esque service that delivers beer
and alchohol at the press of a button, only to learn that it faced a dozen or more competitors. We again
were enthused when we learned that Du‡ had raised 2.5 million dollars to develop a service that moves
your travel bag from city and city, washing your clothes between trips, although its price tag of $99 plus a
monthly subscription fee led one caustic online commentator to remark: “it seems like an expensive solution
to a problem that doesn’t really exist.”




                                                     1
or TaskRabbit allow buyers to run small-scale procurement auctions for specialized tasks.
Businesses such as Instacart and Uber use centralized mechanisms to assign workers to jobs,
but these mechanisms also rely on market forces. When a rider submits a desired route,
Uber advertises the job to nearby drivers. The allocation of the job is invisible to riders, but
Uber tries to balance demand and supply and limit wait times by adjusting prices to current
market conditions.
   These new businesses also collect large amounts of data, which has helped to advance
a growing body of academic research on their market mechanisms, and on the impact of
peer-to-peer businesses on traditional industries. In this paper, we take stock of this work,
and the economic issues around peer-to-peer markets. We divide our review into three parts,
 rst looking at the design of internmet marketplaces, then the economics of peer production,
and nallly at some regulatory issues that are emerging as peer-to-peer platforms become
more prominent.
   We identify and discuss some key issues in internet market design in Section 2. Businesses
that hope to create successful marketplaces or platforms for matching buyers and sellers have
to solve several problems. They need to help buyers and sellers nd each other, either by
developing a centralized assignment mechanism or by allowing for e¤ective search. They
need to set prices that balance demand and supply, or alternatively ensure that prices are
set competitively in a decentralized fashion. And importantly, they have to maintain an
adequate level of trust in the market, by developing mechanisms to guard against low quality,
misbehavior and outright fraud.
   In solving these problems, peer-to-peer businesses usually have to trade o¤ between two
important objectives: designing market mechanisms that e¢ciently elicit and incorporate
dispersed information, and minimizing search and deliberation to keep the user experience
convenient. To see an example, consider the cases of Airbnb and Uber. In accommodation,
heterogeneity is a central problem. Given a choice of Paris apartments, not everyone will
agree on a common ranking and sellers may have widely varying costs. The dispersed nature
of information calls for a market design that prioritizes choice. In ride sharing, matches
need to be made in real time. Most people heading home from a bar on a Friday night
want an immediate and safe ride, and care less about choosing between a nicer car versus


                                               2
a more experienced driver. It therefore makes sense for Airbnb to create a decentralized
marketplace, while Uber uses centralized assignment mechanisms. We argue in Section 2
that many aspects of peer-to-peer market design can be analyzed similarly.
   The way that peer-to-peer markets deal with quality assurance and trust is perhaps more
surprising. One hardly needs a PhD in economics to see the potential incentive problems
in paying upfront to order something online from an semi-anonymous seller. Yet we know
plenty of professional game theorists who are perfectly content to spend the night in a random
person’s apartment that they found on the internet. What is especially striking about how
this degree of trust has developed is that peer-to-peer businesses often do not perform much
ex ante screening or certi cation. London drivers historically spent years studying to obtain a
black cab license, and becoming licensed to run a bed and breakfast could take months. The
application process to become an Uber driver or Airbnb host takes days or hours. In place
of heavy up-front requirements, these businesses rely on user feedback to provide ongoing
monitoring. We discuss the evidence on these trust mechanisms in Section 2.3, including
subtleties such as one-sided versus two-sided reviews, what information to collect, whether
to limit the set of reviewers, and how to provide incentives to leave meaningful and truthful
feedback.
   In Section 3, we turn from market design to the broader e¤ects of peer-to-peer businesses
on traditional industries. To do this, we set out a simple model in which goods and services
can be produced by dedicated professionals or ‡exible peers. Certain features of markets
make them more amenable to peer production. These include variability or diversity in
demand, the absence of scale economies in production, and of course the existence of well-
functioning spot markets to match buyers and sellers e¤ectively. We think of the entry of
peer-to-peer platforms as potentially performing two tasks: improving the e¢ciency of spot
transactions and lowering the cost required for sellers to advertise themselves to buyers.
These innovations especially bene ts ‡exible sellers, who might not otherwise do enough
business to justify large investments in advertising, reputation or customer relationships.
We also discuss the extent to which platforms can generate revenue from users, and the
longer-term prospects for peer production.
   The      nal section of the paper considers the regulation of peer-to-peer marketplaces.


                                              3
One highly publicized issue is how peer-to-peer businesses entering into local taxi and hotel
markets should be incorporated into the existing regulatory structure. Another issue that
will grow in importance if ‡exible work becomes more prevalent is at what point contract
workers on peer-to-peer platforms should be viewed as employees of the platform. A further
set of questions surrounds the collection of data on workers and customers, and the ways in
which people’s histories can be used or shared. Each of these areas is relatively novel, so
after laying them out, we focus on posing questions for future research.



2     Market Design: Search, Pricing, and Trust
The goal of peer-to-peer businesses is to create trade between large numbers of fragmented
buyers and sellers. Doing this e¢ciently requires solving several core market design prob-
lems. One is to match buyers and sellers e¤ectively, while keeping search frictions low. A
related problem is to establish prices, or to organize the market so that prices will be set
competitively. Finally, an important and potentially di¢cult problem is to ensure that trans-
actions are safe and reliable for buyers and sellers. Recent research sheds light on each of
these problems, which we consider in turn.


2.1    Matching Buyers and Sellers

Peer-to-peer markets often are characterized by a high degree of heterogeneity. Buyers may
be interested in very speci c products or services, and sellers may be quite di¤erentiated.
This creates a substantive problem of matching buyers and sellers, and guring out appro-
priate, and perhaps personalized, prices. Both problems have an important informational
component. Information is dispersed about who should be matched and at what prices,
so an e¤ective market must aggregate information successfully. At the same time, there is
a practical problem: platforms need to minimize mundane transaction costs, such as the
time it takes to sort through options or communicate information. Many aspects of internet
market design can be viewed as trading o¤ between these two priorities: keeping transaction
costs low and using information e¢ciently.
    One solution to matching buyers and sellers is to centralize the process. This is the

                                             4
strategy followed by on-demand services such as Uber. When Uber customers look for a
ride, they specify the type of car they want (e.g. a black car, or an SUV), but not the
exact driver. Drivers see a request and can choose whether to respond, but they aren’t
shown where the rider wants to go.2 Although some riders might value the option to pick
their driver, most are apparently happy to delegate the choice provided they get to their
destination quickly and safely. It then becomes Uber’s problem to ensure it has a su¢cient
supply of drivers at any given time, and to weed out problematic or unsafe one. Provided
that this happens, centralization keeps transaction costs for riders and drivers low, certainly
compared to hailing a taxi, but also compared to showing buyers a list of drivers to try to
contact.3
       In contrast, decentralized markets facilitate individual choice. In peer-to-peer markets
where sellers are diverse and o¤er a wide array of products and services, a main challenge is
to create a streamlined and informative search process. Platforms use di¤erent strategies to
facilitate search or make recommendations, but the process often begins with buyers speci-
fying what they want and being presented with search results. This can be straightforward
in some cases and less so in others. A buyer who searches for a used textbook on Amazon
probably cares about getting it quickly, reliably, cheaply and in good condition. Not surpris-
ingly, Amazon displays all of this information prominently, placing the cheapest option at
the top of its search results and highlighting products whose delivery is handled through the
Amazon Prime program. In contrast, buyers looking for a weekend apartment in Barcelona
may prefer di¤erent neighborhoods and di¤erent types of apartments. Consequently, Airbnb
presents buyers with an initial set of options but prominently o¤ers a variety of ways for buy-
ers to re ne their search, for instance by narrowing down the location or type of apartment
or price range.
   2
     Sometimes this mechanism does not work well, as one of us discovered when he ordered an Uber car in
London after midnight, and the driver refused to drive him back to his house an hour away, on the grounds
that it was too far a drive.
   3
     Although the parallel may not be immediately obvious, the advertising markets run by Google and
Facebook are centralized in a similar way. When there is an opportunity to show an advertisement, these
companies run spot auctions to allocate the opportunity. Users get some say about what they want to see
(someone who searches for auto repair on Google will not see ads for shoe stores), as do advertisers (who
can submit bids targeted to certain keywords or demographics or browsing histories). However, Google and
Facebook then adjust the bids to re‡ect their best guesses of what the user wants to see, and in that way
try to leverage their superior data.


                                                   5
       A consistent empirical nding is that the presentation of search results matters a great
deal, even in settings where it seems as if buyers should be able to browse easily through
multiple listings. In internet search advertising, buyers are about twice as likely to click a
listing in the top position as they would be if it were moved one position down (Goldman and
Rao, 2014). A recent theoretical literature has taken this as motivation and asked whether
intermediaries have an incentive to present search results in ways that create maximal ben-
e ts for users. These papers point out that platform incentives may not align fully with
consumers, especially if platforms obtain higher revenue if a buyer chooses a speci c seller
(Armstrong and Zhou, 2011; Eliaz and Spiegler, 2011; Hagiu and Jullien, 2011). This can
happen if certain sellers pay higher fees, or are vertically integrated with the platform (de
Corniere and Taylor, 2014).
       A few recent studies have used data from internet markets to try to quantify search
frictions. Dinerstein et al. (2014) compare shopping behavior and price competition on
eBay under alternative search designs: rankings based on a “relevance score,” and a multi-
stage search process where the buyer rst chooses the exact product, and then sees sellers
ranked by price. They show that guiding buyers toward a price ranking can lead to higher
surplus, but only when the relevant product is clearly de ned with few variants. Fradkin
(2015) looks at search frictions in Airbnb’s more complex apartment rental market. He
shows that on Airbnb, even after buyers identify apartments of interest, many transactions
fall through. Transactions can fail because the seller rejects the buyer, or because multiple
buyers contact the seller at the same time. Horton (2014) shows that the latter congestion
problem is also common in the oDesk online labor market. He argues that it results in part
from showing buyers similar seller rankings in a setting where sellers have limited capacity
(see also Arnosti, Johari and Kanoria, 2015, for a theoretical analysis).4
   4
     In these studies, buyers know what they prefer once they see di¤erent options. In practice, one of the
ways in which internet marketplaces are able to create value is by creating recommender systems that steer
buyers toward potentially desirable products. These systems generally rely on historial purchase patterns
(in the case of Amazon’s “people who bought X also bought Y”) or other user feedback such as reviews (in
the case of Net‡ix’s recommendation system).




                                                    6
2.2    Pricing Mechanisms

The internet enables sellers and marketplaces to use a wide array of di¤erent pricing mecha-
nisms. In the early days of electronic commerce, one of eBay’s innovations was to introduce
the use of proxy bidding, which enabled dynamic auctions to run over a period of days
without buyers being attentive at every minute. Prosper, an early entrant in peer-to-peer
lending, introduced an auction model in which borrowers posted a maximum interest rate,
and lenders were able to make o¤ers at lower rates. Labor markets such as oDesk allow buy-
ers to post jobs and invite bids from potential suppliers. The internet advertising markets
run by Google, Facebook and other rms also rely on spot auctions.
   Auctions are appealing because they allow prices to respond to market conditions. How-
ever, contingent pricing does not necessarily require an auction. Marketplaces such as
Airbnb, Etsy and Amazon make it easy and inexpensive for sellers to adjust prices in real
time, which some sellers do using automated algorithms. Lending Club uses a proprietary
algorithm to asses the riskiness of each potential borrower and sets interet rates based on
this score, adjusting for market conditions and required risk premia. Uber similarly uses
its surge pricing algorithm to vary the per-mile price of a taxi ride as supply and demand
conditions change. In the latter cases, information collected and processed by the platform
e¤ectively substitutes for an auction mechanism.
   We argued above that platforms often have to trade o¤ between keeping transaction costs
low and eliciting and using dispersed information. It is useful to think of pricing mechanisms
from this perspective. In economic theory, the canonical pricing problem involves a seller with
several potential buyers, each of whom privately knows his or her willingness to pay. Auctions
tend to be the optimal mechanism to ensure an e¢cient allocation or maximize revenue, while
maintaining proper incentives for buyers. But in practice, it can be cumbersome to identify
potential buyers and sellers, and elicit information from them. As a result, simpler pricing
mechanisms can make sense if information is available from other sources, or there is not too
much uncertainty about what is the right price.
   In Einav et al. (2015), we studied the trade-o¤s between auctions and posted prices
using data on eBay sellers. As one would expect, sellers tend to use auctions for used goods,



                                              7
or when they have less selling experience. More surprising is the fact that auctions have
been in steady decline for more than a decade. One might hypothesize that this is due to
compositional changes — that is, by trade shifting toward more commoditized products or
more professional sellers. As it turns out, this is not the case. Instead, we show that for a
given seller, o¤ering a given item, the returns to using an auction were relatively high fteen
years ago and much lower today, partly because competition has become more intense and
lowered seller margins, and partly because buyer’s simply seem less interested in participating
and bidding in auctions, even though they can expect on average to obtain a better price.
   One of the points we make in Einav et al. (2015) is that the decline of auctions in e-
commerce extends to other peer-to-peer markets. For instance, Prosper replaced its auction
mechanism for funding loans in 2010, with a system where interest rates are set centrally
based on the borrower’s credit score. Gomez Lemmen Meyer (2015) studied this evolution
and found that the centralized algorithm managed to price risk with just about the same
e¤ectiveness as the auction format, while simplifying the funding process. Another example
comes from Cullen and Farronato’s (2015) study of TaskRabbit’s peer-to-peer labor market.
TaskRabbit initially allowed buyers to either post a price for their job or to request bids and
then pick their preferred o¤er. Because the number of active buyers and sellers turns out
to be quite volatile, one might expect an auction mechanism to be particularly useful. But
Cullen and Farronato found that auction prices do not vary much with market conditions
(mainly because worker labor supply is quite elastic), suggesting that a simpler mechanism
might be preferable. Indeed, TaskRabbit subsequently has moved toward a mechanism where
workers post an hourly wage and schedule, giving buyers a simple and convenient way to
hire.
   The TaskRabbit example also illustrates another interesting point, that the pricing unit
can matter a great deal. On TaskRabbit, most jobs are relatively standard, involving for
instance house-cleaning or delivery. But they might take very di¤erent amounts of time. So
setting a xed price for cleaning jobs would be problematic, but setting an hourly rate makes
a lot of sense. A similar insight was crucial in search advertising. Advertisers initially paid
for impressions or pageviews. But the value of an impression can vary depending on where
the ad is placed on a webpage and who is looking at the page. By instead pricing clicks


                                              8
or conversions, advertisers have a better sense of what they are paying for, which makes it
easier for them to bid for advertising opportunities (Milgrom, 2008; Varian, 2010). Getting
the right transaction unit also can reduce monitoring costs. For instance, apartment rentals
on Airbnb generally charge by the night, not the number of people staying in the apartment,
which is much harder to monitor.


2.3       Trust and Reputation

Market transactions require trust, and this is especially true in markets that seek to facilitate
spot trades between large numbers of dispersed buyers and sellers. In fact, one might be
surprised these markets can work at all. When eBay started in 1995, it was not a slam dunk
that people would send money across the country to nearly anonymous sellers, and these
sellers would reciprocate by sending back items as advertised. Similarly one might have
doubted that people would repay peer-to-peer loans, hire baby-sitters on the strength of a
few online reviews, or rent rooms in their house to lightly vetted strangers. Yet all of these
transactions seem to be workable.5 Apart from general goodwill, what are the mechanisms
that make this possible?
       Trust can derive from upfront inspection, from reputation, and from external enforce-
ment. Internet markets rely on all three, but often in di¤erent degrees from traditional
markets. Inspection is more di¢cult when buyers and sellers meet online. This creates op-
portunities for misrepresentation, which Jin and Kato (2007) attempted to test in an early
study where they compared the quality of graded baseball cards purchased online and of-
‡ine. They found that online sellers were more likely to overstate the quality of their cards.
Related evidence comes from Lewis (2011), who studied auto sales on eBay and found that
buyers tend to be skeptical when sellers post few pictures of the car they are selling.
       An alternative way to generate trust is for market makers to impose external regulations:
limiting entry, certifying quality or insuring bad transactions. Amazon’s sellers and Uber’s
drivers must adhere to minimum quality standards. Airbnb o¤ers apartment owners the
   5
    This is not to say that there are zero problems, as a recent New York Times story about a truly
horrendous experience on Airbnb illustrated (Leiber, 2015). We have our own limited rst-hand knowledge
of bad experiences, for instance when one of us (Farronato) attempted to rent her car to a complete stranger
using RelayRides, who promptly crashed it.


                                                     9
opportunity to have certi ed photos taken of their apartments, providing a signal to buyers
that the apartment is accurately represented. Platforms may also o¤er to compensate users
for bad experiences. In 2010, eBay introduced a buyer guarantee, and now compensates
buyers if they purchase a product and the seller does not deliver as advertised (Hui et al.,
2014). These interventions are costly but direct ways to ensure quality.
      The most pervasive approach used by peer-to-peer platforms, however, is to employ
reputation or feedback mechanisms. These mechanisms provide a substitute to inspection or
upfront screening, are easy to set up online, and are used in some form in virtually all of our
examples. They appear to have bite even though rsearchers have pointed out many of their
‡aws and shortcomings. For instance, eBay developed one of the rst feedback mechanisms,
allowing buyers and sellers to trade under pseudonyms rather than their real-world names.
Disappointed buyers often do not leave feedback (Nosko and Tadelis, 2014), buyers can be
deterred from truthful reporting by the threat of retaliatory feedback (Bolton et al., 2013),
and since 98% of positive/negative feedback is positive, average feedback scores appear to
have relatively little information content. (Horton and Golden (2015) report on a similar
review in‡ation on oDesk.) All the same, eBay’s reputation system seems to have worked
well enough to screen out most of the really bad actors and deter highly fraudulent behavior
(Resnick et al., 2002; Dellarocas, 2003; Cabral and Hortacsu, 2010).
      In markets where the stakes to individual transactions are higher, or where personal safety
is a concern, reputation mechanisms have become increasingly sophisticated. Prosper, for
instance, collects and posts credit bureau information about potential borrowers, and Airbnb
veri es the true identify of both buyers and sellers. Two-sided reviews also play an important
role. For instance, Uber uses customer reviews to screen out problematic drivers, and it shows
drivers the ratings of potential riders, so that riders who behave badly may have a harder
time nding a ride in the future. Of course, heavy reliance on feedback scores raises the
concern that users will seek to manipulate these scores. Mayzlin et al. (2015) argue that on
review platforms such as Trip Advisor or Yelp, where anyone can post a review, manipulation
is pervasive. One might expect manipulation to be more limited when reviews can only be
written after a con rmed transaction.6 But since reviews are in some sense a public good,
  6
      Dowd (2015), however, amusingly describes her discovery that she could raise her low Uber rider rating


                                                     10
people may still under-report information that would be helpful to future customers. Fradkin
et al. (2015) report on an experiment they conducted at Airbnb, showing how additional
incentives for reviewing can improve information aggregation.
    One interesting question is the extent to which a well-functioning feedback system re-
moves the need for upfront screening or quality certi cation. If low-quality sellers or service
providers can be quickly identi ed, the need to screen them out is arguably less important.
Of course, if buyers insist on trading only with sellers who have strong feedback, the repu-
tation system can create an entry barrier to new sellers, who might in fact bene t from a
certi cation process. These trade-o¤s also arise and have been discussed in traditional mar-
kets, but it is interesting to consider how technology has a¤ected the underlying trade-o¤s
by making continuous monitoring so much easier. We will return to this theme below in
discussing the general economics of peer-to-peer markets and approaches to regulation.



3     Peer Production and Traditional Industries
We now turn to the more general economics of peer production. There is less existing work
to draw on, so we develop a simple, stylized model. We consider a market where ‡exible peer
producers can o¤er services in competition with professionals who make upfront investments
in dedicated capacity. For instance, Hilton building a hotel and an apartment owner renting
a spare room are alternative ways to provide short-term accommodation. The introduction
of peer-to-peer marketplaces makes it easier for small ‡exible suppliers to reach consumers,
lowering the barrier for them to enter and compete. This can lead to changes in market
structure, allow for trade in new services, and generate lower consumer prices. We use the
model to identify conditions that are favorable for peer production, and to provide some
context for our earlier discussion of market design, and subsequent discussion of regulation.
In order to keep the presentation light, we defer some details of the model to the appendix.
by promising her driver “ ve for ve” (a perfect rating in exchange for a perfect rating).




                                                    11
3.1    Peers versus Professional Sellers

We consider a market for product or service that can be produced by two types of sellers.
A dedicated or professional seller incurs an upfront cost k (q), to create q units of capacity
— think of the construction of a hotel, the purchase of inventory or the hiring of full-time
employees — and subsequently has marginal cost c0 for each unit. In contrast, a ‡exible
or peer seller has no upfront cost, and a marginal cost c0 + c. The cost c is drawn from a
distribution G, with support [0; 1). Sellers o¤er their services to a pool of buyers whose
demand is variable. We write demand as Ds (p), where s is the demand state drawn from a
distribution H, and p is the market price. We assume that high values of s are associated
with high demand, so Ds (p) is increasing in s and decreasing in p.
   Both professional and peer sellers must advertise their services to buyers in order to be
recognized and make sales. We assume this advertising requirement takes the form of a xed
cost f that each seller must incur to become visible to buyers. The larger the cost of visibility
f , the larger the advertising or reputational barrier to entry, and the fewer sellers who will
be active in market equilibrium. Of course, professional sellers have an advantage when it
comes to advertising because they can spread the xed advertising cost over a larger number
of sales. Later, we will think of peer-to-peer markets as providing a cheaper alternative to
spending f , making it easier for peer sellers to become visible.
   To streamline the model, we abstract from some realistic features of most peer-to-peer
markets such as search frictions, product di¤erentiation and seller market power. Instead,
we assume that selling is competive, and that in each state the market price adjusts to
equate demand and supply. In this spirit, we assume that despite the xed entry cost f ,
scale economies for dedicated sellers are su¢ciently limited to justify a competitive analysis.
In particular, (f + k (q)) =q has a unique minimum q  , which implicitly is small relative to
market demand.
   The timing of the model is as follows. First, potential sellers decide whether to enter
the market. We will let Qk denote the amount of dedicated capacity, and Qc the amount
of ‡exible capacity. Second, the demand state s is realized and peer sellers realize their
marginal costs. Third, the market clears at a price p that equates demand and supply.



                                               12
       To solve, the model, we start by identifying the market clearing price that results in each
demand state. Because all sellers have marginal cost of at least c0 , it is convenient to write
the market price as p = c0 + , where   0 is the “price premium.”7 With this notation,
supply is Qk + G () Qc , and demand in state s is Ds (c0 + ). Let


                                (s) = fjDs (c0 + ) = Qk + G () Qc g


denote the price premium that clears the market when Ds (c0 )  Qk .
       The market-clearing premium  (s) is given by
                                          8
                                          <  = 0 if D (c ) < Q
                                                        s  0     k
                                   (s) =                          :                                       (1)
                                          :   (s) if D (c )  Q
                                                        s  0     k


       Figure 1 illustrates how the market clears when there are only dedicated sellers, and when
there is a mix of dedicated and ‡exible sellers. If demand is low,  = 0 and dedicated sellers
are paid their marginal cost. If demand is high there is a positive price premium. With only
dedicated capacity, capacity is xed at Qk and there may be a great deal of price variability,
as in Prescott’s (1975) well-known “hotel” model. With ‡exible sellers, short-run supply
will be more elastic. In this case, demand variability is partially accommodated by a supply
increase so prices ‡uctuate less. For instance, Cullen and Farronato (2015) studied the labor
supply of peer workers on TaskRabbit and found it to be very elastic. They estimated that
a 10 percent increase in the wage rate leads workers to apply for around 30 percent more
jobs (see also Sheldon, 2015).
       We next derive seller pro ts. A dedicated seller expects to make a pro t  (s) for each
unit of capacity in state s. So her expected pro t, per unit of capacity, is
                                          Z
                                                               f + k (q)
                                   Uk =          (s) dH (s)             :                                 (2)
                                            s                     q

It is apparent from this expression that each dedicated seller will maximize per-unit pro ts
   7
    We have assumed that dedicated sellers always have lower marginal costs, so they will serve the market in
low demand states, but it is straightforward to allow ‡exible sellers to have marginal costs that are sometimes
below c0 .



                                                       13
by choosing the capacity level q  that minimizes (f + k (q))=q, and in equilibrium this is
exactly what will happen.
   A ‡exible seller expects to sell only when  (s) exceeds her marginal cost c. So her
expected pro t is
                                Z "Z     (s)
                                                                  #
                         Uc =                   ( (s)    c) dG (c) dH (s)   f:                  (3)
                                 s   0

   Any increase in seller capacity reduces both spot market prices and seller pro ts. In-
creases in dedicated and ‡exible capacity are not identical, however. In the Appendix (Re-
sult 1), we note that an extra unit of dedicated capacity has a bigger e¤ect on prices than a
unit of ‡exible capacity, because of the lower associated marginal costs. Similarly, dedicated
sellers in the market are e¤ected more negatively by any increase in capacity — because they
hope to sell in every state, their expected pro ts fall more sharply as spot market prices are
reduced.


3.2     When is Peer Production E¢cient?

Under our assumption that the industry is competitive, capacity will adjust to drive seller
pro ts to zero. An equilibrium is therefore a pair of capacity levels (Qc ; Qk ) such that there is
no opportunity for further entry, and no active seller wants to exit. That is, Uc (Qc ; Qk )  0
and Uk (Qc ; Qk )  0, meaning there is no incentive for pro table entry, and also, if a given
type of seller  2 fc; kg is active, U (Qc ; Qk ) = 0. We show in the Appendix (Results 2 and
3) that an equilibrium always exists, is unique, and is e¢cient in the sense that it maximizes
consumer and total surplus.
   Figure 2 illustrates the two zero-pro t lines de ned by Uk = 0, and Uc = 0. The number
of ‡exible sellers, Qc is on the x-axis and Qk is on the y-axis. Each zero-pro t line is
downward sloping, and divides the space into regions where entry by the respective type of
seller is pro table or unpro table. The equilibrium, which involves a mixed market structure,
involves each type of seller making zero pro t. Other market structures are also possible. For
instance, if the zero-pro t line for dedicated sellers were everywhere above the line for ‡exible
sellers, the equilibrium involves only dedicated sellers. And if xed costs are su¢ciently high,
no sellers will enter at all.


                                                         14
   What are the conditions that favor peer production? One factor is relative costs. If the
upfront costs of capacity are low, or ‡exible sellers tend to have high marginal costs, peer
entry will be di¢cult. To add a bit more detail, suppose we let K  = k (q  ) =q  denote the
per-unit capacity cost for a professional at e¢cient scale, and assume there is only a single
demand state. In an equilibrium with only professional sellers, the price premium  must
just compensate for upfront costs, so  = f + K  . A ‡exible seller who enters expects to sell
with probability G (), and have an average marginal cost c () = E[cjc  ]. Its break-even
condition is therefore    c ()  f =G (). Higher capacity costs, which mean a larger price
premium, and more frequent low-end marginal costs, both help peer sellers.
   Advertising or visibility costs are also a critical factor for peer entry. The higher is
f , the fewer sellers in general but also the more the market structure will favor dedicated
professionals. An interesting point here is that even in the absence of a specialized peer-
to-peer marketplace, one might think of the internet in general as lowering advertising or
visibility costs. In the Appendix, we work out the comparative statics associated with a fall
in f . The result is more capacity in equilibrium and lower prices, but it is ‡exible sellers
who bene t the most from the lower xed costs. As a result, dedicated capacity actually can
be crowded out by the entry of new ‡exible sellers.
   A further condition favoring peer production is variability in demand. The logic is as
follows (we provide a simple analysis in the Appendix). When demand is variable, the
e¢cient form of production is to have at least some capacity that operates only part of the
time. Dedicated investments are a costly way to provide capacity that will be used only some
of the time, in constrast to ‡exible sellers who provide more elastic short-run supply. This
observation seems germane for businesses such as Airbnb. In the hotel industry, demand
can vary widely between peak and o¤-peak periods. Building hotel rooms is an e¢cient
way to serve a xed number of consumers, but variation in demand means either periods of
very high prices or alternatively empty rooms. A similar story can be told about the taxi
industry, where instead of prices adjusting to clear the market, drivers or riders tend to end
up queueing or waiting around. In these settings, there is an economic logic to having an
elastic supply of ‡exible drivers or accommodations.



                                              15
3.3    The Rise of Peer-to-Peer Markets

We can now provide a stylized account of how peer-to-peer marketplaces enable entry and
changes in market structure. We think of a new marketplace as introducing a technology — at
some investment cost F — that allows sellers to become visible to buyers. For concreteness,
imagine that marketplace fees are set competitively, so that when a platform enters it sets
fees to just recover its investment cost F . An entering seller then has a choice between paying
the direct advertising cost f , or instead joining the platform and paying its fees. Assuming
buyers can purchase readily on or o¤ the platform, sellers can expect the same market price
 either way they o¤er their services.
   The structure of fees will be important. If the platform charges a xed fee to all sellers,
then depending on whether its fee is above or below the direct advertising cost f , it will
attract either all or none of the sellers. In the former case, it will still change the market
structure toward peer production because of the lower advertising costs. However, if we
think of the platform entering an existing market where dedicated sellers, such as hotel
chains, already have built reputations, the platform may want to appeal speci cally to peer
producers. This makes it interesting to consider the case, which is indeed the common one
we observe, where platform fees are per transaction. This structure will be particularly
attractive to ‡exible sellers because they only have to pay the fee when they trade.
   To see what might happen, suppose that there are Qk dedicated sellers already in the
market. If a peer platform enters and enables the entry of Qc ‡exible sellers, the market
price will be determined as described above. To break even, the platform will need to collect
F=Qc on average from each ‡exible seller. So these sellers expect a pro t

                             Z s "Z    (s)
                                                                #
                                                                           F
                      Uc =                    ( (s)    c) dG (c) dH (s)      :             (4)
                              s    0                                       Qc

   Whether the platform can succeed depends on the general conditions for peer production,
and on how e¤ectively it can bring down visibility costs. If peers were previously deterred
by high upfront costs (large f ), then F=Qc will need to be substantially smaller than f for
the platform to be viable. Because the platform costs per seller fall with scale, a new feature
of the model is that ‡exible sellers may in fact bene t from having other ‡exible sellers to

                                                       16
support a viable marketplace. Figure 3 illustrates this point, showing a situation where,
with Qk xed, there are multiple equilibrium levels of Qc .
   Of course, this provides only a partial analysis. If a peer marketplace enters successfully,
it will lower market prices. If dedicated sellers need to renew their capacity investments
over time, the longer term e¤ect is that peer entry will crowd out some professional sellers
(Zervas, 2014; Farronato and Fradkin, 2015). Dedicated sellers also may want to use the
platform alongside ‡exible ones. Indeed, eBay started as a consumer auction platform but
became a sales channel for many larger retailers. Similarly, labor markets such as oDesk
and Freelance have organized rms that bid for jobs, and some peer-to-peer nancial service
platforms have tried with varying degrees of success to attract professional lenders.
   The proceeding discussion focuses on the way the peer-to-peer marketplaces can lower
entry barriers. In practice, as we discussed in Section 2, they also can play an important
role in creating more e¢cient spot markets for transactions. Our model envisions an initially
competitive setting, but in many industries where peer-to-peer marketplaces are getting trac-
tion, there are pervasive market frictions. For instance, consumer lending can be a confusing
market for borrowers, and is often associated with hidden or high fees. In traditional taxi
markets, licensing restricts the entry of new drivers and prices are often completely inde-
pendent of current demand conditions. In the case of deliveries or household tasks, a buyer
looking for a one-o¤ transaction historically would have had high search costs, little idea of
what to pay, and perhaps little assurance that the person they hired would be reliable.
   We conclude this section by noting a useful parellel between our model of peer production,
and the so-called “long tail” of internet commerce which refers to the idea that local book
or shoe stores might stock a few thousand items, while Amazon or Zappos stock hundreds of
thousands (see Quan and Williams (2014) for recent work). The economics of the long tail
are similar to the way falling xed costs enable ‡exible entry in our model. Stocking a book
involves an upfront xed cost, so if books 1; 2; ::: are ordered by the probability that there
will be potential buyer in any given geographic market, a local retailer will want to stock
some set of books 1; :::; n , with n > n unavailable. Because the internet enables a seller
to reach buyers in many markets, it reduces the (per-market) xed cost of stocking a book.
As a result, it becomes economical to stock a larger product line. The “entry” of the book


                                              17
that sells only with small probability is parallel to the entry of peer seller in our model, and
creates a similar bene t for consumers.



4         Regulation of Peer-to-Peer Markets
The entry of peer-to-peer businesses has raised a number of a new regulatory issues that
in some cases have become quite contentious. At this point, there has not been a lot of
economic research focused on these issues, so we try in this section to lay out some of the
questions that economists might hope to answer in future work.


4.1        Entry and Licensing Standards

Peer-to-peer businesses such as Airbnb and Uber have attracted a great deal of press attention
because of their struggles with local regulators and incumbent businesses. A main cause of
these con‡icts is their perceived advantages when it comes to local regulation. Most cities
limit the number of hotel rooms, the use of residential property for short-term rental, the
number of taxis or for-hire cars, and the way in which taxi companies and hotel operators
can set prices. Taxi and hotel businesses often are subject to speci c licensing requirements,
taxes and fees, and health and safety rules and checks. Peer-to-peer platforms, at least
initially, managed to skirt many of these requirements.8
        The resulting controversy has led to some hasty regulatory responses. Seattle’s city
council responded to the introduction of peer-to-peer ride services by limiting the number
of cars and the number of driving hours per car (300 cars, across all ride-sharing platforms,
and a maximum of 16 hours per week for each car). It also imposed regulations on cars and
drivers, requiring vehicle inspections, driver background checks, and commercial insurance.
The city council explained these regulations as necessary to protect both public safety and
the interests of existing taxi drivers (Grossman, 2015). In Paris, regulators were prevented
by a court ruling from banning Uber, but have interpreted the law as saying that drivers
of paying customers must have special licenses, in e¤ect making most Uber rides illegal
    8
    Some of the recent debates eacho an earlier controversy about the tax advantage enjoyed by online
retailers in the United States. Even today, many small online sellers are exempt from collecting state sales
taxes as brick-and-mortar retailers must do (Goolsbee, 2000; Einav et al., 2014).

                                                    18
(Fourquet and Scott, 2015). Other cities, including New York, Berlin, and San Francisco
have moved to regulate peer-to-peer apartment rental businesses.
   What is the appropriate economic framework for thinking about these decisions? There
are competing economic viewpoints. One account sees licensing and operating regulations
as a response to market failures. For example, unregulated taxi drivers might take advan-
tage of tourists, operate unsafe cars, refuse to serve certain neighborhoods, or create tra¢c
congestion. From this perspective, regulations exist largely to protect consumers, especially
vulnerable ones, from unscrupulous operators or adverse market forces. A contrary view,
however, is that entry and licensing restrictions primarily serve the interests of incumbents
by limiting competition (Stigler, 1971). From this perspective, restricting taxi medallions or
hotel rooms raises prices and creates rents for incumbent operators, and peer-to-peer entry
stands to increase availability, enhance comeptition, and perhaps raise service quality.
   Apart from regulatory goals, one might also inquire about the form that local regulations
take. Many requirements for taxi and hotel businesses, and for other service occupations,
take the form of lengthy licensing or certi cation processes. Once a business is approved,
there is relatively infrequent monitoring by regulators. As we noted above, marketplace
businesses tend to have adopted a very di¤erent approach to ensure quality standards, with
far more reliance on user feedback to provide continuous monitoring and far less upfront
screening. It is natural to ask whether regulators could learn something from these markets,
and try to incorporate new technology in the design of regulatory mechanisms.
   Many economists are inherently sympathetic to the idea that new entry and competition,
and technological advances, generally bene t consumers. In a recent survey of economists
by the Chicago Booth IGM Forum, respondents uniformly agreed that “letting car services
such as Uber or Lyft compete with taxi rms on equal footing regarding genuine safety
and insurance requirements, but without restrictions on prices or routes, raises consumer
welfare.” (Disclosure: two of the authors of this paper are part of the IGM panel.) That
said, the e¤ect of new platforms for ride-sharing, short-term accommodation or other services
on prices and quality, and their consequences for incumbent businesses, are really empirical
questions. Providing convincing analyses seems like a useful topic for future work.



                                             19
4.2    Flexible Workers and Employment Regulation

The use of contractors rather than employees is a common feature of recent on-demand
service businesses. Because businesses such as Instacart, Postmates, Uber, or TaskRabbit
run spot markets where workers are hired by the job, they are not subject to employment
regulations, nor are they required to provide bene ts such as health or disability insurance.
While these businesses are a tiny fraction of the overall labor market, the idea that contract
work and piece rates might encroach on long-term employment relationships is potentially
very controversial. Indeed, the issue was highlighted recently when the California Labor
Commissioner ruled that an Uber driver was technically an employee of Uber.
   Our analysis in the previous section identi ed some of the possible e¢ciency bene ts of
part-time work. Some workers may value having ‡exible hours (Hall and Krueger, 2015). In
other cases, variability in demand favors ‡exible work arrangements. Moreover, in a com-
petitive labor market, a business that o¤ers contract work must compete with rms o¤ering
stable employment, so piece rates must compensate for any lack of associated bene ts. At
the same time, however, employment regulations often are justi ed on the grounds that mar-
ket forces do not su¢ciently protect workers, something that did not enter into our model
of peer production.
   The question of whether technology could make spot labor markets more common, rel-
ative to long-term employment contracts, is potentially very consequential. Even absent
regulation, however, it is possible that some peer-to-peer platforms, having used contract
workers to rapidly scale up their businesses, might turn to stable employees to provide more
consistent or highly-trained service. In this sense, there is room for both theoretical work to
lay out the trade-o¤s that rms face in relying on contract workers, and empirical work to es-
timate the consequences, and evaluate the arguments for and against imposing employment
regulations on peer-to-peer businesses.


4.3    Data and Privacy Regulation

A central feature of marketplace businesses is their reliance on user data and algorithms to
match buyers and sellers, set prices, and monitor behavior. The detailed data collection, and


                                              20
the use of personalized algorithms, raises some potentially challenging regulatory issues. For
instance, what rights should consumers have to limit the way platforms use data? Should
a platform be able to share or sell individual feedback ratings or purchase histories? If a
worker performs poorly, or a consumer gets bad feedback when using a particular service,
should they be able to expect a fresh start with another one?
      A similarly thorny set of issues pertains to the use of personalized algorithms. Consumer
 nance, housing, and many service businesses are governed by strict regulations guarding
against discrimination. Lenders, for instance, cannot use an applicant’s race, gender, religion,
age, or marital status to reject a loan or set interest rates. Presumably algorithms used by
internet platforms will avoid using proscribed variables directly, but what if an algorithm
that is trained to e¤ectively use all permissible data ends up placing weight on a set of close
proxies? For instance, if some platform users consistently give lower feedback to other users
on the basis of gender or race, the latter group may get worse opportunities even if the
platform does not explicitly discriminate. In response, platforms might argue that they are
simply intermediaries and cannot be held accountable for the behavior of their users.9
      These issues are only partly economic. A worker whose poor feedback follows her to her
next job may su¤er economic harm, but even if she does not, she may su¤er an inherent
— and di¢cult to quantify — cost from the loss of privacy. Advocates for data regulation
often focus on the latter. Nonetheless, despite the potential measurement di¢culties, there
is room for economic analysis that looks at the arguments for regulating both the sharing
and use of individual user data.


4.4      When to Regulate?

We nish this section by highlighting a point that has not received much attention in the
current debate about regulating peer-to-peer businesses. It concerns the timing of when
regulators should act. The businesses we have discussed, like many internet platforms, have
the feature that once they can grow extremely fast if they start to succeed. And as they
grow, their businesses can change rapidly. Sellers may become more professionalized, market
  9
   This argument also comes up when a transaction goes wrong, and liability must be assigned. Platforms
sometimes o¤er compensation but typically present it as being voluntary rather than required.


                                                  21
mechanisms are modi ed, technology can alter the way people use a service. One di¢culty in
trying to impose regulations on rapidly growing and evolving businesses is that regulations
cannot easily be changed or withdrawn, so rules that look sensible at the time they were
imposed may appear outdated or misguided. This logic suggests taking a relatively lenient
early-stage approach to regulation.
    The counter-argument is that in platform businesses, there can be a great deal of path
dependence. Twenty years ago there were many marketplaces for used goods, and many
competitors in search advertising, but eBay and Google became dominant by o¤ering thicker
markets and better services (Brown and Morgan, 2009; Levin, 2013). Today, regulators in
Europe seem inclined to pursue antitrust action against Google, which would be a massive
and lengthy undertaking given Google’s size and importance. While one can argue about the
likelihood of one of the newer platforms we have discussed achieving anything like Google’s
success, it is certainly the case that all of these businesses are characterized by at least some
degree of network e¤ects and scale economies. As a result, regulators may worry that by
delaying action, they may miss the opportunity. As with the above issues we have raised, the
question of when and how regulators should intervene in rapidly evolving markets deserves
more thought.



5     Conclusion
Economic and business opportunities inevitably depend on the available technology. In the
last two decades, information technology has facilitated the creation of larger, faster, and
more geographically diverse marketplaces. In doing so, it has allowed consumers access to a
wider and more personalized range of products and services. Internet marketplaces also have
managed to deal fairly successfully with the incentive problems that arise in long-distance
and semi-anonymous trade, and in doing so have enabled the entry and participation of small
suppliers and ‡exible workers into many markets. In this review, we have tried to provide
some insight into the market mechanisms used by internet marketplaces, and the economics
that underlie peer production.
    A signi cant risk in writing this review is that the businesses we have discussed are not


                                               22
static. As marketplace businesses such as eBay became successful the sellers became more
professionalized and larger retailers adopted the platform. Today, only a minority of eBay’s
business could be described as peer-to-peer. As we noted above, it may well turn out that
providing rides, deliveries and other services with ‡exible contract workers does not prove
to be a winning model, whether for economic, legal, or regulatory reasons. Nonetheless,
peer-to-peer markets are likely to be an exciting area for at least some time, and hopefully
this paper will encourage even more interest among economists.



References
 Arnosti, Nick, Ramesh Johari and Yash Kanoria (2015). “Managing Congestion in Dynamic
     Matching Markets,” Stanford University, unpublished.

 Armstrong, Mark, and Jidong Zhou (2011). “Paying for Prominence,” Economic Journal,
    121, F368-F395.

 Bolton, Gary, Ben Greiner, and Axel Ockenfels (2013). “Engineering Trust: Reciprocity in
     the Production of Reputation Information,” Management Science, 59(2), 265-285.

 Brown, Jennifer and John Morgan (2009). “How Much is a Dollar Worth? Tipping versus
     Equilibrium Coexistence on Competing Auction Sites,” Journal of Political Economy,
     117(4), 668-700.

 Cabral, Luis, and Ali Hortacsu (2010). “The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Evidence
     from eBay,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(1), 54-78.

 Cullen, Zoe, and Chiara Farronato (2015). “Outsourcing Tasks Online: Matching Demand
     and Supply on Peer-to-Peer Internet Platforms,” Stanford University, unpublished.

 De Corniere, Alexandre, and Greg Taylor (2014). “Integration and Search Engine Bias,”
     RAND Journal of Economics, 45(3), 576-597.

 Dellacrocas, Chris (2003). “The Digitization of Word-of-Mouth: Promise and Challenges
     of Online Feedback Mechanisms,” Management Science, 49(10), 1407-1424.

 Dinerstein, Michael, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2014). “Con-
     sumer Price Search and Platform Design in Internet Commerce,” Stanford University,
     unpublished.

 Dowd, Maureen (2015). “Driving Uber Mad,” New York Times, May 23, 2015.

 Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2015). “Auctions
     versus Posted Prices in Online Markets,” Stanford University, unpublished.


                                            23
Einav, Liran, Dan Knoep‡e, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2014). “Sales Taxes
    and Internet Commerce,” American Economic Review, 104(1), 1-26.

Einav, Liran, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2015). “Assess-
    ing Sales Strategies in Online Markets Using Matched Listings,” American Economic
    Journal: Microeconomics, 7(2), 215-247.

Eliaz, K r, and Ran Spiegler (2011). “A Simple Model of Search Engine Pricing,” Economic
     Journal, 121, F329-F339.

Farronato, Chiara, and Andrey Fradkin (2015). “Market Structure with the Entry of Peer-
    to-Peer Platforms: the Case of Hotels and Airbnb,” Stanford University, in progress.

Forquet, Laure, and Mark Scott (2015). “Uber Drivers Face Fines in Paris” New York
    Times, February 22, 2015.

Fradkin, Andrey (2015). “Search Frictions and the Design of Online Marketplaces,” MIT,
    unpublished.

Fradkin, Andrey, Elena Grewal, David Holtz, and Matthew Pearson (2015). “Bias and
    Reciprocity in Online Reviews: Evidence from Field Experiments on Airbnb,” MIT,
    unpublished.

Goldman, Matthew, and Justin Rao (2015). “Experiments as Instruments: Heterogeneous
    Position E¤ects in Sponsored Search Auctions,” unpublished.

Gomez Lemmen Meyer, Ana (2015). “Pricing Mechanisms in Peer-to-Peer Online Credit
   Markets,” PhD Dissertation, Stanford University.

Goolsbee, Austan (2000). “In a World without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on Internet
    Commerce,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2), 561-576.

Grossman, Nick (2015). “Regulation, the Internet Way,” Harvard University Kennedy
    School, unpublished.

Hagiu, Andre, and Bruno Jullien (2011). “Why Do Intermediaries Divert Search?” RAND
    Journal of Economics, 42, 337-362.

Hall, Jonathan and Alan Krueger (2015). “An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber’s
     Driver-Partners in the United States,” Princeton University, unpublished.

Horton, John J. (2014). “Misdirected Search E¤ort in a Matching Market: Causes, Con-
    sequences and a Partial Solution,” Proceedings of the fteenth ACM Conference on
    Economics and Computation, 357-357.

Horton, John J., and Joseph M. Golden (2015). “Reputation In‡ation: Evidence from an
    Online Labor Market.” NYU, unpublished.

Hui, X. A., M. Saeedi, Neel Sundaresan, and Zeqian Shen (2014). “From Lemon Markets
    to Managed Markets: the Evolution of eBay’s Reputation System,” unpublished.

                                          24
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Andrew Kato (2007). “Dividing Online and O­ine: A Case Study”
     Review of Economic Studies, 74(3), 981-1004.
Leiber, Ron (2015). “Airbnb Horror Story Points to Need for Precautions,” New York
    Times, August 14, 2015.
Levin, Jonathan (2013). “The Economics of Internet Markets,” in D. Acemoglu, M. Arel-
    lano, and E. Dekel eds., Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, 2013.
Lewis, Greg (2011). “Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection and Online Disclosure:
    The Case of eBay Motors,” American Economic Review, 101(4), 1535-1546.
Luca, Michael (2014). “Reviews, Reputation and Revenue: The Case of yelp.com,” Harvard
    University, unpublished.
Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judy Chevalier (2014). “Promotional Reviews: An Em-
   pirical Investigation of Online Review Manipulation,” American Economic Review,
   104(8), 2421-2455.
Milgrom, Paul (2008). “Simpli ed Mechanisms with an Application to Sponsored-Search
    Auctions,” Games and Economic Behavior, doi: 10/1016/j.geb.2008.12.003.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1994). “Comparing Equilibria,” American Economic
    Review, 84(3): 441-459.
Nosko, Chris, and Steven Tadelis (2015). “The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets:
    An Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment,” UC Berkeley, unpublished.
Prescott, Edward C. (1975). “E¢ciency of the Natural Rate,” Journal of Poilitical Econ-
    omy, 83(6), 1229-1236.
Quan, Thomas W., and Kevin R. Williams (2014). “Product Variety, Across Market De-
   mand Heterogeneity, and the Value of Online Retail,” Yale University, unpublished.
Resnick, Paul, Richard Zeckhauser, Eric Friedman, and Ko Kuwabara (2002). “Reputation
    Systems: Facilitating Trust in Internet Interactions,” Communication of the ACM,
    43(12), 45-48.
Sheldon, Michael (2015). “Income Targeting and the Ride-Sharing Market,” University of
    Chicago, unpublished.
Stigler, George (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulations,” Bell Journal of Economics
     and Management Science, 2(1), 3-21.
Varian, Hal (2010).   “Computer-Mediated Transactions,” American Economic Review,
    100(2), 1-10.
Zervas, Georgias, Davide Proserpio, and John W. Byers (2014). “The Rise of the Sharing
    Economy: Estimating the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry,” Boston University,
    unpublished.

                                         25
Appendix: More Detailed Results from The Model
This section presents additional details on the model in Section 3. Recall that in the model,
‡exible peer sellers have unit capacity, pay no upfront capactiy cost and have marginal cost
c0 + c. The marginal cost c is drawn from a distribution G on support [0; 1). We assume
it has density g. Dedicated professional sellers incur an upfront cost k (q) to create q units
of capacity, and have marginal cost c0 for each unit. Each type of seller must incur a xed
visibility cost f > 0 upon entry. We assume that there is some q  that minimizes per-unit
  xed costs for dedicated sellers, that is q  = arg minq (f + k (q)) =q. All dedicated sellers
will enter at this scale. Demand is uncertain the time when sellers enter, and we write it as
Ds (p), where D is increasing in the demand state s, and strictly decreasing in the market
price p.
    Once entry occurs and demand is realized, the product trades on a competitive spot
market. With dedicated and ‡exible capacity Qk and Qc , the market clearing price in state
s equates demand Ds (c0 + ) with supply Qk + G () Qc . The quantity  = p c0 is the
“price premium.” As shown in Figure 1, if Ds (c0 )  Qk , market clearing involves  (s) = 0.
If Ds (c0 ) > Qk , then  (s) solves Ds (c0 + ) = Qk + G () Qc . It is convenient to de ne
s (Qk ) as the maximum value of s for which  (s) = 0. An entry equilibrium in the model is
a pair of capacity levels Qc ; Qk such that there is no further entry opportunity, Uc  0 and
Uk  0, and no seller wants to exit. So Uc = 0 if Qc > 0 and Uk = 0 if Qk > 0. Expressions
for the expected seller pro ts Uc and Uk are shown in the text.

   Our rst result shows the e¤ect of capacity on spot prices and seller pro ts.

Result 1. The spot market premium  (s), and expected seller pro ts Uk and Uc are de-
creasing in seller capacity Qc ; Qk . Furthermore,
                               @Uk   @Uk   @Uc   @Uc
                                        =           0,
                               @Qk   @Qc   @Qk   @Qc

and the inequalities are strict provided that s > s (Qk ) with positive probability.

Proof. First consider the spot market price. If s > s (Qk ), then

                  @ (s)             @ (s)            G ( (s))
                         = G ( (s))        = 0                             ;
                   @Qc                @Qk    Ds (c0 +  (s)) + g ( (s)) Qc

which is negative. And of course  (s) = 0 if s  s (Qk ).
   Now consider pro ts. For  = fC; Kg, we have
                                                Z    s
                                   @Uk                   @ (s)
                                       =                        dH (s)
                                   @Q           s        @Q

and                                   Z    s
                              @Uc                             @ (s)
                                  =            G ( (s))             dH (s) :
                              @Q      s                       @Q
   Combining these equations yields the claimed comparative static result.              Q.E.D.

                                                         26
   Our second result shows that equilibrium is unique and socially e¢cient.

Result 2. There is a unique entry equilibrium Qc ; Qk .

Proof. Figure 2 in the main text shows the iso-pro t curves de ned by Uc (Qc ; Qk ) = 0 and
Uk (Qc ; Qk ) = 0. Equilibrium is given by their intersection, and what ensures uniqueness
is that the zero-pro t line for ‡exible sellers is more steeply downward sloped than the
corresponding line for dedicated sellers. We rst show that at any point (Qc ; Qk ), the iso-
pro t line for ‡exible sellers will be more steeply sloped than the corresponding iso-pro t line
at that point for dedicated sellers. To see why, imagine a small amount of entry by ‡exible
sellers and a small amount of exit by dedicated sellers that just o¤set to leave Uk unchanged.
Such a change holds the average spot market price (which determines Uk ) unchanged. But
by replacing dedicated capacity with ‡exible capacity, the market price becomes higher in
low demand states and lower in high demand states. This hurts ‡exible sellers, who are more
likely to be selling in the high demand states. So to preserve ‡exible pro ts, Qk must fall
farther. Formally, at any point (Qc ; Qk ),

                     Rs                            Rs
        @Uk =@Qc      s
                          G ( (s)) @(s)
                                      @Qk
                                          dH (s)    s
                                                       G ( (s))2 @(s)
                                                                   @Qk
                                                                        dH (s)   @Uc =@Qc
                 =         R s @(s)              Rs             @(s)
                                                                               =          .
        @Uk =@Qk                     dH  (s)           G  ( (s))       dH (s)   @Uc =@Qk
                             s @Qk                   s            @Qk

The inequality follows from the fact that G is increasing in s.
    Now to show that equilibrium is unique, note that if Uc and Uk are negative for all
(Qc ; Qk ), the unique equilibrium has no entry. If Uc is always negative but Uk can be
positive, the equilibrium is given by the unique Qk that solves Uk (0; Qk ) = 0. Similarly if Uk
is always negative, the equilibrium is given by the unique Qc that solves Uc (Qc ; 0) = 0. This
leaves the case where pro ts for both types of sellers can be positive, as depicted in Figure 2.
In this case, both zero-pro t curves are downward sloping (Result 1) and the ‡exible seller
zero-pro t curve is more steeply sloped (from above). So the zero pro t curves can cross
at most once. If they do cross, the crossing point is the unique equilibrium. If they do not
cross, one curve lies always above the other. The unique equilibrium has only the type of
seller with the higher zero-pro t curve, and the equilibrium capacity for this type of seller
equates pro t to zero.                                                                   Q.E.D.

Result 3. The entry equilibrium Qc ; Qk capacities maximize consumer plus producer surplus
given the e¢cient spot market.

    We show that the marginal return to an entering seller is just equal to the marginal
social surplus. Given capacity Qc ; Qk in the spot market, the sum of producer and consumer
surplus, ignoring xed entry costs, is (note that to compute surplus, we integrate along the
price axis in Figure 1, rather than the quantity axis):
                              Z   1                    Z   (s)
                   W (s) =            D (c0 + 
                                              e) de
                                                  +                           )) de
                                                                  (Qk + Qc G (e     :
                               (s)                    0




                                                 27
   If s  s (Qk ), then an extra unit of capacity adds nothing to welfare. If s > s (Qk ), the
welfare contribution of an additional unit of capacity is
                                                     Z       (s)                Z   (s)
      @W (s)                              @W (s)
             =  (s)        and                  =                  G (e
                                                                        ) de
                                                                            =              ( (s)   c) dG (c) .
       @Qk                                 @Qk           0                       0

This coincides exactly with the private return to entry, so entry will occur whenever it is
socially e¢cient, but will not occur if it is socially ine¢cient. The equilibrium capacities will
therefore maximize consumer plus producer surplus, taking xed costs of entry into account.
Q.E.D.

   Our next results show the comparative statics results asserted in the text:

Result 4a. (Capacity Cost) A decrease in k (q) increases Qk and decreases Qc .

Proof. For any (Qc ; Qk ), a decrease in k (q) has no e¤ect on Uc but it increases Uk . (Note that
the e¢cient scale may change if k (q) changes but the per-unit pro t for a dedicated seller
choosing optimal scale will weakly increase with any decrease in k (q).). The rst conclusion
then follow from Milgrom and Roberts (1994).

Result 4b. (Cost Structure) A rst order stochastic dominance decrease in c makes it more
likely that ‡exible sellers can exist pro tably alongside dedicated sellers.

Proof. Suppose only dedicated sellers are present in the market and the spot price premium
is  (s).                  Z Z
                         Uc =             maxf0;  (s)         cgdG (c) dH (s)          f
                                  s   c
A decrease G in the sense of FOSD increases Uc , and hence makes it more likely that the
equilibrium involves ‡exible sellers.                                            Q.E.D.

Result 4c. (Visibility Costs) A decrease in f increases ‡exible capacity Qc , and total
capacity Qc + Qk . It decreases expected spot market prices. It also decreases the e¢cient
scale of dedicated sellers q  , and reduces dedicated capacity Qk , provided that ‡exible sellers
were present in the initial equilibrium.

Proof. We start with the case at some initial f , the equilibrium involves Qc ; Qk > 0,
and Uc (Qc ; Qk ; f ) = Uk (Qc ; Qk ; f ) = 0. Now consider a drop from f to f 0 . Each dollar
drop in f increases the pro t of both types of sellers by a dollar, so at Qc ; Qk , we have
Uc = Uk = f f 0 > 0. To restore equilibrium, there must be entry by at least one type of
seller. If both Qc ; Qk increase, however, it will have a bigger e¤ect on the pro t of ‡exible
sellers, so we will have Uc > Uk , which is inconsistent with having an equilibrium with both
types of sellers present. The same will be true of Qk increases and Qc falls, which means
that to restore equilibrium Qc must increase and Qk must fall.
    The new equilibrium has a lower average spot prices. To see why, note that at the new
equilibrium Uk = 0, so the average price premium now equals f 0 rather than f . Moreover,
because entry by a ‡exible seller has a smaller e¤ect on average prices than the exit of a

                                                     28
dedicated seller, it follows that for prices to fall, there must be net positive entry. Of course,
prices need not be lower in every state. The exit of dedicated sellers means that there could
be some demand states where previously we would have had  = 0, and now have  > 0 to
induce ‡exible sellers into the market.
    The same argument also applies if the initial equilibrium involved only ‡exible sellers.
That is, Qc must increase from its initial level Qc , and dedicated sellers will not enter.
However, if the initial equilibrium had no ‡exible sellers, and 0  Uk > Uc at equilibrium,
the situation is slightly di¤erent. By de nition the new equilibrium must have at least as
many ‡exible sellers, but it also can have more dedicated sellers. A simple example is where
‡exible sellers have such unfavorable marginal costs that they never enter, and then a fall in
f clearly will increase the equilibrium number of dedicated sellers.                       Q.E.D.

Result 4d. (Demand Uncertainty) Suppose demand is zero with probability and 1 1 D (p)
with probability . Then greater demand variability (an increase in ) makes it more likely
‡exible sellers can enter against dedicated sellers.

Proof. To enter, dedicated sellers require a price premium  = (f + k R) = (1                        ) in the
                                                                            
event of positive demand. A ‡exible seller can expect to make Uf = (1    ) 0 (                        c) dG (c)
f: It follows that
                                       Z                     Z 
                     d       d
                       Uf =    (1    )      (    c) dG (c) =     cdG (c) .
                    d       d           0                      0

Flexible sellers are relatively more advantaged with variable demand. because they can avoid
incurring their (higher) marginal costs in the event of zero demand, whereas a dedicated seller
must incur its (higher) up-front cost in all demand states.10 .                        Q.E.D.

    Our nal observation relates to the entry of a peer-to-peer market. With a peer-to-peer
market that charges a break-even transaction fee, the cost of the platform will be split across
participants. If only ‡exible sellers use the platform, the platform free per seller will be
F=Qc , and the fee decreases with the entry of additional ‡exible sellers. At the same time,
the entry of additional ‡exible sellers reduces the spot market price. So in general ‡exible
sellers may have their pro ts increased or decreased by the entry of additional ‡exible sellers,
that is Uc may be increasing or decreasing in Qc .




  10
    There is an envelope theorem logic. In considering the e¤ect of an increase in , we can ignore the
change in  which is set e¢ciently. So the rst-order e¤ect is that there is a slightly higher chance of zero
demand, which resultsR in dedicated sellers avoiding their marginal cost of c0 and a ‡exible seller avoiding its
                       
expected cost of c0 + 0 cdG (c).


                                                      29
FIGURE 1: Spot Market with Dedicated and Flexible Sellers

Price                         Supply with only               Supply with
                              dedicated sellers              dedicated and
                                                             flexible sellers




                                                  DHigh(p)
   c0


                                      DLow(p)


                         Qk                            Qk+Qc
FIGURE 2: Equilibrium Market Structure

 Qk




          Uc(Qc,Qk)=0       Both Seller Types
                              Unprofitable




                               (Qc*,Qk*)
        Both Seller Types
           Profitable                           Uk(Qc,Qk)=0


                                                              Qc
FIGURE 3: Equilibria with a Peer-to-Peer Platform

 Qk




 Qk*




                                       Uc=0



                                                    Qc
