                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LIFE-CYCLE PERMANENT-INCOME
                  MODEL AND CONSUMER OURABLES




                         Avner Bar-han

                        Alan S. Blinder




                     Working Paper No. 2149




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1987




Paper prepared for the International Seminar on Life-Cycle Theory,
Paris, June 3-5, 1986. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2149
                                                February 1987




          The Life-Cycle Permanent-Income Model and Consumer Durables




                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper presents an extension of the life-cycle permanent-income model

of consumption to the case of a durable good whose purchase involves lumpy trans-

actions costs. Where individual behavior is concerned, the implications of the

model are different in some respects from those of standard consumption theory.

Specifically, rather than choose an optimal path for the service flow from

durables, the optimizing consumer will choose an optimal range and try to keep

his service flow inside that range. The dynamics implied by this behavior is

different from that of the stock adjustment model. Properties of aggregate

durables consumption are derived by explicit aggregation. In particular, it is

shown that expenditures on durables display very large short-run elasticity to

changes in permanent income. Empirical tests of the sort suggested by Hall

(1978) generally produce results that are in line with the predictions of the

theory.




Avner Bar-han                                   Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                               Princeton University
Hanover, NH 03755                               Princeton, NJ 08544
                                         —1—




I. THE LIFE CYCLE MODEL AS A THEORY OF CONSUMER SPENDING

   In the 1950s, Franco Modigliani and Richard Brumberg (1954) and Milton
Friedman (1957) turned the abstract Fisherian model of interternporal maximization
into an operational model of consumption. The model they developed,1 which drew
the crucial distinction between consumption and consumer expenditures and applied
only to the former, has three main empirical implications about consumption at the
microeconomic level:

                                                                                  he-

present value of expected lifetime resources.
   (2) Consumption is insensitive to transitory fluctuations in income that do not
affect permanent income.
   (3) Under the usual assumption that the utility function is CES, consumption
grows or shrinks at a rate (r-a)/b, where r is the rate of interest, a is the rate of
subjective time discounting, and b is a taste parameter.
   Item 1 on this list was, of course, the empirical observation that motivated the
theory. Item 2 is the distinguishing characteristic of the theory. Both of these apply
to aggregate as well as to individual consumption. Item 3 points out an implication
of the particular utility function needed to derive item 1; but it does not survive
        .2
aggregation.
   The LCH/PIH is often held up as a model of good economics, and rightly so. A

pzling set of empirical phenomena was explained by a theory based on maximizing
behavior. That theory was then translated into econometrically estimnatable equations
and subjected to a battery of empirical tests--with generally favorable results. Yet,
from a business cycle perspective, the model has at least one serious shortcoming:
it applies only to consumption, not to consumer expenditures, while spending on
                                        —2—




durables accounts for most of the cyclical variability. Thus the PIH needs to be
supplemented by a model of expenditures on consumer dur-ables (and also, of course,
by a way to translate durable stocks into the service flows required by the theory).
The usual way to do this is by the stock (partial) adjustment model.
   The stock adjustment (SA) model assumes the presence of convex adjustment
costs that give rise to a lagged adjustment of actual to 'desired" stocks. Each period
a constant fraction -y of the gap between the desired and actual stocks is closed,

          -    =         - Kt),
(1) K+i
where the parameter y, 0 < y < 1, is called the "speed of adjustment." K denotes
the durable stock at the begiming of period t and Kt is the desired stock at that time.
On the further assumption that depreciation is proportional to the stock, gross

expenditures are given by:

(2) E+i = y(K1 - K) + óK
where 6 is the periodical depreciation rate. According to the LCH/PIH, the desired
stock will be proportional to permanent income. But the existence of adjustment
costs (y < 1) results in a deviation of the actual stock, and thus the service flow of
durables, from the desired level.
   Despite tH SA model's wide acceptance, it has some obvious theoretical and
empirical drawbacks.
   The first pertains to its microfoundations. It has been knov for a long time
(Holt, Modigliani, Muth and Simon (1960)) that the SA model can be justified
rigorously by quadratic costs of adjusting durable stocks. But this assumption is
counterintuitive. There is no apparent reason why it should be less costly to adjust
durable holdings in several small steps rather than all at. once. In a recent attempt
                                         —3—




to rationalize the assumption of quadratic adjustment costs, Bernanke (1985)
claimed that "it takes time to shop for and acquire a new car." That is no doubt true,
but it implies the existence of transactions costs, not adjustment costs. With lumpy
transactions costs, we show below, consumers either fully adjust by replacing their
old durable good or do not adjust at all. The SA model implies, instead, that they
will partially adjust, i.e. purchase successively better durable goods over several
consecutive periods. Even if partial adjustment at the aggregate level is conceivable
(more on this below), it is hard to accept the conclusion for individuals.
   Second, it is well known that an important property of demand for durables is that
the purchasing decision can be advanced or postponed. This, many people suspect, is
why spending on durables is so volatile. It is difficult to integrate this idea into the
SA framework.
   Third, the SA model is really a model of expansion demand. Replacement demand
is simply grafted on as a fraction of the current stock. But. the separation between
expansion and replacement demands is an artificial one; consumers make one decision
about durable purchases and do not distinguish between the "replacement" and
"expansion" parts. In addition, actual data on durables expenditures lump the two
components together; unfortunately for the theory, most of the demand is the

unmodelled, replacement part.
   Fourth, it is generally assumed that the speed of adjustment is constant and
independent of any economic variables. In principle, this ought not to be the case;
some variables, like credit rationing, interest rates, and supply constraints, should
affect y. However, "in the simple stock-adjustment framework, desired stocks are
the only channel through which economic variables can act." (Deaton and Muellbauer

(1980), p. 353).
                                          —4—




   Finally, when the SA model is estimated empirically, the estimated adjustment
speeds are very low; in most cases below 30% per quarter.
   These problems all suggest that there is room for improvement. In particular,
we will derive here a model in which the underlying microeconornics makes better
sense; in which postponement/advancement decisions and depreciation are integrated;
and in which aggregate behavior is not necessarily a blowup of individual behavior.
Instead, the model distinguishes between the individual dynamics, which may be quite

discontinuous, and relatively smooth aggregate dynamics.


II. MICROFOUNDATIONS OF THE (S,s) MODEL
   A. Discrete versus Smooth Adjustment
   In deriving a new model of the demand for durable goods, we begin by solving for

the decision rule of a single consumer. This decision rule will then be aggregated to
yield the consumption behavior of the whole economy, which may be very different
from that of any single cosnumer.
   The underlying assumption is that the market for durables is characterized by
important lumpy transactions costs. The possible origins of these costs are many.
Sometimes transactions costs are large and explicit (e.g., in buying a house).
Alternatively, since durable goods are characterized by variety of characteristics,
potential buyers must spend time and effort finding the right combination for their
purposes. So search costs, whether described as time costs, utility costs, or
financial costs, may be heavy. A third source of transactipris costs is asymmetric
information between buyers and sellers of durable goods -- which gives rise to the
"lemons' principle (Akerlof, 1970). As a result, the buyer suffers a lumpy cost - in
the Form of a loss of a fixed percentage of value - as soon as he takes the durable
                                            —5—




home.

   Another property which distinguishes durables from nondurables is
noncombinability (Lancaster, 1979), which means, for example, that two used cars
camot be combined to make one new car. Noncombinability implies that if a
consumer wants to increase his flow of durable services, he will probably have to
                                                              Arid because ofth
"lemons" effect, each replacement will involve a lumpy cost which is a fraction of the

purchase.
   Despite the apparent similarity between adjustment costs and transactions costs,
the two are very different, both in nature and in their empirical Implications. The
combination of lumpy trnasactions costs and noncombinability implies that durable
purchases will be made infrequently. If the deviation between actual and desired
stocks is small, people will not find it worthwhile to pay the transactions costs
necessary to change their durable good. Instead, they will wait until the deviation is
large enough to justify the costs involved in the transaction. Quadratic adjustment
costs imply the opposite dynamics: Even if the discrepancy between desired and
actual stocks is small, the old "car" should be "replaced" by a slightly better one.
Moreover, this should not be done in one shot, but rather spread over several periods.

   It is obvious that people purchase durable goods infrequently and, when they do,
the additions to their stocks are significant. Unfortunately, lumpy transactions costs
are much more difficult to model than the quadratic adjustment costs that underly the
SA model. Yet modelling them properly is worth the effort because similar
theoretical and empirical problems arise in so many areas of economics.
   For example, partial adjustment is often unthinkingly grafted on to models of the
demand for money, which then display puzzlingly low speeds of adjustment. But this
                                            —6--




makes little snse. What possible reason can there be to assume that it costs four
times as much to make twice as large a change in one's money holdings? Is it not
more likely that marginal adjustment costs are decreasing, or even zero? The same
reasoning applies, more generally, to all portfolio adjustments. Contrary to naive
theory, investors do not adjust their portfolios continuously, and for good reasons:
because there are fixed costs of doing so. Similarly, government officials and
business executives may be reluctant to pay the fixed costs of decisionmaking tritil
they are convinced that their current policy is far from optimal. Quadratic
adjustment costs have been used to rationalize the Q-theory of investment (see Abel,
1980). But here, just as with consumer durables, lumpy adjustment costs are far
more plausible. It is believable that it costs a firm 49 times as much to install
seven new drill presses as it costs to install one? We think not.
   Indeed, we find it hard to imagine any application in which the (commonly made)
assumption of quadratic adjustment costs is more reasonable than the (rarely made)
assumption of lumpy transactions costs. Economists' standard theory of gradual
adjustment seems to need rethinking. Fortunately, there is a well-known body of
analysis in the inventory literature that applies to the case of fixed transactions
costs. It leads to the so-called (S,s) or two-bin policy. The basic idea of this
approach, which we apply here to consumer durables, is that the optimal plan is
defined by a target point S and a trigger point s. If the stock (of money, inventories,
or durable goods) falls below level s, an order to restore the stock to level S is
made; otherwise, no order is made. We now show how the (S,s) rule applies to the
demand for durable goods with lumpy transactions costs.
   B. Art (S; Ruiefor Durables
   Suppose that a consumer consumes two commodities: a perishable good X and a
                                            —7—




durable good K which depreciates at a constant exponential rate p.3 Denote by q <1
the ratio of the selling price of durables to the purchasing price; thus the lumpy
transactions cost is a fraction (1 -q) of the purchase price, as suggested by the
"lemons" principle. We would like to see what effect this parameter has on the
consumption plan of a consumer who maximizes lifetime utility subject to a lifetime
budget constraint. Assume that the instantaneous utility function is of the standard
LCH/PIH form:

(3) u(K, X) = aK + bX            k <1,
where we assume, as is usual, that the flow of services from durables is
proportional to the stock. Assuming time separability and an infinite horizon, the
consumer wants to maximize:
           co
(4) U =    f u(K, Xt)e_atdt,
where U is lifetime discounted utility and a is the rate of subjective time

discounting.
     It is obvious that, because of the lumpy transactions costs, durable purchases will
take place only occasionally, for continuous replacement implies infinite transactions
cost. Denote by Sn the durable stock immediately after the nth durable purchase
which takes place at time tn• That good will be replaced at time tn+1 when it has
deteriorated to a value S given by:

(5) s = S exp [-p (t1 - tn)]
Thus the discounted utility obtained while the nth "car" is held will be,

 6
      ft U[Sn exp (-p(t-t) Xt]et dt
Surrimnation over all lifetime purchases of durables and use of the, specific functional
                                                   —8—




form (3) yields the following expression for lifetime utility,

                                                                                              k
(7) U= [a/ (pk+a)]          [{exp {- (pk+a) tn] -exp [- (k+a)   t1 I } (Se1n) k1 +bJ et (X)       dt

which is homogenous of degree k in its arguments S and X.
    In order to derive the budget constraint, assume that the nondurable good X is the

numeraire and that the relative price of durables to nondurables is constant. Denote
the purchase price of one "unit" of the durable good by p; therefore the resale price is
qp. The discounted cost of the nth durable good is,


(8) pS exp (rtn)
wherer >-O ithTrs rte.Thd1seoutedincbm                                  mllrr1gthts 'crat
time t1 will be,

(9) qp Sn exp [rtn+j 1          (t1 - tn)I
The difference between (8) and (9) is the net expenditure on the nth car. Summation
over all durable transactions and inclusion of spending on nondurables yield the

following lifetime budget constraint:

(10) W = p
                  n1
                       {[etn - q exp{rtn+j - P      (t - tn)]JSn} + Tet X dt
where W denotes total (human and nonhuman) lifetime wealth. Notice that the budget
constraint is homogenous of degree I in its arguments X and S1, S2
    The interternporal optimization problem of the consumer is maximization of total
discounted utility subject to the lifetime budget constraint. The solution consists of
a plan for nondurable consumption, X, and two infinite series of trigger pionts (S1,

S2., ...)   and        s2, ...) which denote the stocks immediately after the purchase and
just before resale, respectively. However, the homogeneity of lifetime utility and
                                           —9—




the linearity of the budget constraint simplify the solution significantly and reduce
the infinite number of parameters in the s and S series to only three: S1, Sn+ i/Sn
and Sn/Sn• Similarly, the nondurable consumption plan X is characterized by only
two parameters: the initial consumption and a constant exponential growth rate.
Moreover, the growth rates of the consumption plans of both goods are the same,
which reduces the total number of parameters to four. All this is summarized in the

following theorem:
Theorem I: The optimal consumption plan (S, s, X) exhibits the following
          .4
properties:
   Ci)    X0, all the S, and all the s are proportional to total lifetime wealth.
   (ii)   The ratio Sn/Sn defined by (5) is constant, so the interval between
          purchases, r, is constant
   (iii) The ratio Sn+i/Sn is constant and equal to e where g =
   (iv)   The growth rate of nondurable consumption is constant and equals the growth
          rate g in (iii).
   The inclusion of lumpy transactions costs in the durable goods market changes the
durable transactions plan substantially from a continuous to a discrete one. Except
for isolated points in time at which a purchase is made, the consumer will not be
active in the market for durables. Do the key features of the PIH/LCh still hold with
transactions costs? The answer is that these properties do hold in the 'long run," but
not in the "short run." Specifically, the pattern of durables stock, and therefore the
service flow from durables, follows a ratchet path., as shown in Figure 1. This path,
of course, differs in details from the predictions of the strict PIH. However, the
envelope curve which connects the S levels in Figure 1 does follow the PIH/LCH
predictions: It is proportional to permanent income; the rate of growth of
consumption (g) is identical to that implied by the PIH; and transitory income affects
                                  —10—




                                                 logX(t)


                    g
logX1
                                                 — .logS(t)

                                                    —logs(t)
        r\.
    1     N./111i



logs1

               t        2t   3t   4t     5t 6t
                                                       -
                                                           *time

                              Fiqure 1
                                           —11—




consumption only insofar as it changes permanent income.5 Thus in the short rlJn,
between purchases, there are deviations from the strict PIH/LCH predictions,
deviations which are larger the larger are transactions costs. However, in the long
run these deviations are rectified and the consumption plan returns to the PIH/LCH
path. Notice also that since each purchase of a durable good involves a lumpy
transactions cost, each change lowers the value of lifetime wealth. Thus total
lifetime wealth, W, will follow a discontinuous ratchet pattern. At a time of a
durable purchase, when the durable stock jumps up, wealth jumps down.
   It is of interest to compare the predictions of the (S,s) model with those of the
SA model. The inclusion of transactions costs increases the number of choice
variables from one (the "desired" stock) to two, S and s -- a change which has
considerable implications for the microdynamics. To see this, assume that the rate
of time discounting (a) equals the discount rate (r) so that the trigger points, S and
s, do not change unless new information is received. The SA model implies that the
individual will hold a constant durable stock by replacing the depreciated amount each
period. The (S,s) dynamics, by contrast, follow a ratchet path. Even with no new
information the stock in different periods may be different, and durable purchases
will not be made each period. If an unanticipated income shock takes place, the SA
model predicts a smooth exponential convergence toward the new desired stock. No
such smooth partial adjustment is predicted by the (S,s) model. Everyone adjusts
either fully or not at all. Thus unanticipated changes may induce large
contemporaneous cnanges for those consumers who adjust right away. But, for other
consumers, no adjustment whatsoever will be observed for some time.
   The microdynamics are therefore not the smooth paths described by the SA model.

The "speed of adjustment" may vary considerably among individuals, depending on
                                           —12—




their initial durables stock. Thus explicit aggregation over the entire population is
necessary in order to find the aggregate adjustment speed. Note also that, although
the dynamics implied by the (S,s) model are more complicated than those of the SA
model, the underlying theoretical basis is more solid. The postponernent/
advancement decision is naturally integrated into the model. By optimizing over the
choice variables S and s, the consumer decides not only how much to spend on
durables (as in the SA model), but also when to spend; when the durables stock hits
the level s, he spends p(S-qs). In principle every piece of relevant information is
taken into account in determining the levels S and s. This means that such important
timing factors as intertemporal price substitution and variable interest rates are in
principle captured by the model.6 Another advantage relative to the SA model is that
the (S,s) model envisions one unified decision about how much to spend on durables;
this avoids the artificial distinction between expansion and replacement expenditures.




   Clearly, individuals do not "partially adjust" to "desired" stocks. Does the
aggregate economy? In order to aggregate over the population, assume that all
consumers have the same lifetime income but differ in their durable stocks, i.e.
their position between the (common) levels S and s. An unexpected change in income
will set in motion the following dynamics. Consumers who find themselves outside
their (new) desired (S,s) region will react by moving into that region.7 This is the
short-run effect. These rescheduled purchases will also change the distribution of
durable stocks in the population, which will lead to long-run dynamics.
   Assume that consumers monitor their durable stocks continuously while the
econornetrician observes the data only periodically, at intervals of length e.   Denote
                                                —13—




the depreciation rate for one observation period by 6; thus 6 = 1 -    e'0.   Durable

goods that depreciate to the new trigger point, s, within the period will be replaced.
The following is the decision ri.jie:


(11) If K (1-6)              buyS-qs
        If K (1-6) > s, buy nothing,
where      is the stock at the start of a period.
Hence the number of consumers Nt who purchase a durable good during period t is,8
  -         ________

(12) Nt =         I      ft(I<t) dKt =
             st_I
where      (Kt)
                  is the density function of durables at the begiming of period t and
F(Kt) is the corresponding cumulative density function. Those who buy a new "car"

during period t spend:

(13) C=S-qs
where we have normalized p           1.

   Denote by E the average economy-wide expenditure on durables during period t.
   is the product of C times Nt or:

(14) E CN = (St - qs) [F                  () - F(sti)}
   At this point a simple example may be helpful. In the steady state, the number of
durable goods purchased is the same each period (except for a possible trend). Hence
the age distribution of cars is uniform. If cars are held for at most T periods we
have,

                      forO<h<T
(15) f(h)={T0 otherwise
                                                 —14—




where h is the age of the car. To derive the density of Kt from that of age, recall

that:

              -          dR'
and that K and h are related by,

(17) K =      Se             for 0 <h < T

Equations (15), (16), (17) yield the following expression for the density function of
the durables stock:

          — f1/(pTK)
                     = 1/[K(lnS-lns)]              for s < K <S
(18) f(K) —                                        otherwise
                  l.0

sincesSe -juT
The function f(K) is depicted in Figure 2. Although the age distribution is uniform,
the distribution of stocks is rnonotonically decreasing due to exponential depreciation.
The distribution in (18) implies that the average stock is:

        -         S-s
               n - ns
It is clear from the fact that the distribution is skewed towards the lower end that R
is below (S+s)/2. for example, if S 10 (thousand dollars) p = .2 and T = 5 then s
= 3.68 and R =          6.32 even though the midpoint of the (s,S) range is 6.84. The
cumulative     distribution function corresponding to the density function (18) is,


                        0           forK<s
(20) F(K)                           fors<K<S
                         I          forK>S

Since inS-ins      = pT and ln(1-6) = -p0,   equations (14)   and   (20)   yield   the following


simple      expression for average expenditures on durables at periot t,
         —15—




f (K)




        Ficiure   2
                                              —16—




(21) Et = . (St - qs)

If, for example, the average durable good is held for T = 5 years, and the observation
period is a quarter (0 = 1/4), then about 5% of the cars are replaced each period in
the steady state (6 = .049). If S = 10 (thousand dollars), s 3.68, and q = 0.7,

average expenditure per capita is $371.
   Returning to the general case, we would like to understand the dynamics implied
by equation (14), and in particular whether the standard implications of the PI}-1/LCH
hold for aggregate expenditures on durables. The contemporaneous effect of

permanent income change on E is,
       dE
                  s d(S-qs)                          s ds
(22)
       dy
            =F
                 (i:   dy
                                 +
                                     (S-qs)
                                              ____


The first term represents the increase in expenditures per consumer (Cr) times the
number of buyers (Nt). The second term is the average expenditure per buyer times
the increase in the number of buyers. Recall from Theorem 1 that both       and      are
proportional to permanent income y. Therefore, the difference (S-qs) is also
proportional to permanent income. That means that S-qs is unit elastic with
respect to y. So the first term in (22) is:

(23L
       d(S-qs)        s
                 JE...LL=
                            S-qs        s
        dy
Similarly, the second term in equation (22) simplifies to


(24) (S-qs)   (1-6)   f()   yt
Adding (23) and (24), and converting to an elasticity of aggregate expenditures on
durables with respect to permanent income yields:
                                            —17—




(25)
        dE    y 1 +Xp()
                   f(xt)
                         1 +t>
        dyt
               t       t

where                  0, and     is the elasticity of F(x) with respect to its
        x
argument.
   Thus the elasticity of durable expenditures with respect to permanent income is
larger than one, rather than the unit elasticity normally associated with the
PIH/LCH. The actual number depends on the density function. However, if the
distribution of durables is close to its steady state, the elasticity must be much
larger than 1. For example, consider again the case of a uniform age distribution.
Using the previous expressions, the second term in (25) becomes:

     f(x) ______       i   (for small 6),
   X F(x) = ln(1-d)
which gives the following (large) elasticity:

(26)
        dE y           i
        dy
For a quarterly depreciation rate 6 5%, the elasticity will be 21, meaning that a
1% increase in permanent income yields a short-run increase of 21% in durable

expenditures!
   What is the reason for this very large elasticity? Look at the two terms in
equation (22). The first term, the increase in expenditures per transaction          is
unit elastic to permanent income because both St and s are. The second term
describes the increase in the number of purchasers, which might be very large
because of advancement of the purchasing decision. In the case of a periodical
depreciation rate of 6 .05, 5% of the population are replacing their durable good
each period in the steady state. If permanent income now rises by 1%, the trigger
                                           —18—




point s will increase by 1%. This temporarily raises the percentage of the population
buying cars from the normal 5% up to 6%. Thus the increase in the flow rate of
transactions is 20% (6% instead of 5% of the population). The other 1% comes from

the larger purchase size.
   This discussion shows why breaking the data on durable expenditures into        and

   is important. The average transaction size       describes the behavior of a single
consumer. As such it should satisfy the predictions of the PIH/LCH; and, in fact, C
is proportional to permanent income, is not sensitive to transitory income, and the
growth rate of       is identical to that implied by the PIH.9 The number of
transactions N may vary widely in the short run with changes in permanent income.
Since changes in aggregate durable expenditures E are dominated by variations in Nt,
we camot expect        to be proportional to permanent income. In the next section we
shall make an empirical test of the different theoretical predictions for C, N and
    Although aggregate expenditures are not described very well by permanent
income on a period by period basis, E is proportional to yP in the long run. To see
this, recall that:

(14) E = (S-qs)       [F () - Ft (s
In the long run [F (—) - Ft(st_i)], the proportion of the population purchasing
durables in a certain period, equals the steady state level -- which is independent of
permanent income. Thus in the long run E changes only with           (S-qs), which is


   The conclusion is that durable expenditures will exhibit a very high short-run
income elasticity and a long run elasticity of unity. What can be said about the
dynamics between these two extreme cases? The aggregate demand for durables
                                           —19—




depends cruciallyon the initial distribution of stocks and, in particular, on the lower
tail of that distribution. An increase in permanent income leads to advancement of
purchases, and hence to a change in the distribution. The echoes may reverberate for
a long period and are not easy to characterize. We can, however, get a rough idea
about the nature of these subsequent changes in the distribution of stocks. After a
rise in yP, there are more "new cars" and fewer "old cars". So the density in the
lower tail will be smaller and fewer people will purchase new cars. Thus an
unexpected income increase will lead to the following dynamics. Initially, there is a
large short-run increase in durable expenditures. If the initial distribution is
uniform, then the distribution after the income shock will not be uniform anymore.
Then there is a long period in which expenditures may change as the distribution of
stocks adjust. Spending will tend to be low until convergence to the long-ri.n steady
state is achieved, which might take a long time.
   These dynamics are quite different from those implied by the stock-adjustment


The closest analogue to the "desired" stock in the SA model is the mean of the steady-
state distribution in the (S,s) model. But according to the (S,s) model, the mean of
the actual distribution does not converge smoothly to this "desired" level. For
example, we have just noted that if the initial age distribution is uniform, then the
average stock will "overshoot'1 the "desired" level. Subsequently, it will fluctuate in
long damped oscillations around the steady state until convergence is achieved. 10
Thus the SA and (S,s) models imply very different micro and macrodynamics.
   At. this point, it may be useful to summarize the aggregate implications of the
(S,s) model:
   1. The variable which is most closely related to the PIH/LCH is average
                                                —20—




expenditure per Xransaction, C. This variable should satisfy the key properties of
the PIH. However, total expenditures on durables E should not be predicted very
well by standard results of the PIH. The reason is that the typical application of the
PIH is based on a representative consumer. This abstraction can capture only one
dimension of the consumption decision: how much to spend. But because of the
existence of transaction costs, there is another dimension: when to spend. This
advancement/postponement decision cannot be captured by a model of a representative

agent.
      2. The average durable stock, K, and total expenditures, E, will not necessarily
be proportional to permanent income; neither will they follow the growth rate

implied by the PIH. Instead, changes in permanent income might lead to very large
changes in durable expendtirues with echo effects which might last for a long time.
Only the long-run, steady-state levels of expenditures and stock will follow the
predictions of the PIH. This means that the market for durable goods is inherently
more volatile than the markets for nondurable goods and services. Even with no new

information, E and Kt might vary across periods. Only when there are no surprises
and the distribution of stocks is in a steady state will durable expenditures and stocks
not   fluctuate.


      3.   The   high short-run income   elasticity of   expenditures implied by   the   (S,s)


model      opens up an avenue through which small impulses in perceived permanent
income may lead to large business cycles. Suppose a small, negative innovation to
income leads people to write down their estimated permanent incomes by small
amounts. By the logic of the (S,s) model, spending on durables may fall by a much

larger percentage than permanent income, thereby kicking off a recession.
(Supposing, of course, that prices and wages are not perfectly flexible.)
                                          —21—




where u and vt.are stochastic terms which represent factors that are not included in
the analysis. The amount spent on durable purchases C is, in real terms:

(28) Ct = S-qs       Q yP +

where the coefficient Q is defined by Q a1-qa2, q is the ratio of selling to

purchasing price, and the transitory component      satisfies       u-qv.   Equation

(28) is the conventional way of modelling the PIH. (See, for example, Flavin (1981),
p. 978). It states that, apart from transitory consumption, consumption is
proportional to permanent income.
   In order to estimate the number of purchases, Nt, begin with equation (12). The
integral can be approximated by using The Theorem of the Mean for Integral which
states that if f(x) is a continuous function on a closed interval [a,b], then there is a
number c, a c < b, such that
   b
   5 f(x) dx = f(c) (b-a).
  a
Applying this theorem to (12) yields,


(29) Nt     ft(Kt)             - st_il

where 5ti            s/(l-6)
Equation (29) is exact because no approximation was involved in its derivation.
However, it is not operational since the theorem does not specify the exact location of
the point K. In general f(K) depends on the distribution of stocks in the lower tail.
The simplest assumption to permit empirical work is that f(K) is constant through
time. Call that constant B. Using the approximation i/(i-6)1 + 6 for 6 << i, we
get,
(30) Nt = 6Ay + A (y - y1) + (1+6) Bv - Bv.j
                                                —22—




where A Ba2.- Notice that N depends not only on y, but also                on y1.


   In his influential (1978) paper, Hall pointed out that if the PIH holds then lagged
information other than lagged consumption will be useless for predicting
consumption. In order to see if this result is robust to the inclusion of transactions
costs difference equation (30) to obtain:

(31) Nt =     Ni + A (1+6) (y-y1) - A (y1 -y2) + (1+6) B (vt-vt1) * B (Vt i-v2)
And similarly equation (28) implies,

(32) Ct = C1 + Q(y -           -1 +
Equation (32) is Hall's well known result. Expenditures per transaction follow a
random walk process if we assume away the transitory element, or ARMA (1,1)

                                                          irnpi4es-that thenwmber- of durab1e- -
sold, Nt,   is   far from a random walk. Even ignoring the moving average error term,

Nt depends on both             and ty1. So past income does have a value in predicting
Nt, and thus future consumption expenditures.
   We test these implications with quarterly data on automobile purchases because
good data are available on both the average price of a new car, C, and the number of
                                              13
new cars purchased by consumers, N.
   First, following Hall, we ask if         can     be predicted by its own past values, other
than
       Eti.
                 The result is (with t-ratios in parentheses):

(33) E = 28.52 + .571E              + .387E
                                                2
                                                     .113E       .067E
              (344)      (5•66)t      (335)t*        (98)t       (68)t
              R2 = .635; DW = 1.987; F(3,98) = 3.799

The    F test rejects the omission of longer lags at the 2% level, and the equation
                                               —23—




makes   it clear that it is E2 that matters. According to our theory, the rejection
should come from N, not from C. That turns out to be the case, as the following
two regressions show.
(34) C =    11.01+ i.017C         -   .025C 2 + .094C             .086C
            (.11) (10•22)t
                              i
                                      (18)t           (71)t        (87)t
            R2 = .956; OW = 2.006; F(3,98)              .265

(35) N = 533.7 + .583N + .414N                     - 124N        - .041N
                                               2
         (2.76) (576)t   (355)t                     (107)t         (4j)t
           R2 = .687; OW = 1.984, F(3,98) = 4.511
Longer lags are inconsequential in the C equation, but Nt2 matters in the N
equation. (The F-statistic for omitting the longer lags rejects the null hypothesis at
well beyond the 1% level.)
   Next, again following Hall, we ask if lagged values of disposable income can
predict expenditures on autos. The result is:

(36) E = 38.14 +     .622E    + .642Y              - .244Y       + .234Y   - .615Y
                                                           t-2
           (4.02) (787)t              (190)t        (54)           (.52)   (183)t
           R2 = .621; DW = 2.350; F(4,97) = 1.856
or, if only >'i is allowed to enter the equation:

(37) E = 28.80 + .737E + .013Y i
         (3.23) (1112)t  (724)t

        R2 .594; DW = 2.340; F(1,100) =                .534

In both (36) and (37), the null hypothesis that all lagged y's can be excluded cannot be
rejected. In this case, the failure to reject characterizes both the equation for the
number of cars and the equation for average expenditure per car:
                                             —24—




(38) C = 22.02 + .978C           - .043Y      - .313Y                        - .223Y
                                                       2 + .604Y
         (.24) (2844)t'           ( 18)         (-.93)     (178)t               (-.94)

           R2 .958; DW 1.970; F(4,97) = 1.295
(39) N = 952.4 + .75 iN + .796Y i - .338Y                2
                                                              + .280Y         - .795Y
        (3.65) (1 182)t1 (1.06)     (-.32)                        (.26)        (102)t
           R2 = .659;   OW 2.487; F(4,97) = 1.088

We conclude that lagged disposable income is of no use in predicting expenditures on
cars. In the case of (39) this is contrary to our model. A similar conclusion was
obtained by Hall, and also by Mankiw (1982), who tested Hall's hypothesis using data
on total expenditures on durable goods.
   Finally, we ask whether lagged wealth has any predictive power. In this case, the
answer is significantly yes (at a 1% level) for E and Nt, but barely so (significant at
10%, but not 5% level) for

(40) E 34.64 + .692E + .234Wt - .381W 2 + .330W                               - .182W
        (3.73) (1080)t1 (353)   (278)t    (241)t                               (269)t
           R2 = .657; DW 2.462; F(4,97) = 4.621

(41) C = 64.22 + .930C           + 1.300W         - 2.196W        + 1.483W          0.451W
                             1                1               2
         (.70) (22•10)t            (241)t           (198)t           (133)           (-.83)
           R2 = .960; OW = 1.924; F(4,97)             2.283

(42) N =   1213.6   + .738N + 4.828W                - 8.20W        + 7.243W        - 4.128W
                                                              2
           (4.30) (1252)t1          (2.97)          (244)t           (2.16)          (-2.49)
           R2 = .699; OW = 2.573; F(4,97)             4.480

which echoes Hall's finding. It is pretty clear that the strongest rejection of the PIH
comes from N, not from C.
   I hese results hardly can be said to support the (S,s) model. More exacting tests
of some of the implications mentioned in the previous section are necessary for that.
                                         —25—




But they are encouraging in that rejections of the simple PIH/LCH using data on
durables do seem to stern more from the behavior of       than from the behavior of
which is what our model predits.


V. SUMMARY

   We have presented here an extension of the life-cycle permanent-income model of
consumption to the case of a durable good whose purchase involves lumpy transactions
costs. The micro-theoretic foundation of the model is a particular application of
what might be called "the general optimality of doing nothing" in that fixed costs of
decisionmaking generally make it optimal to make large changes in behavior at
sporadic intervals, but to do nothing most of the time.
   Where individual behavior is concerned, the implications of the model match those
of the PIH/LCH in some respects, but not in others. Specifically, rather than choose

an optimal th for the service flow from durables, the optimizing consumer will
choose an optimal range and try to keep his service flow inside that range. When the
durable good deteriorates to the bottom of the range, s, he will buy enough to restore
the stock to the top of the range, S; he will not "partially adjust" toward some
"desired level" of the durable stock. The (S,s) range itself, however, evolves
precisely as prescribed by the PIH/LCH, as does the consumption of nondurable goods
and services. The model naturally integrates replacement and expansion investment
in a unified framework, and also automatically takes account of the opportunities to
postpone or advance purchases that may make expenditures on durables so volatile.
   Because there is no "representative consumer" in the (S,s) model, aggregation is
more difficult than in the standard PIH/LCH. Building from microfoundations to
macro aggregates suggests separate treatment of the number of durable goods
                                          —26—




purchased   and th purchase size. According to the theory, the latter follows the
implications of the PIH. The former displays higher-order dynamics and a potentially
huge short-r-tr elasticity to changes in permanent income (despite a long-run
elasticity of unity).
   Empirical tests of the sort suggested by Hall (i978), carried out on quarterly
data on new purchases of automobiles by U.S. consumers, generally produce results
that are in line with the predictions of the theory. In particular, the time series
behavior of the number of cars purchased differs substantially (and in the predicted
way) from that of the average purchase size. However, these are not very powerful
tests for discriminating between the (S,s) model and the stock adjustment model.
Much more detailed empirical work is necessary before anyone can really say that
the data support or reject the (S,s) model.
                                         —27—




                                       Footnotes
1For purposes of this paper, the differences between the life cycle hypothesis (LCH)
and the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) are inconsequential.

7There is much confusion on this point. If population is constant and the age
distribution is uniform, then the LCH/PIH implies that aggregate consumption is
constant regardless of the time profile of individual consumption, that is, regardless
of r and a.

3mis section is an exterition of earlier work by Flemming (1969).

4For the proof, see Bar-han (1985). The consumption plan depends also on the
initial durable stock. The solution stated in Theorem I and described in Figure I
holds when the consumer adjusts his initial stock immediately to level S. This will
be the case, for example, when the initial stock is zero. However, if the initial stock
is different from zero, there is a possibility that the optimal policy is not to
purchase anything for some time. In this case the first holding period may be
different from the other periods. Hence property (ii), Theorem 1, holds only after
the first purchase of durables had been made.

51n an uncertainty model an innovation to permanent income will induce a consumer

to advance his purchase and spend more on durables. Both of these effects will be
larger the more permanent the income shock.

6However, in practice analytical solutions for S and s are hard to obtain; so
implementing these features analytically is difficult.

7Either immediately, by making a durable transaction, or by letting their "excessive"
durable stock depreciate to the new region.
                                          —28—




       =0
 8Nt        when t/(1-6) <sri
       is depicted in Fig I by the difference between the per and lower envelope
 curves. Since both curves grow at the same rate, this is also the growth rate of C.
 Notice that unlike the discrete purchasing behavior of a specific consumer,       is
 observed every period and its growth path is continuous, i.e. the predictions of the
 PIH hold each period and not only right after a purchasing by a specific individual (as
 was the case in the former section).

 10The convergence is gauranteed when the depreciation is stochastic. For a more

 rigorous analysis of the dynamics in the case of stochastic depreciation see Bar-Ilan
 (1985).
  1
        stock-adjustment model can also produce a large short- income elasticity,
though For very different reasons. In the SA model, the short-run elasticity arises
from the stock/flow distinction; each consumer's flow rate of expenditure depends on
his desired stock, and the desired stock may be very large relative to the flow of
expenditures. In the (S,s) model, the high short-run elasticity arises naturally from
the postponement/advancement decision.

        is very similar to the explanation given by Bus (1985) to the counteroyclical
aggregation bias in computing average real wage. Since the income of low income
people is most volatile, they should be weighted highly in studying the cyclical
behavior of wages, not given the low (or even zero, when they are unemployed) weight
assigned to them automatically by their income.

13The data are unpublished and were kindly furnished by the bureau of Economic

analysis. The period of observation is 1958:1 through 1984:3, and all data are
                                        —29—



seasonally adjusted. C is average expenditure per new car purchased by consumers.
Nt is retail sales of new passenger cars to consumers (business and government

expenditures are excluded). E is the product CtNt.
                                       —30—




                                    References


Abel, A.B., "Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative Framework," in K.
Bruriner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.) On the State of Macro-economics, Carnegie-
Rochester Series on Public Policy, 1980.
Akerlof, G.A., "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84, 488-500.
Bar-Han, A., "Optimal Decision Rules and Fixed Transactions Costs," unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation, Princeton University, 1985.
Bernanke, B., "Adjustment Costs, Durables and Aggregate Consumption," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1985, 13, 4 1-68.
Bus, M.J., "Real Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,"
Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93, 666-689.
Deaton, A.S. and J. Muellbauer, Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge
University Press, 1980.
Flavin, M.A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
Income," Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89, 974-1009.
Flemming, J.S., "The Utility of Wealth and the Utility of Windfalls," Review of
Economic Studies, 1969, 36, 55-66.
Friedman, M. A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University Press,
1957.

Hall, R.E., "Stocastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86, 97 1-987.
Holt, C.C., F. Modigliani, J. Muth and H. Simon, Planning Production, Inventories and
Work Force, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1960.
Lancaster, K., Variety, Equity, and Efficiency, Columbia University Press, 1979.
Mankiw, N.G., "Hall's Consumption Hypotheis and Durable Goods," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1982, 10, 417-425.
Modigliani, F. and R.E. Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function:
An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in Post-Keynesian Economics, edited by
K.K. Kurihara, Rutgers University Press, 1954.
</ref_section>
