                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DIVERSIFICATION THROUGH TRADE

                                          Francesco Caselli
                                            Miklós Koren
                                           Milan Lisicky
                                          Silvana Tenreyro

                                        Working Paper 21498
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21498


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2015




For helpful comments and conversations, we would like to thank Costas Arkolakis, Fernando Broner,
Ariel Burstein, Lorenzo Caliendo, Julian DiGiovanni, Bernardo Guimaraes, Nobu Kiyotaki, Pete Klenow,
David Laibson, Fabrizio Perri, Steve Redding, Ina Simonovska, Jaume Ventura, Romain Wacziarg,
and seminar participants at Bocconi, Birmingham, CREI, Princeton, Penn, Yale, NYU, UCL, LBS,
LSE, Toulouse, Warwick, as well as participants at SED, ESSIM, and Nottingham trade conference.
Calin Vlad Demian, Federico Rossi, and Peter Zsohar provided superb research assistance. Caselli
acknowledges financial support from the Luverlhume Fellowship. Koren acknowledges financial support
from the European Research Council (ERC) starting grant 313164. Tenreyro acknowledges financial
support from the ERC starting grant 240852. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Lisicky is a salaried
official of the European Commission. The content of this article does not reflect the official opinion
of the European Union.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Francesco Caselli, Miklós Koren, Milan Lisicky, and Silvana Tenreyro. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversification through Trade
Francesco Caselli, Miklós Koren, Milan Lisicky, and Silvana Tenreyro
NBER Working Paper No. 21498
August 2015
JEL No. E32,F4,F41,F44,F6,F62

                                              ABSTRACT

A widely held view is that openness to international trade leads to higher GDP volatility, as trade increases
specialization and hence exposure to sector-specific shocks. We revisit the common wisdom and argue
that when country-wide shocks are important, openness to international trade can lower GDP volatility
by reducing exposure to domestic shocks and allowing countries to diversify the sources of demand
and supply across countries. Using a quantitative model of trade, we assess the importance of the two
mechanisms (sectoral specialization and cross-country diversification) and provide a new answer to
the question of whether and how international trade affects economic volatility.


Francesco Caselli                                     Milan Lisicky
Department of Economics                               European Commission
London School of Economics                            Bruxelles - Belgium
Houghton Street                                       Milan.LISICKY@ec.europa.eu
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM                                        Silvana Tenreyro
and CEPR                                              London School of Economics
and also NBER                                         Department of Economics
f.caselli@lse.ac.uk                                   Houghton St, St. Clement's Building, S.600
                                                      London, WC2A 2AE
Miklós Koren                                          United Kingdom
Central European University                           S.Tenreyro@lse.ac.uk
Department of Economics
Nádor u. 9, 1051
Budapest Hungary
and CERS-HAS
and CEPR
korenm@ceu.edu
I        Introduction

An important question at the crossroads of macro-development and international economics

is whether and how openness to trade a¤ects macroeconomic volatility. A widely held view in

academic and policy discussions, which can be traced back at least to Newbery and Stiglitz

(1984), is that openness to international trade leads to higher GDP volatility. The origins

of this view are rooted in a large class of theories of international trade predicting that

openness to trade increases specialization. Because specialization (or lack of diversi…cation)

in production tends to increase a country’s exposure to shocks speci…c to the sectors (or

range of products) in which the country specializes, it is generally inferred that trade in-

creases volatility. This view seems present in policy circles, where trade openness is often

perceived as posing a trade-o¤ between the …rst and second moments (i.e., trade causes

higher productivity at the cost of higher volatility).1

        This paper revisits the common wisdom on two conceptual grounds. First, the paper

points out that the existing wisdom is strongly predicated on the assumption that sector-

speci…c shocks (hitting a particular sector) are the dominant source of GDP volatility. The

evidence, however does not support this assumption. Indeed, country-speci…c shocks (shocks

common to all sectors in a given country) are at least as important as sector-speci…c shocks in

shaping countries’volatility patterns (e.g. Koren and Tenreyro, 2007). The …rst contribution

of this paper is to show analytically that when country-speci…c shocks are an important

source of volatility, openness to international trade can lower GDP volatility. In particular,

openness reduces a country’s exposure to domestic shocks, and allows it to diversify its
    1
    See for example the report on “Economic openness and economic prosperity: trade and investment
analytical paper” (2011), prepared by the U.K. Department of International Development.



                                                2
sources of demand and supply, leading to potentially lower overall volatility. This is true as

long as the volatility of shocks a¤ecting trading partners are not too big, or the covariance

of shocks across countries is not too large. In other words, we show that the sign and size of

the e¤ect of openness on volatility depends on the variances and covariances of shocks across

countries.

   The paper furthermore questions the mechanical assumption that higher sectoral special-

ization per se leads to higher volatility. Indeed, whether GDP volatility increases or decreases

with specialization depends on the intrinsic volatility of the sectors in which the economy

specializes in, as well as on the covariance among sectoral shocks and between sectoral and

country-wide shocks.

   We make these points in the context of a quantitative, multi-sector, stochastic model of

trade and GDP determination. The model builds on a variation of Eaton and Kortum (2002),

Alvarez and Lucas (2006), and Caliendo and Parro (2012), augmented to allow for country-

speci…c, and sector-speci…c shocks. In each sector, production combines equipped labour with

a variety of tradable inputs. Producers source tradable inputs from the lowest-cost supplier

(where supply costs depend on the supplier’s productivity as well as trade costs), after

productivity shocks have been realized. This generates the potential for trade to “insure”

against shocks, as producers can redirect input demand to countries experiencing positive

supply shocks. However, (equipped) labor must be allocated to sectors before productivity

shocks are realized. This friction allows us to capture the traditional specialization channel,

because it reduces a country’s ability to respond to sectoral shocks by reallocating resources

to other sectors.

   We use the model in conjunction with sector-level production and bilateral trade data

                                               3
for a diverse group of countries to quantitatively assess how changes in trading costs since

the early 1970s have a¤ected GDP volatility.2 The quantitative exercise uses as inputs the

stochastic properties of country-speci…c sectoral productivity shocks, which we back out from

the model on the basis of sector-level data on gross output, value added, and bilateral trade

‡ows data. To assess the e¤ect of changes in trade barriers since the 1970s we also back out

country-and-sector speci…c paths of trade costs.

      We …nd that the decline in trade costs since the 1970s has caused sizeable reductions in

GDP volatility in two-thirds of the countries in our sample, while it led to modest increases

in volatility in the other third. The range of changes in volatility varies signi…cantly across

countries, with Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium-Luxembourg, and Norway experiencing

the largest reductions in volatility and Greece and Italy experiencing the biggest increases.

The general decline in volatility due to trade is the net result of the two di¤erent mechanisms

discussed above, sectoral specialization, and country-wide diversi…cation. The country-wide

diversi…cation mechanism contributed to lower volatility in 90 percent of the countries in

our sample, indeed suggesting that there is scope for diversi…cation through trade. Equally

interestingly, and against conventional wisdom, higher sectoral specialization does not always

lead to higher volatility: Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, India, the Netherlands, Norway,

South Korea, and Sweden, all experienced a decline in volatility due to the trade-induced

change in sectoral specialization. For three-quarters of the countries, however, the sectoral-

specialization channel contributed to increase volatility. As with the overall net e¤ect of

trade on volatility, the relative importance of the two mechanisms we highlight varies across
  2
    The data are disaggregated into 24 sectors. We stop the analysis in 2007 as our model abstracts from
the factors underlying the …nancial crisis.




                                                   4
countries, though the e¤ect of the specialization mechanism is on average smaller than the

e¤ect of the diversi…cation mechanism.

   To summarize, our study challenges the standard view that trade increases volatility.

It highlights a new mechanism (country diversi…cation) whereby trade can lower volatility.

It also shows that the standard mechanism of sectoral specialization— usually deemed to

increase volatility— can in certain circumstances lead to lower volatility. The analysis indi-

cates that diversi…cation of country-speci…c shocks has generally led to lower volatility during

the period we analyze, and has been quantitatively more important than the specialization

mechanism.

   As the model and quantitative results illustrate, openness to trade does not always causes

an unambiguous e¤ect on volatility: the sign and size of the e¤ect varies across countries.

This result might partly explain why direct empirical evidence on the e¤ect of openness on

volatility has yielded mixed results. Some studies …nd that trade decreases volatility (e.g.,

Cavallo, 2008, Strotmann, Döpke, and Buch, 2006, Burgess and Donaldson, 2015, Parinduri,

2011), while others …nd that trade increases it (e.g., Rodrik, 1998, Easterly, Islam, and

Stiglitz, 2000, Kose, Prasad, and Terrones, 2003, and di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2009).

The model-based analysis can circumvent the problem of causal identi…cation faced by many

empirical studies, allowing for counterfactual exercises that isolate the e¤ect of trade costs

on volatility. Moreover, it can cope with highly heterogenous trade e¤ects across countries.

   Before proceeding, we should emphasize that we focus the analysis on GDP volatility

because for most countries in the world, GDP and consumption ‡uctuations are almost

perfectly correlated. Hence, accounting for GDP volatility goes a long way in accounting



                                               5
for consumption volatility (see Figures 1 and 2).3 Accordingly, in the modeling section, we

abstract from …nancial trade in assets.4

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the literature.

Section III presents the model and solves analytically for two special cases, autarky and

costless free trade. Section IV introduces the data, calibration, and quantitative results.

Section V presents concluding remarks. The Appendix contains further derivations and a

detailed description of the datasets used in the paper.




Figure 1: Volatility (standard deviation ) of Annual per capita GDP Growth and Annual per
capita Consumption Growth. The data come from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators 1970–2007.

   3
     Figure 1 shows the volatilities of per capita consumption and GDP. Figure 2 shows the volatilities of
aggregate consumption and GDP.
   4
     There is an obvious analogy between diversi…cation through trade in goods and diversi…cation through
trade in …nancial assets. However, trade in assets stabilizes consumption, not GDP (indeed, trade in assets
might increase GDP volatility, as capital would tend to ‡ow to high productivity countries and amplify
productivity shocks), whereas in contrast, trade in goods stabilizes GDP— and as a by-product, also con-
sumption. Given the patterns in Figure 1, there appears to be limited asset diversi…cation across countries.


                                                     6
Figure 2: Volatility (standard deviation) of Aggregate Annual GDP Growth and Aggregate
Annual Consumption Growth. The data come from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators 1970–2007.




II    Literature Review

A number of empirical studies have exploited variation across countries to study the e¤ects

of trade openness on volatility. Some studies, most notably Rodrik (1998), Easterly, Islam,

and Stiglitz (2000), Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003) …nd that trade openness increases

volatility, while others, including Haddad, Lim and Saborowski (2010), Cavallo (2008), and

Bejan (2006) …nd that trade openness decreases volatility. Di Giovanni and Levchenko

exploit variation across countries and across sectors, concluding that trade openness leads

to higher volatility. Strotmann, Döpke, and Buch (2006) exploit variation across …rms in



                                            7
Germany and infer that exposure to international trade increases …rm-level and aggregate

volatility. While the use of sector- or …rm-level data allows researchers to control for a

number of country-speci…c determinants of volatility, omitted-variable biases at lower levels

of aggregation, reverse causality, and possibly heterogenous e¤ects of trade openness across

countries remain important concerns.5

       To understand the causal e¤ect of trade openness on volatility, we build on a variation of

the theoretical model formulated by Eaton and Kortum (2002), further extended by Alvarez

and Lucas (2006) and Caliendo and Parro (2012). The model is amenable to quantitative

calibration and has proven useful at replicating trade ‡ows and production patterns across

countries. Variations of this model have been used to address a number of questions in

international economics— questions related to the e¤ects of trade on the “…rst moments”of

domestic or foreign productivity, but not the trade e¤ects on countries’aggregate volatility.

For example, Hsieh and Ossa (2011) study the spillover e¤ects of China’s growth on other

countries; di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Zhang (2014) study the global welfare impact of

China’s trade integration and technological change; Levchenko and Zhang (2013) investigate

the impact of trade with emerging countries on labour markets; Burstein and Vogel (2012)

and Parro (2013) study the e¤ect of international trade on the skill premium; Caliendo,

Rossi-Hansberg, Parro, and Sarte (2013) study the impact of regional productivity changes

on the U.S. economy, and so on. None of these applications, however, focuses on the impact

of openness to trade on volatility. The closest paper to ours, both on question and mod-

elling framework, is Burgess and Donaldson (2012), who use the Eaton-Kortum model in
   5
    Trade is by no means the only determinant of volatility. For studies of other determinants of volatility,
see Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003), Raddatz (2006), Koren and Tenreyro (2007, 2011, 2013), Berrie,
Bonomo and Carvalho (2013), and the references therein.


                                                     8
conjunction with data on the expansion of railroads across regions in India to assess whether

real income became more or less sensitive to rainfall shocks, as India’s regions became more

open to trade. The authors …nd that the decline in transportation costs lowered the impact

of productivity shocks on real income, implying a reduction in volatility. Our analysis high-

lights that, while a reduction in volatility has been experienced by many countries as they

became more open to trade, the size and sign of the trade e¤ect on volatility may be— and

indeed has been— di¤erent across di¤erent countries.6;7

       Our results also relate to Wacziarg and Wallack (2004), who empirically study 25 episodes

of trade liberalizations and …nd a relatively small extent of labour reallocation across sec-

tors. Though the authors do not analyze volatility patterns, their results are consistent

with our …nding that, on average, the sectoral-specialization channel tends to be of limited

quantitative importance; our results, however, point out to signi…cant heterogeneity in the

e¤ects, indicating that the sectoral specialization channel played an important role in certain

countries, most notably Italy and the Netherlands.

       Our paper is also related to the seminal contribution of Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland

(1992). The authors show that in a real-business-cycle setting, GDP volatility is higher in

the open economy than in the closed economy, as capital inputs are allocated to production

in the country with the most favorable technology shock. In other words, GDP ‡uctuations

are ampli…ed in an open economy. (In contrast, consumption volatility decreases in the
   6
      Though similar in question and modelling framework, the quantiative approach carried out in our paper
is very di¤erent from that adopted for India by Burgess and Donaldson (2012).
    7
      See also Donaldson (2015), where the question also is addressed in the context of India’s railroad ex-
pansion. There is also a growing literature on the e¤ect of globalization on income risk and inequality. We
do not focus on distributional e¤ects within countries in this paper, though it is obviously a very important
issue, and a natural next step in our research. For theoretical developments in that area, see for example,
Anderson (2011) and the references therein.



                                                     9
open economy, as …nancial markets allow countries to smooth the impact of GDP shocks on

consumption; this result generates a large cross-country correlation of consumption relative

to the cross-country correlation of output, which, as the authors point out, is not borne out

by the data.) In our multi-country, multi-sector setting, instead, GDP volatility can— and

often does— decrease with openness, as intra-temporal trade in inputs allows countries with

less favorable productivity shocks to source inputs from abroad, thus reducing GDP (as well

as consumption) volatility.8 Also related is the empirical literature initiated by Frankel and

Rose (1998), who documented a strong correlation between bilateral trade ‡ows and GDP

comovements between pairs of countries. Our main focus in this paper is on the causal e¤ect

of trade on volatility— and the channels mediating this e¤ect— but the quantitative approach

we follow in our counterfactual exercise can potentially be extended to also identify the causal

e¤ect of trade on bilateral comovement— and indeed, other higher-order moments. We keep

the focus on volatility, which is our main motivation, and speak to the perennial question of

how trade might a¤ect it.9

       Readers of Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) may wonder whether changes in terms of trade caused

by (broadly construed) foreign productivity shocks a¤ect measured real GDP— and hence

real GDP volatility. In the Appendix we explain that this is indeed the case, given the way

in which statistical o¢ ces construct real GDP measures in practice.
   8
     A number of papers have tried to address the comovement “anomaly” pointed out by Backus, Kehoe,
and Kydland (1992), that is, the result that cross-country consumption correlations increase vis-à-vis cross
output correlations in the open economy; see, for example, Stockman and Tesar (1995). In this paper, we
focus on the e¤ect of trade on output volatility and refer readers interested in the comovement puzzle to the
complementary literature.
   9
     For studies on the e¤ect of bilateral trade on bilateral comovement, see Kose and Yi (2001), Arkolakis
and Ramanarayanan (2008), and the references therein.




                                                     10
III     A Model of Trade with Stochastic Shocks

The baseline model builds on a multi-sector variation of Eaton and Kortum (2002), Alvarez

and Lucas (2006), and Caliendo and Parro (2012), augmented to allow for stochastic shocks,

as well as frictions to the allocation of non-produced (and non-traded) inputs across sectors.



A     Model Assumptions

The world economy is composed of N countries. At a given point in time t, each country n is

endowed with Lnt units of a primary (non produced) input, which we interpret as equipped

labour. There are J sectors (or broad classes of goods) in the economy, whose output is

combined into a …nal good through a Cobb-Douglas aggregate. In formulas, aggregate gross

output in the economy is given by:


                                                       Y
                                                       J
                                                                             j
                                            Qnt =             Qjnt                                            (1)
                                                       j=1


                                                         PJ
where Qjt is the gross output in sector j and                 j=1
                                                                         j
                                                                             = 1. Competitive …rms in each sector

j produce a composite good according to the following constant-elasticity-of-substitution

(CES) technology:
                                             Z    1                               1
                                                                     1
                                 Qjnt   =             qnt (! j )         d! j                                 (2)
                                              0


where qnt (! j ) is the quantity of good ! j used by country n in sector j at time t, and                  > 0 is

the elasticity of substitution across goods within a given sector. The intermediate goods ! j

can be produced locally or imported from other countries. Delivering a good from country
                                                                                       j
n to country m in sector j and time period t results in 0 <                            mnt    1 goods arriving at


                                                         11
                        j          j   j                              j
m; we assume that       mnt        mkt knt     8m; n; k; j; t and     nnt   = 1. All costs incurred are net

losses.10 Under the assumption of perfect competition, goods are sourced from the lowest-

cost producer, after adjusting for transport costs. The technology for producing qnt (! j ) is

given accordingly by the country of origin (m) with the lowest cost (with m = n when the

good is produced locally):


                                                                  j               j
                              xmt (! j ) = Ajmt zm (! j )lmt (! j ) Mmt (! j )1                            (3)



where xmt (! j ) is the production of good ! j by country m at time t, Mmt (! j ) is the amount

of the aggregate composite good used by country m to produce xmt (! j ) units of good ! j and

lmt (! j ) is the corresponding amount of equipped labour. Total factor productivity (TFP)

levels vary across countries, sectors, and goods. Speci…cally, each intermediate good ! j in

sector j of country n has a time-invariant idiosyncratic productivity factor zn (! j ) and a time-

varying factor Ajnt common to all the goods ! j in sector j. Building on the literature, we

assume the productivities zn (! j ) follow a sector-speci…c, time-invariant Fréchet distribution

Fnj (z) = exp( Tnj z ). A higher Tnj shifts the distribution of productivities to the right,

that is leading to probabilistically higher productivities. A higher                  decreases the dispersion

of the productivity distribution, and hence reduces the scope for comparative advantage.

Shocks to Ajnt over time are interpreted as standard sectoral total factor productivity (TFP)

shocks.

   The single …nal good can be used both as input in the production of intermediaries ! j
  10
     In the calibration, the s will re‡ect all trading costs, including tari¤s; so implicitly we adopt the
extreme assumption that tari¤ revenues are wasted— or at least not rebated back to agents in a way that
would interact with the allocation of resources in the economy.




                                                       12
or for …nal consumption, Cnt . Hence, market clearing in the good markets implies:


                                                   J Z
                                                   X             1
                                 Qnt = Cnt +                         Mnt (! j )d! j ;
                                                   j=1       0




where the integral aggregates over the unit-size continuum of goods ! j entering in the pro-

duction of each sector’s j aggregate good.

       Clearing in the input market within a sector implies:


                                                   Z   1
                                        Ljnt   =           lnt (! j )d! j ;
                                                   0




where lnt (! j ) denotes the amount of equipped labour used in the production of good ! j by
                                                                                        PJ
country n. The (equipped) labour allocated to each sector, Ljnt ; with                   k=1   Lknt = Lnt , are

determined ex ante (before the realization of the shocks). Speci…cally, we assume there is

perfect risk-sharing within a country, but no risk-sharing across countries.11 At the beginning

of each period, a representative consumer decides on the optimal allocation of the primary

input Lnt into di¤erent sectors in order to maximize the expected value of utility; then

(stochastic) shocks to productivity Ajnt are realized, equipped labour is reallocated within

a sector (but not across sectors), and production and consumption take place. The lack of

ex-post reallocation across sectors in a given period aims at capturing the idea that in the

short run, it is costly to reallocate productive factors across sectors. Hence, ex post, Ljt is

…xed until t + 1:12
  11
    To motivate the lack of risk-sharing across countries, see our discussion of Figures 1 and 2.
  12
    In the quanti…cation, a period will be one year. This amounts to assuming that it takes at least one
year for resources to be reallocated across sectors.




                                                       13
   The representative consumer’s budget constraint in each period is:


                                                                X
                                                                J
                                                                           j
                                             Pnt Cnt =                    wnt Ljnt ;
                                                                j=1



                                                   j
where Pnt is the price of the aggregate good (1), wnt Ljnt is the nominal value-added generated

in sector j. Lifetime utility is given by


                                                           X
                                                           1
                                                                     t
                                                 Un =                    u(Cnt );
                                                           t=0



where u0 > 0, u00        0 and      is the discount factor. Because there is no intertemporal

trade and no capital in the economy, each period consumers maximize the expected static

utility ‡ow E [u (Cnt )] and the equilibrium is simply a sequence of static equilibria (in the

quantitative section, we allow for trade imbalances). In making his labor allocation decisions

the representative consumer takes into account the joint probability distribution function of

sectoral productivities, Ajnt s.

   In the analysis, we assume log utility and therefore the consumer solves:

                                        "         PJ           j
                                                                             !#
                                                          j=1wnt Ljnt                          XJ
                Ljnt = arg max Et   1       ln                                      ; s:t: :            Ljnt = Lnt ;   (4)
                                                            Pnt                                   j=1




where Et   1   indicates that the expectation is taken before the realization of period t shocks.

This maximization problem leads to the following …rst-order conditions for the allocation of

inputs to sectors:
                                                      "              #
                               Ljnt                          j
                                                           wnt Ljnt
                                    = Et          1       P k k ;                        8j; t:                        (5)
                               Lnt                         k wnt Lnt




                                                                14
In words, the share of resources allocated to a given sector equals its expected share in value
                                                           P        k k
added. To gain intuition on this expression note that 1=       k   wnt Lnt is the marginal utility of

consumption in period t; thus, more resources are allocated to higher value-added sectors,

after appropriately weighting by marginal utility. Consider, for further intuition, a (small)

sector whose productivity is negatively correlated with the rest of the economy (that is, it has

high value added when the rest of the economy has low value added); in states of the world
                                                                                 P      k k
in which overall income is low, the marginal utility of consumption 1=             k   wnt Lnt will be

high and hence the optimal allocation entails allocating more resources to this sector. (Log-

linearizing this expression makes the role of second moments on the allocation of resources

clearer.) In the closed economy, the value-added share is pinned down by the Cobb–Douglas

              j   j
coe¢ cients           , as with Cobb-Douglas technology there is no variation on expenditures

(and sales) shares— and log-utility implies the shares determine the sectoral allocation of

resources. (In the open economy this result no longer holds as a country’s sectoral shares

depend on its absolute and comparative advantage as well as trading costs vis-à-vis other

countries.



B    Model Solution

We …rst discuss the solution under autarky, and then turn to the solution under free trade.


Solution under Autarky We solve the model backwards in two stages. First, we solve

the model taking the sectoral allocation of nonproduced inputs Ljt as …xed. We then solve

for the ex-ante optimal Lj0
                         t s before the shocks are realized. In the analysis of the autarky


case, we omit the country-speci…c subscripts n for convenience.


                                                15
    The demand for each sector’s composite good is given by

                                                                                     !       1
                                                                               Ptj
                                                       Qjt   =         j
                                                                       t                         Qt ;                                            (6)
                                                                               Pt


and the demand for each intermediate good ! j is


                                                                           pt (! j )
                                                   qt (! j ) =                                    Qjt ;
                                                                             Ptj


where
                                                              Z    1                                    1
                                                                                                            1


                                                 Ptj   =               pt (! )  j 1
                                                                                         d!       j
                                                                                                                                                 (7)
                                                               0


is the aggregate price index in sector j, and the economy-wide price index is given by:


                                                               Y
                                                               J
                                                                           j
                                                                                 j                 j
                                                                                       Ptj
                                                                                 t                 t
                                                       Pt =                t                           :                                         (8)
                                                               j=1



The demand for non-produced inputs lt (! j ) and produced inputs Mt (! j ) are given, respec-
                          j pt (! j )qt (! j )                                               j pt (! j )qt (! j )
tively, by ltj (! j ) =            wtj
                                                 and Mt (! j ) = (1                           )       Pt
                                                                                                                  :       Aggregating over all goods

! j in a given sector, we obtain

                                                             wtj Ljt =          j
                                                                                     Ptj Qjt                                                     (9)


and, correspondingly, Pt Mtj = (1                       j
                                                            )Ptj Qjt : Using the input demand functions and the zero

pro…t condition the autarky prices of intermediate goods are given by:


                                                                                                            j
                                                                                         1                            j
                                     pt (! j ) = B j Ajt z(! j )                                 wtj            Pt1       ;                     (10)




                                                                           16
                           j                         j
                 j                     j
where B j =                    (1          )   (1        )
                                                             . Using (10) and the properties of the Fréchet distribution,

we can express the sectoral price index as:


                                                    h                                 1   i   1            j                 j
                                           Ptj = B j Ajt                    Tj                      wtj        Pt1                                       (11)


                     +1
where      =                        ; and           is the gamma function. Using (6), (9), and (8) we obtain real

GDP:
                                                    X
                                                    J
                                                      wtj Ljt               Y
                                                                            J                         j                    j j

                                      Yt =                              =         Rj Ajt                   Ljt                   ;                       (12)
                                                    j=1
                                                               Pt           j=1


                PJ         j    j                     QJ                j   j
                                                                                      j j                  j                     j

where       =    j=1                and Rj /                  j=1                              (B j )          (T j )                is a time-invariant prod-

uct.

       We can now move one step backward and solve for the allocation of the primary input
                                                                                                                   j   j
across sectors, Ljt ; j = 1; :::; J. From (4) and (5), Ljt =                                                               Lt .13 Substituting into (12),

GDP is given by:
                                                                                              j j
                                                             Y
                                                             J                    j                            j

                                               Yt =                Rj       j
                                                                                                     Ajt               Lt                                (13)
                                                             j=1


In words, GDP varies with ‡uctuations in sectoral productivity, Ajt , and aggregate resources,

Lt :


Solution with International Trade The key di¤erence in the internationally open econ-

omy is that inputs can potentially be sourced from di¤erent countries. Delivering a unit of
                       j   j
  13
       The FOC are             E[u0 (Ct )Ct ] = Ljt where                   is the multiplier for the resource constraint.




                                                                                17
good ! j produced in country m to country n costs:

                                                                                   j            j
                                                                     j                  1
                                                                B j wmt                Pmt
                                         pjnmt (! j )       =
                                                                 Ajmt    j        j
                                                                         nmt zm (! )


                  j         j
           j           1
where B j wmt         Pmt       is the cost of the input bundle in country of origin m, sector j, at time

t. Because of perfect competition, the price paid in country n, denoted pnt (! j ), will be the

minimum price across all N potential trading partners: pjnt (! j ) = min pjnmt (! j ); m = 1; :::; N :

Producers of the aggregate good in (1) minimize production costs taking prices as given.

We assume the distribution of e¢ ciencies for any good ! j in sector j and country n are

independent across countries and sectors and follow a time-invariant Fréchet distribution:

Fnj (z) = exp( Tnj z ): Under this assumption, the distribution of prices in sector j of coun-

try n, conditional on Ajmt          m=1;:::N
                                                  is given by Gjnt (p)jfAj g = Pr(Pnt
                                                                                   j
                                                                                      < p) = 1 exp                  j
                                                                                                                    nt p
                                                                         t
                                              j
                                                       !
                                                        j
        j        PN    j
                                       j
                                 B j (wmt )        1
                                                  Pmt
where   nt   =    m=1 Tm             Ajmt     j                 . Given that there is a continuum of ! j in each
                                              nmt


sector, by the law of large numbers the probability that country m provides a good in sector

j at the lowest price in country n equals the fraction of goods that country n buys from

country m in sector j:
                                                                              j
                                                                                            !
                                                                      j            1    j
                                                                B j (wmt )        Pmt
                                                        Tmj         Ajmt     j
                                                                             nmt
                                       djnmt       =                     j                                           (14)
                                                                         nt


that is, djnmt is the fraction of country n’s total spending on sector-j goods from country m

at time t. The equilibrium in the open economy can be de…ned as following.

   Equilibrium De…nition.                         An equilibrium in the open economy is de…ned as a set

of resource allocations          Ljnt , import shares                   djnit , prices fPnt g,       j
                                                                                                    Pnt , and fwnj g such

that, given technology Ajit ; Titj ; aggregate endowments fLnt g and trading costs                                   j
                                                                                                                     int



                                                                 18
i) consumers maximize expected utility, ii) …rms minimize costs and, iii) markets for goods

and inputs clear, and iv) trade is balanced. In equilibrium, prices and quantities satisfy

(15)-(21):
                                                                             j
                                                   Y
                                                   J
                                                                   1               j
                                                                                               j
                                          Pnt =                    j              Pnt                                    (15)
                                                       j           n


                                                    j                      j 1=
                                                   Pnt =                   nt                                            (16)
                                                                             2                               j
                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                           j
                                                X
                                                N
                                                                              P1                   witj
                           j
                           nt   = Bj                   Tij Ajit              4 it                                5       (17)
                                                                                               j
                                                i=1                                            nit


                                                                     1       j    j   j
                                                                    Pmt          wmt
                                (B j )    Tmj Ajmt                          j                          X
                                                                                                       N
                                                                            nmt
                   djnmt   =                               j                                       ;         djnmt = 1   (18)
                                                           nt                                          m=1

                                                       "                                           #
                    j
                                         X
                                         N
                                                                       1          j        j
                                                                                          wmt Ljmt
                   wnt Ljnt     =   j
                                               djmnt       j
                                                                +            j                       wmt Lmt             (19)
                                         m=1
                                                                                          wmt Lmt

                                                                   X
                                                                   J
                                                                             j
                                               wnt Lnt =                    wnt Ljnt                                     (20)
                                                                   j=1

                                                               "                               #
                                         Ljnt                               j
                                                                           wnt Ljnt
                                              = Et         1       PJ                                                    (21)
                                         Lnt                           k=1
                                                                                  k k
                                                                                 wnt Lnt

   Equations (15)–(17) show the equilibrium prices as a function of technology and input

costs resulting from …rms’cost minimization and consumers’maximization problems. The

…rst equation in (18) shows the value of goods from sector j bought by country n from

country m as a share of total spending on goods j by country n: The second equation says

that the sum of spending shares on goods j from all countries m by country n (including n

itself) add to 1, that is, imports plus domestic expenditures on goods j by country n, add up

to the overall spending value on goods j by country n: Equation (19) gives the value of total



                                                                19
sales accruing to the primitive factor in sector j of country n; it already incorporates the

balanced trade condition, i.e., total payments for goods ‡owing out of country m to the rest

of the world equal payments ‡owing in country m from the rest of the world.14 Equation (18)

expresses total value added in the economy as the sum of sectoral value added. (Real value

                                wnt Lnt
added is given by Ynt =          Pnt
                                        .)   Finally, (21) expresses the resource shares as a function of

expected shares, following the …rst order conditions in (5).

       The model can conceptually be solved backwards in two steps. First, for any given set

of values for Ljnt , the …rst …ve sets of equations can be solved for Pnt , wnt
                                                                             j     j
                                                                                , Pnt , djnmt as a
                      j
function of the       mnt s   and the augmented productivity factors de…ned as:


                                                     h           1=    j   i   j
                                          j
                                         Znt      Tnj Lnt Ajnt                     :                        (22)


                                                              Ljnt
Then in a …rst stage, we can solve for the shares             Lnt
                                                                   .       As seen, with log utility the solution

       Ljn
for    Ln
             simpli…es signi…cantly as it is the expected value of sectoral value-added shares; in

the implementation, we will use the data to help pin down these expectations.



C        Two Illustrative Cases: Autarky and Costless Trade

To illustrate the mechanism of diversi…cation through trade, we analyze a one-sector version

of the model (that is, the Eaton-Kortum model) under two extreme cases for which we have

closed-form analytical solutions for GDP: autarky and costless trade. We accordingly drop
                  PJ      j     PN PJ
  14
     In formulas, j=1 Xmt     = n=1 j=1 djnmt Xnt j          j
                                                    , where Xnt is total expenditure by country n on sector-j
goods. The right-hand side is the total demand by all N countries for goods produced in country m. The
left-hand side is the total expenditures by country m, which, under trade balance also equals its total sales.
                                                                                            j
Recall that Pm j
                 Qjm is the total purchases of goods from sector j by country m: Note Pmt      Qjmt , the total
                                                                                      j
                                                           j  j       j           1      j   j
purchases of goods from sector j by country m: Hence: Pmt Qmt = wmt Lmt + j wmt Lmt .




                                                        20
the sector subscripts.


C.1      Volatility under Autarky


Under complete autarky, value added in the one-sector economy is given by (13), which can

be rewritten as:
                                                                       1
                                              Ynt / (Znt )

                           1=
where Znt       Tn Lnt Ant        . Taking log-di¤erences around the mean (or trend value in the

empirics), we obtain,
                                                      1 ^
                                               Y^nt =   Znt :


Thus, in the one-sector economy under autarky, shocks to value added are driven exclusively

by domestic shocks to the productive capacity of the economy, Z^nt : The variance of GDP,

V (Y^nt ) thus depends on the variance of the shocks V (Z^nt ):


                                                             1
                                         V (Y^nt ) =                  V (Z^nt ):
                                                       (         )2


C.2      Volatility under Costless Trade


Under costless trade in the one-sector economy (                      nmt   = 1), GDP per capita simpli…es to:15

                                                                                    !1
                                                         1            X
                                                                      N         1
                                  Ynt = ( B)1= Znt     1+                     1+
                                                                            Zmt
                                                                      m=1

 15
      See derivations in the Appendix.




                                                        21
and hence GDP ‡uctuations are given by:

                                                        "                                      #
                                                                     1 X
                                                                       N
                                            1
                                   Y^nt =                   Z^n +                        ^
                                                                                        m Zm
                                          1+                             m=1


                     1
                  1+
                 Zm
where   m   =   PN       1   is the relative size of country j evaluated at the mean of Zj s. Rear-
                       1+
                 i=1 Zi

ranging, we obtain:
                                           "                                                           #
                                       1        +                    1              X
                                                                                    N
                             Y^nt =             n
                                                             Z^n +                           m Zm
                                                                                                   ^                               (23)
                                               1+                  1+              m6=n


Volatility under free trade is hence given by:

                                   8                                                                                    9
                                   >                2                        h           i2 P                           >
                                   >
                                  2<       n+
                                                        V ar(Z^nt ) +               1                      2      ^     >
                                                                                                                        =
                             1             1+                                     1+               m6=i    m V ar(Zmt )
        V ar(Y^nt ) =                                                                                                              (24)
                                   >
                                   >                                 P                                                >
                                                                                                                      >
                                   :                2   n+       1
                                                                             m6=n
                                                                                               ^ ^
                                                                                         m Cov(Zm; Zn )
                                                                                                                      ;
                                                        1+     1+




Compared to the variance in autarky, V (Y^nt ) =                     (
                                                                         1
                                                                             )2
                                                                                  V (Z^nt ), it is clear that the volatility

due to domestic productivity ‡uctuations, V ar(Z^nt ); now receives a smaller loading, as
        2
  n+
  1+
            < 1 since        n   < 1: The smaller the country (as gauged by its share                                       n ),   the

smaller the impact of domestic volatility of shocks, Z^n ; on its GDP, when compared to

autarky. Openness to trade, however, exposes the economy to other countries’productivity

shocks, which will also contribute to the country’s overall volatility. Whether or not the

gain in diversi…cation (given by lower exposure to domestic productivity) is bigger than the

increased exposure to new shocks depends on the variance-covariance matrix of shocks across

countries. If all countries have the same constant variance V ar(Z^nt ) = ; and the Z^nt are




                                                              22
uncorrelated, volatility under free trade becomes:

                                                          (                                                            )
                                               1
                                                      2
                                                                   +
                                                                                 2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                        2   X
                        V ar(Y^nt ) =                             n
                                                                                     +                             2
                                                                                                                   m          (25)
                                                                  1+                   1+                   m6=i



which is unambiguously lower than the volatility in autarky given that16


                                            +
                                                              2
                                                                         1
                                                                                     2   X
                                               n                                                   2
                                                                  +                                m   <1                     (26)
                                           1+                          1+                m6=i


                           PN          2
(recall     m    < 1 and       m=1     m           1). Of course, if other countries have higher variances or the

covariance terms are important, then the weights countries receive matter and the resulting

change in volatility cannot be unambiguously signed.




IV          Mapping the Model into Observables

In this section, we connect the model to the data and use it to quantitatively assess the

e¤ect of historical changes in trade barriers on GDP volatility for a diverse sample of 24

core countries and an aggregate of the remaining countries to which we refer as “rest of the

world”(ROW).

       The equilibrium of the model is characterized by equations (15)-(21). We solve the model
                                                                                                                              j
numerically, for which we need to calibrate the values of the exogenous trading costs                                         nmt ,

                          j                                                          j        j
the productivity process Znt , and the parameters                                        ,        , , and . We consider 24 sectors
  16              2                P       2
       since (   ) +2      n   +   j=1     j   < (1 +         )2 as
                                                                      X
                                                                            2
                                                      2       n   +         j   <2           +1
                                                                      j=1




                                                                        23
in the analysis (agriculture, 22 manufacturing sectors, and services). Throughout the study,
                                                           j                              j
services are treated as a nontradable sector (that is,     nmt   = 0 for all n 6= m and   nmt   =1

for n = m), whereas agriculture and all manufacturing sectors are treated as tradables, with

potentially di¤erent trading costs.

              j
   We set         so as to match the average share of each sector on total …nal uses in the OECD

Input-Output tables across all countries. The betas for each sector are calculated as the

ratio of value added to total output. A detailed description of the data and the calculations

are available in the Appendix.

   We allow for a relatively broad parametric range for , from          = 2 to   = 8; consistent

with the estimates in the literature (see Eaton and Kortum, 2003, Donaldson 2015, and

Simonovska and Waugh, 2011). We use            = 4 as the baseline case, and report the results

for other values when discussing the sensitivity of our results. We calibrate the elasticity of

substitution across varieties     = 2, consistent with Broda and Weinstein (2006). The results

are not sensitive to this parametric choice.
                                                            j
   We explain next how we obtain the processes for          nmt   and Zitj using data on sectoral

bilateral trade ‡ows, value added, output, and prices. Before we specify the details, a

quick intuition on how these series are backed-out from the model is as follows. We recover
              j
trade costs   nmt   using information on bilateral trade shares and gross output at the sectoral

level. Intuitively, if two countries trade little with one another in a given sector (relative to

the sectoral gross output of these countries), this will signal high trade costs between the

countries in that sector. Second, we recover productivities relative to a benchmark country

using the market share of each exporter. If a country has a high export share in a sector,

that is a sign of revealed comparative advantage, meaning a high relative productivity in the

                                                24
sector relative to the benchmark country. To calibrate the absolute level of productivities,

we use price data for a benchmark country. We explain the procedure in detail and with

formulas in the next section.



A    Implementation

Kappas In order to perform counterfactual experiments we need to back out the historical

realizations of the exogenous processes. Following the idea in Head and Ries (2011), we
                                                                         j         j
assume that sectoral bilateral trading costs are symmetric, that is:     nmt   =   mnt ,   and hence

bilateral trade costs at the sectoral level can be backed out from the data. Indeed, inverting

the structural model, we obtain:


                                    djnmt djmnt         j   2
                                                =       nmt          :                          (27)
                                    djmmt djnnt


The left hand side objects can be measured using data on bilateral imports and gross output

at the sectoral level. Speci…cally, djnmt is the value of exports from m to n in sector j at t

relative to total spending by n on sector j at time t, where total spending is measured as

gross output plus imports minus exports by that sector and country at time t: The share

djmmt is obtained as a residual from the accounting restriction:


                                                      X
                                                      N
                                    djmmt   =1               djmnt
                                                      n6=m



Hence, for a given value of , we can obtain the time series of trading costs by sector and
                 j
country-pairs    nmt   .


                                                 25
Productivity in Tradable Sectors To back out the productivities, we proceed as follows.

First, using the formula for djnm in equation (18), after some algebra, we obtain:

                                                             j                                      j
                                                       j
                                            (B j )     m
                                                                   j
                                                                  Zm (          j
                                                                                nm )
                                                                                           j
                                                                                         (ym )
                                 djnm =                                 j                               ,                           (28)
                                                                 Pm     n



        j     Ljm        j           Ljm wm
                                          j
                                                                                j
where   m     Lm
                    and ym             Pm
                                            .   We can exploit this to recover Zm : In particular, inverting

(28) we have:
                                                                                          !
                                                                                    j
                        j
                                                         j                         Pnt                               j
                       Zmt = Bj             djnmt ym
                                                   j              j
                                                                  nmt
                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                        mt                          (29)
                                                                                  Pmt

To approximate terms on the right hand side we use data on sectoral import shares djnmt ,

                      j                                    j
sectoral value added ym , sectoral shares                  mt ,   and aggregate prices Pnt along with the cal-

ibrated parameters. (See the Appendix for more details.) The only terms we cannot back

out directly from data are sectoral prices. We thus use the model in conjunction with the

data to infer them. Note …rst that equation (29) holds for all (n; k) pairs of countries and

all sectors j (except for services). The procedure becomes clear when we collect known and

unknown terms as follows:


                                                                            j                 j                  j
              j
             Znt =            B j djk;n;t    j
                                             k;n;t
                                                        j
                                                       wn;t Ljn;t                  j
                                                                                   n;t            Pn;t      (1       )    j
                                                                                                                         Pk;t
                         |                                  {z                                                   }
                                                                  j
                                                           exp(   k;n;t )


                                  j       j
                     = exp(       k;n;t )Pk;t                                                                                       (30)



Note in particular that this relationship holds for any choice of country k. Note also that
                    j                                                                                                           j
the factor exp(     k;n;t )   can be constructed from observable data. We decompose exp(                                        k;n;t )   =
 j   j
Znt Pk;t    according to the following procedure:


                                                             26
 1. Take logs and rename terms for brevity.


                                                       j             j        j
                                                       k;n;t   = ln Znt + ln Pk;t                                    (31)

                                                                       j          j
                                                                       nt   +     k;t                                (32)


                    j               j        j            j
       where        nt          ln Znt and   k;t      ln Pk;t .


 2. To proceed we need a benchmark country, so we use sectoral prices in the US.


                                                               j
                                                               U S;t           ln PUj S;t



       We choose units of accounts for each sector so that U.S. nominal sectoral prices are

       equal to 1 in 1972.

                     j
 3. Obtain           k;t    for all other countries as:


                                                      1 X
                                                         N
                                              j                        j            j               j
                                              k;t   =                  k;n;t        U S;n;t     +   U S;t            (33)
                                                      N n=1


                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                PN
       (Note that this equation holds with and without the averaging operator,                              N    n=1 ,   as
        j                j
        k;t   and        U S;t   do not depend on the exporter n.17 )

                           j
 4. Back-out               nt    for all other countries:


                                                               1 X
                                                                  N
                                                      j                         j             j
                                                      nt   =                    k;n;t         k;t                    (34)
                                                               N k=1

17
     We use the average in the quantitative analysis to minimize measurement error.




                                                                   27
  5. Recover shocks and prices:


                                                         j                     j
                                                        Zn;t = exp             nt                                                     (35)
                                                                                        !
                                                                                   j
                                                         j                         kt
                                                        Pk;t = exp                                                                    (36)



                                                                              j
   At the end of the procedure we end up with augmented productivity factors Zn;t and
                                                               j
sectoral prices for agriculture and all manufacturing sectors Pk;t .


Productivity in Nontradables To compute the productivities in the services sector for

each country, we use equilibrium equations (15), (16) and (28).


  1. As we already have sectoral prices of tradables we can use (15) to recover the price of

      services as follows:

                                                         1
                                                                                   !        1
                                                                                             s
                                                                                                 "                           #   1

                                        Pn;t              s    Y
                                                               J
                                                                               j                     Y        j
                                                                                                                         j
                                                                                                                                  s
                            s                                            j
                           Pn;t =              PU S;t                                                        Pn;t                     (37)
                                        PU S;t                 j=1                                   j6=s



      Note that we observe data on the price of country n relative to the price in the United
                 Pn;t
      States,   PU S;t
                       ,   from the Penn World Tables.

                     s
  2. Now we recover Zn;t using (16), (28), and n = m.

                                                                     s                                         s
                                                   s                                                    (1         )
                              s               s
                                                  wn;t Lsn;t                 Pn;t                                       s
                             Zn;t   =     B             s                           PU S;t                             Pn;t           (38)
                                                        n;t                  PU S;t




                                                               28
Sectoral versus Aggregate Shocks Note that the changes in productivity retrieved

above,
                                          1 ^j        1 ^j     ^
                                          j Zm         j Amt + Lmt ;                                   (39)


can be decompose into two factors: a sectoral factor,         1
                                                              j   A^jmt , and an aggregate factor L
                                                                                                  ^ mt . The

interpretation of Lmt as “equipped labour”means that it embeds a productivity component

too. Given the functional form, the split between pure productivity and resources in Lmt

is not relevant from the point of view of aggregate volatility. (A shock to Lmt will be
                                                                                                          0
equivalent to an aggregate shock to Ajmt s that leaves the relative productivities Ajmt =Ajmt

unchanged 8j; j 0 :) For identi…cation, we impose the restriction that


                                             X    j
                                                    ^j                                                 (40)
                                                  j Amt    = 0:



Thus, changes in the sectoral productivity will correspond to changes in the relative value

of Ajmt , while changes in aggregate productivity (a¤ecting all sectors equally), as well as

changes in overall resources, will be subsumed in Lmt . We hence call sectoral shocks, those

a¤ecting A^jmt and aggregate shocks those a¤ecting the aggregate factor L
                                                                        ^ mt . The identi-

…cation restriction implies that any primitive aggregate shock a¤ecting all sectors will be

             ^ mt :
collected in L


Summary of the Procedure We can summarize the procedure as follows.


   1. Obtain the inverse of trade costs, s, from (27).

                      j
   2. Compute         mt   as the sectoral value-added share at time t.


                                                      29
                                                                 j
   3. Retrieve the panel of sectoral and country productivities Zmt                           from the procedure

        described above.18


   4. Retrieve Lmt from (39) using (40) and compute Ljmt =                         j
                                                                                   mt Lmt :



   5. Solve the equilibrium values of djnit , fPnt g, Pnt
                                                       j
                                                          , and fwnj g using equations (15)

        through (20).


A.1      Counterfactual Equilibria


We discuss next how we compute the equilibrium in the counterfactual exercise and how we

identify the two theoretical mechanisms.


Numerical Counterfactual Equilibria For each new value of (inverse) trading cost ,
                                                       j
and the estimated sequence of sectoral productivities Zmt , we need to solve for the sequence

of equipped labour allocated to each sector Ljmt . The rational-expectations equilibrium is

a …xed point of a below mapping on the space of all possible sequences Ljmt . We proceed

as follows.


   1. We start from the initial value (Ljnt )0 =             j
                                                                 Lnt .


   2. In iteration i for the actual (Ljnt )i we get sectoral and aggregate (equipped labour)
                 j i
        wages, (wnt ) and (wnt )i , from the equilibrium equations.


   3. We calculate the implied total value added and the sectoral value added shares as

                                                        !i
                                              j
                                             wnt Ljnt            j i
                                                               (wnt ) (Ljnt )i
                                                             =                 :
                                             wnt Lnt            (wnt )i Lnt
 18
      Units of accounts are chosen so that nominal sectoral prices in the US in 1972 equal 1.

                                                        30
  4. (a) Decompose all N J value-added-share series into trend and cycle components

          using an annual band-pass …lter.

                                                    !i
                                          j
                                         wnt Ljnt
                                  log                    = trendjnt + cyclejnt :
                                         wnt Lnt


      (b) Normalize the trend values so that in each period and each country the trend

          values add up to 1:
                                         \       !i
                                         j
                                        wnt Ljnt       exp(trendjnt )
                                                    = P             k
                                        wnt Lnt         k exp(trendnt )



      (c) Replace the expectation with the adjusted trend value.

                                                          !         \      !i
                                               j
                                              wnt Ljnt              j   j
                                                                   wnt Lnt
                                    Et    1                   =
                                              wnt Lnt              wnt Lnt



  5. Update the resource allocations


                                                               \       !i
                                                               j
                                                              wnt Ljnt
                                    (Ljnt )i+1   = Lnt
                                                              wnt Lnt



  6. Repeat the procedure until convergence.


Productivities in Counterfactual Scenario We are interested in decomposing the trade

e¤ect on volatility on the contributions of the two mechanisms, specialization and diversi…-

cation. To achieve that, we need to identify the sources of shocks to productivity. We resort

to a factor model that decomposes productivity shocks into sector- and country-speci…c com-

ponents in a way described in Koren and Tenreyro (2007). To separate per period shocks


                                                 31
                                                          j                                       T
from trends we use a band pass …lter to detrend each log Zn;t                                     t=1
                                                                                                        series. Then we calculate

the time average of the shocks for each (n; j) pair and subtract it from the growth rate to

get the object to be decomposed, Z~nt
                                   j
                                      .


                                                                               X
                                                                               T
                                    Z~nt
                                      j
                                         = Z^n;t
                                             j
                                                       (T           1)     1
                                                                                          Z^n;t
                                                                                            j

                                                                               t=2



Without loss of generality, we decompose Z~nt
                                           j
                                              as:



                                         Z~nt
                                           j
                                              =        j
                                                       t   +       nt   +      j
                                                                               nt ;




                                                                                                                            j
where   n;t   is the country-speci…c factor, a¤ecting all sectors within the country;                                       t   is the
                                                                                                                  j
global sectoral factor, a¤ecting sector j in all countries; and the residual                                      n;t   is the idio-

syncratic component, speci…c to the country and sector. The three factors, ; , and                                                are

estimated as:


                                                           X
                                                           N
                                        ^j = N       1
                                                                   Z~nt
                                                                     j
                                         t
                                                       n=1
                                                       X
                                                       J
                                       ^ nt = J    1
                                                                    Z~nt
                                                                      j          ^j
                                                                                      t
                                                         j=1


                                       ^jnt = Z~nt
                                                j          ^j           ^ nt ,
                                                               t




                       P
with the restriction     n   n   = 0 implying that the country-speci…c e¤ect is expressed relative

to the world’s aggregate. In the counterfactual exercises, we can mute the sector- or country-

speci…c factors by setting the corresponding components equal to 0, in order to identify the

separate e¤ects of the two trade channels a¤ecting volatility.

                                                           32
V      Quantifying the E¤ect of Trade on Volatility

This section uses the framework developed above to quantitatively assess how historical

changes in trade costs from the early 1970s have a¤ected volatility patterns in a sample of

countries at di¤erent levels of development.

    Trade barriers have declined signi…cantly since the early 1970s. This decline in barriers (or

increase in ) is illustrated in Figures 3 and 4, which show, correspondingly, the histograms

of bilateral s in manufacturing and agriculture in the …rst and last year of our sample. As

the …gures show, the distribution of    has moved to the right, indicating a decline in trading

costs in both sectors.




     Figure 3: Histogram of bilateral     in Manufacturing sectors. Years 1972 and 2007




                                               33
          Figure 4: Histogram of bilateral    in Agriculture. Years 1972 and 2007




   Table 1 investigates how the changes in trading costs have a¤ected volatility in the 25

countries in our sample. (The list of countries can be seen in Table 1.) The results in

the table correspond to our benchmark calibration, based on         = 4: Column (1) in the

table shows the volatility generated by the model. Volatility is computed as the variance

of annual growth rates over 35 years (we focus on the variance rather than the standard

deviation, as the variance allows for an additive decomposition into the two mechanisms we

are interested in). The value reported in Column (1) is very close to the actual volatility

experienced by these economies from 1972 through 2007, since both the trading costs and

productivity processes fed into the model are backed out from the data. Column (2) shows

the volatility that would be observed if there were no global sectoral shocks. (The latter

is generally smaller than the benchmark volatility, though there are some exceptions, as

global sectoral shocks can covary negatively with country-speci…c shocks in some countries.)

To compute this counterfactual measure, we mute the global sector-speci…c shocks in the

decomposition of Z~nt
                   j
                      . (This measure of volatility is useful to identify and quantify the two



                                             34
trade channels, as it will become clear next.) Column (3) shows the country’s volatility in

the counterfactual scenario that trading costs ( ) stayed at their 1972 levels. Column (4)

shows this latter measure in the absence of global sector-speci…c shocks.

   Column (5) shows the percent change in average volatility due to actual changes in trading

costs since 1972, that is, the percent di¤erence between columns (1) and (3). Column

(6) shows the contribution of the specialization channel to the change in volatility in (5)

and Column (7) shows the corresponding contribution of the diversi…cation channel. The

contribution of diversi…cation to the change in volatility is computed as the di¤erence between

the volatility in the absence of sectoral shocks (Column 2) and the volatility under 1970’s

trading costs, in the absence of sectoral shocks (Column 4); the di¤erence is expressed relative

to the volatility under the 1972’s trading cost levels (Column 3). This measures captures

the trade in volatility due exclusively to the country-diversi…cation e¤ect, as the sectoral

shocks are muted. The volatility due to specialization is computed as the di¤erence between

Columns (5) and (7).

   As Table 1 shows, two thirds of the countries in our sample experienced a decline in

volatility due to the decline in trade barriers since 1972, while the other third of the countries

experienced an increase in volatility. The biggest decreases in volatility caused by trade

occurred in Belgium-Luxemburg, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Norway, all of which saw

volatility reductions of over 90 percent, meaning their current volatility is 90 percent lower

than it would have been if trading costs stayed at their 1972 levels. The biggest increases in

volatility due to trade were witnessed by Greece (14 percent increase) and Italy (12 percent

increase). These results are the net e¤ect stemming from the contribution of the two separate

channels we study. The diversi…cation channel contributed to lower volatility in nearly 90

                                               35
percent of the countries. The specialization channel contributed to increase volatility in two-

thirds of the countries, with the biggest increases experienced by Italy, Spain, the Netherlands

and Greece. In some countries, sectoral specialization actually contributed to lower volatility;

this is the case of Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, India, Norway, South Korea, and Sweden.

This is possible, as the model illustrates, when the sector (or sectors) in which the economy

specializes in comoves negatively (or less positively) with the country’s aggregate shocks— or

other sectoral shocks. Interestingly, the United Kingdom did not experience a sizeable change

in its volatility due to changes in trade costs. However, this result masks the contribution of

a sizeable reduction in volatility due to the diversi…cation channel and a comparably sizeable

increase in volatility due to the sectoral specialization channel.

      In absolute terms, the diversi…cation e¤ect was in general larger than the specialization

e¤ect, and hence, on net, two-thirds of the countries saw a reduction in volatility, while the

remaining third saw a more modest increase in volatility. The heterogeneity in the trade

e¤ects across countries is remarkable.

      Table 2 shows the change in volatility due to free trade and its decomposition for two other

(more extreme) values of ,       = 2 and    = 8: The general message is qualitatively robust: i)

the e¤ect of trade on volatility varies across countries; ii) the diversi…cation channel tends

to reduce volatility; and iii) sectoral specialization tends to increase volatility. Interestingly,

for     = 2, the case of high scope for comparative advantage, volatility always declines with

trading costs, with the declines being signi…cant even for countries like the United States.

The decline in volatility is driven almost exclusively by the large e¤ects stemming from the

country-wide diversi…cation channel. The e¤ects of sectoral specialization are also sizeable,

but smaller than the diversi…cation e¤ect. These results imply that, on average, trade leads

                                                36
to a reduction in volatility. On the other extreme of               = 8, the results are qualitatively

similar to the benchmark case, although in general the results are quantitatively smaller.

Taken together, the …ndings appear robust to increases in               and suggest that the e¤ect of

country diversi…cation on volatility would be stronger for lower values of , meaning that

trade will reduce volatility even further as the scope for comparative advantage increases.

(This result holds despite the fact that sectoral specialization would also increase in this

case.)19




VI         Conclusions

How does openness to trade a¤ect GDP volatility? This paper revisits the common wisdom

that trade increases volatility by causing higher sectoral specialization. It argues that when

country-speci…c shocks are an important source of volatility, openness to international trade

can lower GDP volatility, as it reduces exposure to domestic shocks and allows countries to

diversify the sources of demand and supply across countries. Building on Eaton and Kortum

(2002)’s quanti…able model for trade, the paper assesses the e¤ect of trade on volatility and

the role played by these two mechanisms, sectoral specialization and country diversi…cation.

       A key …nding of the paper is that the historical decline in trade barriers in agriculture and

manufacturing has led to a reduction in volatility in two-thirds of the countries analyzed, and

to modest increases in volatility in the remaining third. The quantitative change in volatility

varies signi…cantly across countries. The overall volatility change due to trade openness is
  19
    Our exercise underscores the importance of the parameter , and adds to the message of Arkolakis,
Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012): in order to assess the e¤ects of trade on key aggregate variables, the
elasticity of trade to trade costs plays a key role.




                                                    37
Table 1: Baseline and counterfactual change in volatility (measured as variance) under free
trade. Baseline calibration with = 4.

                                         Average volatility                                              Changes in average volatility due to measured
                                                                                                                  changes in trade barriers




                                                Volatility        Volatility     Volatility absent
                             Benchmark                                           sectoral shocks,    Volatility change   Volatility change   Volatility change
                                             absent sectoral      at 1972s                           due to change in         due to              due to
                              volatility        shocks         trade barriers        at 1972s
                                (1)                                               trade barriers      trade barriers      specialization      diversification
                                                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                 (7)



Australia                      0.00085           0.00081          0.00090            0.00090               -5.6%                4.8%             -10.4%
Austria                        0.00023           0.00020          0.00037            0.00033              -37.5%               -3.5%             -34.0%
Belgium and Luxembourg         0.00035           0.00019          0.00465            0.00426              -92.4%               -4.8%             -87.5%
Canada                         0.00019           0.00014          0.00040            0.00037              -53.0%                4.2%             -57.2%
China                          0.00631           0.00581          0.00630            0.00582                0.2%                0.3%               -0.1%
Colombia                       0.00113           0.00089          0.00106            0.00084                6.2%                1.3%                4.9%
Denmark                        0.00031           0.00013          0.00049            0.00032              -35.5%                5.5%             -41.0%
Finland                        0.00038           0.00034          0.00046            0.00045              -16.3%                7.2%             -23.5%
France                         0.00022           0.00012          0.00023            0.00014               -7.5%                4.1%             -11.6%
Germany                        0.00028           0.00014          0.00029            0.00018               -5.3%                6.0%             -11.3%
Greece                         0.00032           0.00023          0.00028            0.00022              13.9%               10.4%                 3.5%
India                          0.00087           0.00082          0.00159            0.00150              -45.7%               -2.9%             -42.7%
Ireland                        0.00078           0.00055          0.06890            0.06919              -98.9%                0.8%             -99.6%
Italy                          0.00017           0.00009          0.00015            0.00010              12.4%               19.5%                -7.1%
Japan                          0.00027           0.00011          0.00025            0.00011                8.2%                7.4%                0.8%
Mexico                         0.00066           0.00076          0.00186            0.00202              -64.3%                3.3%             -67.6%
Netherlands                    0.00021           0.00012          0.00239            0.00260              -91.4%              12.1%             -103.5%
Norway                         0.00055           0.00046          0.01116            0.01078              -95.1%               -2.7%             -92.4%
Portugal                       0.00115           0.00082          0.00193            0.00170              -40.3%                5.4%             -45.6%
ROW                            0.00164           0.00173          0.00163            0.00173                0.6%                0.8%               -0.2%
South Korea                    0.00094           0.00069          0.00097            0.00072               -3.3%               -0.9%               -2.4%
Spain                          0.00018           0.00015          0.00017            0.00016                9.3%              14.7%                -5.4%
Sweden                         0.00020           0.00020          0.00030            0.00029              -32.7%               -2.1%             -30.6%
United Kingdom                 0.00020           0.00016          0.00020            0.00018                0.4%                9.2%               -8.8%
United States                  0.00028           0.00017          0.00027            0.00018                2.1%                3.2%               -1.1%


Average                        0.00075           0.00063          0.00429            0.00420              -26.8%                4.1%             -31.0%

Note: Column (1) shows the average volatility in the baseline model using the calibrated kappas and shocks from 1972-2007. Column (2) is the
volatility in (1) after removing common sectoral shocks. Column (3) shows the average volatility using the calibrated shocks from 1972-2007 under
the assumption that trading costs in manufacturing and agriculture remain at their 1970 levels. Column (4) is similar to (3), after removing common
sectoral shocks. Column (5) shows the percent change in average volatility as economies lowered their trading costs (move from (3) to (1)). Column
(6) shows the contribution of specialization to the change in volatility in (5). Column (7) shows the contribution of diversification to the change in
volatility in (5).




                                                                            38
Table 2: Counterfactual change in volatility (measured as variance) under free trade. Alter-
native calibrations with = 2 and = 8.

                                             Changes in average volatility due to measured changes in trade barriers




                         Volatility change   Volatility change   Volatility change   Volatility change   Volatility change   Volatility change
                         due to change in         due to              due to         due to change in         due to              due to
                          trade barriers      specialization      diversification     trade barriers      specialization      diversification



Australia                     -30.1%                7.9%             -38.0%                -1.2%                2.2%               -3.4%
Austria                       -60.2%               -9.8%             -50.4%               -22.6%                2.7%             -25.3%
Belgium and Luxembourg        -94.4%               -4.3%             -90.1%               -86.4%               -6.1%             -80.4%
Canada                        -82.1%                5.4%             -87.5%               -13.4%               -0.3%             -13.1%
China                          -1.5%                0.7%               -2.3%                0.4%                0.1%                0.3%
Colombia                       -2.2%                1.4%               -3.6%                3.3%                0.8%                2.5%
Denmark                       -58.7%               -2.8%             -55.9%               -24.8%                8.5%             -33.3%
Finland                       -55.1%                4.7%             -59.9%                -4.4%                4.1%               -8.6%
France                        -32.8%              11.5%              -44.2%                -4.4%                0.5%               -4.9%
Germany                       -21.6%              12.8%              -34.4%                -3.8%                2.3%               -6.0%
Greece                        -22.4%              19.2%              -41.5%                 5.0%                2.2%                2.7%
India                         -66.1%               -3.1%             -63.0%               -17.6%               -1.3%             -16.3%
Ireland                       -98.8%                0.2%             -99.0%               -97.7%                1.7%             -99.4%
Italy                         -10.4%              44.9%              -55.3%                 4.2%                6.5%               -2.3%
Japan                          -5.5%              16.3%              -21.8%                 4.4%                3.4%                1.0%
Mexico                        -83.0%                0.8%             -83.8%               -37.6%                3.8%             -41.4%
Netherlands                   -92.3%              11.6%             -103.9%               -87.4%              13.5%             -101.0%
Norway                        -96.8%               -2.8%             -94.0%               -91.2%               -3.0%             -88.2%
Portugal                      -72.4%                3.7%             -76.1%                -1.5%                3.0%               -4.5%
ROW                            -6.1%                2.6%               -8.7%                0.6%                0.2%                0.5%
South Korea                   -14.5%                1.7%             -16.2%                 0.7%               -0.2%                0.9%
Spain                         -27.8%              30.2%              -58.0%                 3.0%                4.0%               -1.0%
Sweden                        -75.2%               -3.6%             -71.6%                -9.3%               -0.9%               -8.5%
United Kingdom                -37.5%              12.7%              -50.2%                -2.5%                1.6%               -4.2%
United States                 -20.8%                6.2%             -27.0%                 1.3%                1.2%                0.2%


Average                       -46.7%                6.7%             -53.4%               -19.3%                2.0%             -21.3%




                                                                    39
the net result of the two di¤erent mechanisms, sectoral specialization, and country-wise

diversi…cation. The …rst mechanism tends to decrease volatility, while the second tends to

increase it (though, as we point out, this general tendency …nds a number of exceptions).

The diversi…cation e¤ect is, on average, quantitatively stronger than the specialization e¤ect;

this result explains why, on average, volatility tends to decline with trade. The model sheds

light on why the magnitude of the trade e¤ects may di¤er across countries. The sizeable

heterogeneity in the trade e¤ects on volatility can contribute to understand the diversity of

results documented by the existing empirical literature.




                                              40
References

[1] Alvarez, F. and R. E. Lucas (2007), “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum

   Model of International Trade,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (6), p.1726-1768.


[2] Anderson, J., 2011. “The speci…c factors continuum model, with implications for global-

   ization and income risk,”Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 85(2), pages

   174-185.


[3] Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012), “New Trade Models, Same

   Old Gains?”American Economic Review, 2012, 102(1), 94-130.


[4] Arkolakis, C. and A. Ramanarayanan (2008), “Vertical Specialization and International

   Business Cycle Synchronization,”manuscript Yale University.


[5] Backus, David K.; Kehoe, Patrick J.; Kydland, Finn E. (1992), "International Real

   Business Cycles", Journal of Political Economy 100 (4): 745–775.


[6] Bejan,    M.   (2006),   “Trade   Openness   and   Output    Volatility,” manuscript,

   http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/2759/.


[7] Berrie, T., M. Bonomo and C. Carvalho (2014). “Deindustrialization and Economic

   Diversi…cation,”PUC manuscript.


[8] Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006), “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” The

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 121(2), pages 541-585, May.


[9] Burgess, R. and D. Donaldson (2012) “Railroads and the Demise of Famine in Colonial

   India,”MIT manuscript.

                                           41
[10] Burstein, A. and J. Vogel, (2012). “International trade, technology, and the skill pre-

    mium,”UCLA manuscript.


[11] Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2012) “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of

    NAFTA”with Fernando Parro, NBER Working Paper No. 18508, 2012.


[12] Caliendo, L., E. Rossi-Hansberg and D. Sarte (2013). “The impact of regional and

    sectoral productivity changes on the U.S. economy,”Princeton and Yale manuscripts.


[13] Cavallo, E. (2008). “Output Volatility and Openess to Trade: a Reassessment,”Journal

    of LACEA Economia, Latin America and Caribbean Economic Association.


[14] Department for International Development (2011), “Economic openness and economic

    prosperity: trade and investment analytical paper” (2011), prepared by the U.K. De-

    partment of International Development’s Department for Business, Innovation & Skills,

    February 2011.


[15] di Giovanni, J. and A. Levchenko, (2009). “Trade Openness and Volatility,”The Review

    of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 91(3), pages 558-585, August.


[16] di Giovanni, J., A. Levchenko, and J. Zhang (2014). “The Global Welfare Impact of

    China: Trade Integration and Technological Change,”forthcoming American Economic

    Journal: Macroeconomics.


[17] Donaldson, D. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation In-

    frastructure,”(2015) forthcoming, American Economic Review.




                                            42
[18] Easterly, W., R. Islam, and J. Stiglitz (2001), “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth

    Volatility,” Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, p. 191-212.

    World Bank, July, 2001.


[19] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica

    70: 1741-1780.


[20] Frankel, J. and A. Rose (1998), “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area

    Criteria,”Economic Journal, Vol. 108, No. 449 (July), pp. 100.


[21] Haddad, M., J. Lim, and C. Saborowski (2010), “Trade Openness Reduces Growth

    Volatility When Countries Are Well Diversi…ed”The World Bank WPS5222.


[22] Head, K. and J. Ries (2001), “Increasing Returns versus National Product Di¤erenti-

    ation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade.” American Economic

    Review 91, pp. 858-876.


[23] Hsieh, C. and Ossa, R. (2011), “A Global View of Productivity Growth in China,”

    University of Chicago manuscript.


[24] Kehoe, T. and K. J. Ruhl (2008), “Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to Pro-

    ductivity?,” Review of Economic Dynamics, Elsevier for the Society for Economic Dy-

    namics, vol. 11(4), pages 804-819, October.


[25] Koren, M. and S. Tenreyro (2007), “Volatility and Development,”Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 122 (1): 243-287.




                                            43
[26] Koren, M. and S. Tenreyro (2013), “Technological Diversi…cation,”The American Eco-

    nomic Review, February 2013, Volume 103, Issue 1. Pages 378-414.


[27] Koren, M. and S. Tenreyro (2011), “Volatility and Development in GCC countries,”

    The Transformation of the Gulf: Politics, Economics and the Global Order, David Held

    and Kristian Ulrichsen, eds. 2011.


[28] Kose, A., E. Prasad, and M. Terrones (2003), “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic

    Volatility,”IMF Sta¤ Papers, Vol 50, Special Issue, p. 119-142.


[29] Kose, A. and K. Yi, (2001), “International Trade and Business Cycles: Is Vertical

    Specialization the Missing Link?,” American Economic Review, vol. 91(2), pages 371-

    375, May.


[30] Levchenko, A. and J. Zhang (2013), “The Global Labor Market Impact of Emerging

    Giants: a Quantitative Assessment,” IMF Economic Review, 61:3 (August 2013), 479-

    519.


[31] Newbery, D. and J. Stiglitz, (1984), “Pareto Inferior Trade,”Review of Economic Stud-

    ies, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 51(1), pages 1-12, January.


[32] Parinduri, R. (2011), “Growth Volatility and Trade: Evidence from the 1967-1975 Clo-

    sure of the Suez Canal,”manuscript University of Nottingham.


[33] Parro, F. (2013), “Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quan-

    titative Model of Trade,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, American

    Economic Association, vol. 5(2), pages 72-117, April.


                                            44
[34] Raddatz, C. (2006), “Liquidity needs and vulnerability to …nancial underdevelopment,”

    Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 80(3), pages 677-722, June.


[35] Rodrik, D., (1998), “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?,”Jour-

    nal of Political Economy, vol. 106(5), pages 997-1032, October.


[36] Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh (2011), “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates & Evi-

    dence,”NBER Working Papers 16796, National Bureau of Economic Research.


[37] Stockman, Alan C.; Tesar, Linda L. (1995), "Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country

    Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements", American Eco-

    nomic Review 85 (1): 168–185.


[38] Strotmann, H., J. Döpke and C. Buch (2006), “Does trade openness increase …rm-level

    volatility?,” Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies 2006,40, Deutsche Bundes-

    bank, Research Centre.


[39] Wacziarg, R. and J. S. Wallack (2004), “Trade liberalization and intersectoral labor

    movements,”Journal of International Economics 64 (2004) 411–439.




VII      Appendix:

The following Appendix provides details on the derivations of the model, the data, and the

quantitative approach. Next, it addresses the problem raised by Kehoe and Ruhl (2008)

and shows that given the way price indexes are computed in practice by statistical o¢ ces,

changes in terms of trade a¤ect measured real GDP.



                                           45
A     Derivation of GDP under free trade

In the one-sector economy, under free trade, prices are equalized across countries.

                                                             (                               )   1
                                                                 X
                                                                 N
                        Pt = Pnt = ( B)1=                              Tm (Amt ) (wmt )                                 (41)
                                                                 m=1



Thus, from dnmt = ( B)          Tm (Amt ) (wmt )                      (Pmt )   we obtain:

                                                                  (                              )    1
                                                                      X
                                                                      N
                     dmnt = Tn (Ant ) (wnt )                              Tm (Amt ) (wmt )                              (42)
                                                                   m=1


                      PN
and from wnt Lnt =      m=1    dmnt wmt Lmt ;, we have:

                                                                          ! 1+1
                                                             Tn (Ant )
                                          wnt =                                   Vt                                    (43)
                                                                Lnt


            hP                                       i 1+1
                N            wmt Lmt
where Vt        m=1
                    PN                                           is common to all countries. Therefore, using the
                        i=1 Ti (Ait ) (wit )


de…nition of Znt ,

                                                                  8                0                          1     91
                                  ! 1+1                           >                                  ! 1+1          >
    wnt Lnt          Tn (Ant )                                    <XN
                                                                                      Ti (Ait )                     =
            = Lnt                          Vt ( B)1=                      Ti (Ait ) @                        Vt A
     Pnt                Lnt                                       >
                                                                  : i=1                  Lit                        >
                                                                                                                    ;
                                                     "                                  #1
                                          1+
                                            1            X
                                                         N
                                                                                  1+
                                                                                    1

           = ( B)1=     Tn Ant Lnt                               Ti (Ait ) Lit
                                                         i=1
                                                      !1
                           1       X
                                   N             1
       Ynt = ( B)1= Znt  1+
                                          Zmt  1+


                                   m=1




                                                                  46
B    Derivation of diversi…cation result

We now prove the result in inequality (26). Start with the original condition that shows that

GDP under costless trade less is volatile than under autarky.


                                                           2           2   PN      2
                                        ( +              i)    +            j6=i   j
                                                                                           <1
                                                         ( + )2


    The …rst line below expands the numerator and adds terms while the second line collect
                                                 2
terms. The last line adds the (             i)       term to the expression in square brackets (note the

change of the index under the sum). The inequality holds since                                                i   < 1 for all i.


                 2             2                     2         2                                     2    PN           2
                     +(   i)       +2   i   +                      +2              2           +           j6=i        j
                                                                                                                           < 1
                                                     ( + )2
                                                                                           hP                       i
                                   2        2                                          2           N      2
                      ( + ) +(           i)      +2            (   i       1) +                    j6=i   j        1
                                                                                                                           < 1
                                                          ( + )2
                                                                                               "                    #
                                                                                                   X
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                           2              2
                                                          2        (   i    1) +                          j        1       < 0
                                                                                                   j=i




C    Mapping Lwi =pi into constant-price GDP in PPP

It is instructive to start with variable Pi that in the Penn World Tables denotes the price level

of GDP, or more precisely the USD value of local expenditures over expenditures evaluated

in international prices. While the PWT variables are originally de…ned (and computed) in

terms of expenditures and relative prices, it is possible to cast them in terms of prices and

quantities as follows:
                                                          P
                                                            g pg;i qg;i
                                                     Pi = P
                                                             g pg qg;i




                                                                   47
with pg;i and qq;i represent the USD price and quantity of good g respectively and pg is the

price of the same good in an international currency. Index g represents spending groups (basic

headings in PWT slang), which are constructed in a way that the sum of these expenditure

groups adds to total GDP. One of these groups are net exports, valuation of which follows

the assumption that

                                  pnx;i qnx;i = pnx qnx;i = Si


where Si is in USD. In our model, consumers buy all individual goods q(x) and bundle them

using the CES aggregator in a …nal good qf . Hence, a PWT statistician would be able to

sample only from this one …nal good in each country and the quantity Pi measured becomes


                                            pi;t qf;i;t Li;t + Si;t
                                   Pi;t =
                                            pt qf;i;t Li;t + Si;t


   Setting PU S;t = 100 as is the case in the PWT implies pt = pU S;t =100 for all t. The

denominator of Pi;t is the current-price GDP in international prices



                               CGDPi;t = pU S;t qf;i;t Li;t + Si;t



and the real-price (Laspeyres) GDP in international prices is de…ned as



                                                               T
                               RGDPi;t = pU S;T qf;i;t Li;t + Si;t



where the last term captures real net exports in year t valued at prices from base year T .




                                                 48
Using the income-expenditure identity Li;t wi;t = pi;t qf;i;t Li;t + Si;t and simple algebra we get


                                             (Li;t wi;t Si;t )    T
                        RGDPi;t = pU S;T                       + Si;t
                                                    pi;t
                                             Li;t wi;t   pU S;T         T
                                  = pU S;T                      Si;t + Si;t
                                               pi;t       pi;t
                                             Li;t wi;t   pU S;T pi;T         T
                                  = pU S;T                           Si;t + Si;t
                                               pi;t       pi;T pi;t
                                             Li;t wi;t    T          pU S;T
                                  = pU S;T             + Si;t   1
                                               pi;t                   pi;T
                                      Li;t wi;t
                                        pi;t


    The last equality follows the PWT convention of valuing net exports by the price index

of domestic absorption for years other than the base year. By dropping the last term in the

approximation we assume that changes in real net exports are small for most countries com-

                                                                        T
pared to the role of domestic absorption. Given the weight attached to Si;t this assumption

will be of importance only for countries with price level far o¤ the US one in the base year.



D     Data Sources

We …rst describe the sample of countries and then the various sources of data.


D.1    Sample of Countries



Our sample consists of 24 core countries, for which we were able to collect all the informa-

tion needed to carry out the quantitative analysis with no need— or very limited need— of

estimation. Other countries, for which data are nearly complete and estimation of some

sectors’output or value added was needed, are grouped as “Rest of the World”(ROW); the

                                                  49
sectoral trade data are available for virtually all countries. Some countries were aggregated

(for example Belgium and Luxembourg, and, before making to ROW, Former USSR, Former

Yugoslavia.). In particular, the minimum condition to keep a country (or an aggregation of

countries) in the sample is the availability of complete series for sectoral value added and

the presence of trade data.

   The core sample of countries include the United States, Mexico, Canada, Australia,

China, Japan, South Korea, India, Colombia, the United Kingdom, a composite of France

and its overseas departments, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, a composite of Belgium and

Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Greece, Austria and

Ireland. While some important countries appear only in our ROW group (most notably

Brazil, Russia, Turkey, Indonesia, Malaysia and oil exporters), the selection of core countries

is meaningful both in terms of geographic location (covering all continents) and in terms of

their share in global trade and GDP. The time period we study covers years from 1972 to 2007.

(1970–1971 are slightly problematic for trade data, as there are many missing observations;

hence the decision to start in 1972. The end period is chosen in order to avoid confounding

the trade e¤ects we are after with the …nancial crisis, which had other underlying causes.)We

focus on annual data.

   The rest of the section describes our data sources and estimation methods.


D.2   Sectoral Gross Output


The data are disaggregated into 24 sectors: agriculture (including mining and quarrying),

22 manufacturing sectors, and services, all expressed in millions of US dollars for the core

countries and the Rest of the world (ROW). The 22 manufacturing sectors correspond to

                                              50
the industries numbered 15 to 37 in the ISIC Rev. 3 classi…cation (36 and 37 are bundled

together).

   The …nal dataset is obtained by combining di¤erent sources and some estimation. Data

on agriculture, aggregate manufacturing and services for core countries come mostly from

the EU KLEMS database. There is no available series for services output in China and India,

so they are obtained as residuals. Additional data come from the UN National Accounts.

   Data on manufacturing subsectors come from UNIDO and EU KLEMS. For some subsec-

tors, EU KLEMS data are available only at a higher level of aggregation (i.e. sector 15&16

instead of the two separately); in those cases, we use the country speci…c average shares from

UNIDO for the years in which they are available to impute values for each subsectors.

   For the countries in the ROW, the output dataset is completed through estimation, using

sectoral value added, aggregate output, GDP and population (the latter two from the Penn

World Table 7.1) using Poisson regressions. For every country for which sectoral value added

and PWT data are available, we estimate gross output using Possion regressions. Finally,

for the few countries for which we have value added data but no PWT data, we estimate

sectoral output by calculating for each year and sector the average value added/output ratio,


                                           1 X V Ai;t
                                              N      j
                                     j
                                     t   =
                                           N i=1 Outputji;t


and then use it in
                                                 j
                                      \j = V Ai;t
                                     Output i;t j
                                                      t


Data collection notes on the core countries are as follows:



                                               51
USA: missing years 1970-76 generated using a growth rate of each sector from EU

KLEMS (March 2008 edition).


Canada: 1970-04 EU KLEMS (March 2008 edition), for 2005-06 sectoral growth rates

from the Canadian Statistical O¢ ce’s National Economic Accounts (table Provincial

gross output at basic prices by industries).


China: data are from the Statistical yearbooks of China. Output in agriculture is

de…ned as gross output value of farming, forestry, animal husbandry and …shery and is

available for all years. Mining and manufacturing is reported as a single unit labelled

output in industry, which apart from the extraction of natural resources and manu-

facture of industrial products includes sectors not covered by other countries: water

and gas production, electricity generation and supply and repair of industrial products

(no adjustment was made). The primary concern was the methodological change ini-

tiated around 1998, when China stopped reporting total industrial output and limited

the coverage to industrial output of …rms with annual sales above 5m yuan (USD 625

000). The sectoral coverage remained the same in both series. There were 5 years of

overlapping data of both series over which the share of the 5m+ …rms on total output

decreased from 66 to 57 percent. The chosen approach to align both series was to

take the levels of output from the pre-1999 series (output of all …rms) and apply the

growth rate of output of 5m+ …rms in the post-1999 period. This procedure proba-

bly exaggerates the level of output in the last seven years and leads to an enormous

increase in the output/GDP in industry ratio (from 3.5 in 1999 to 6.0 in 2006). Our

conjecture is that the ratio would be less steep if the denominator was value added


                                        52
in industry (unavailable on a comparable basis) because the GDP …gure includes net

taxes, which might take large negative values. Output in industry of all …rms re‡ects

the 1995 adjustment with the latest economic census.

There is no available estimate for output in services, so we use the predicted values

from a Poisson regression on the other core countries, with sectoral value added (see

below for details on the source), output in agriculture, output in manufacturing, GDP

and population (the latter two from the Penn World Table 7.1) and year dummies as

regressors.


India: data are from the Statistical O¢ ce of India, National Accounts Statistics. Years

1999-06 are reported on the SNA93 basis. Earlier years were obtained using the growth

rates of sectoral output as de…ned in their ‘Back Series’database. The main issue with

India was the large share of ‘unregistered’manufacturing that is reported in the SNA93

series but missing in the pre-1999 data. The ‘unregistered’manufacturing covers …rms

employing less than 10 workers and is also referred to as the informal or unorganized

sector. We reconstructed the total manufacturing output using the assumption that

the share of registered manufacturing output in total manufacturing output mirrors

the share of value added of the registered manufacturing sector in total value added in

manufacturing (available from the ‘Back Series’database).

As for China, output in services was estimated through a Poisson regression method.


Mexico: data are from the System of National Accounts published by the INEGI and

from the UN National Accounts Database. 2003-06 Sistema de cuentas nacionales,

INEGI (NAICS), 1980-03 growth rate from the UN National Accounts Data, 1978-79

                                       53
      growth rate from Sistema de cuentas nacionales, INEGI, 1970-1978 growth rate from

      System of National Accounts (1981), Volumen I issued by the SPP.


      Japan: data for 1973-06 are from EU KLEMS (November 2009 Edition), for 1970-72

      the source is the OECD STAN database (growth rate).


      Colombia and Norway: data are from the UN National Accounts Database.


      Germany: the series is EU KLEMS’estimate for both parts of Germany.


D.3   Sectoral Value Added


The data on sectoral value added is obtained by combining data from the World Bank, UN

National Accounts, EU KLEMS and UNIDO. For the World Bank and UN cases, the format

of the data does not allow to have exactly the same sectoral classi…cation as the output data:

namely, mining here is not included in agriculture.

   The World Bank and UN data are cleaned (we note a contradiction in the UN data for

Ethiopia and Former Ethiopia, which we correct to include in ROW …nal sample; see the …le

for more details).

   Data on manufacturing subsectors come from UNIDO and EU KLEMS. UNIDO. For

some subsectors, EU KLEMS data are available only at a higher level of aggregation (i.e.

sector 15&16 instead of the two separately); in those cases, we use the country speci…c

average shares from UNIDO for the years in which they are available to impute values for

each subsectors; if no such data are available in UNIDO, we use the average shares for the

whole sample. We use the UNIDO data as baseline and complete it with EU KLEMS when

necessary (in these cases the growth rates of the EU KLEMS series are used to impute values;

                                             54
this is done because sometimes the magnitudes are quite di¤erent in the two datasets). If

an observation is missing in both datasets, we impute it using the country speci…c average

sectoral shares for the years in which data are available.


D.4    Trade and dij’s


These bilateral import shares in gross output are obtained through several steps. We use the

SITC1 classi…cation for all the sample. This is made in order to ensure a consistent de…nition

of the sectors throughout the whole time period. In order to construct the agricultural

sector we aggregate the subsectors in the SITC1 classi…cation corresponding to the BEC11

group. For the manufacturing sectors, we use the correspondence tables available on the UN

website to identify the SITC1 groups corresponding to the ISIC 3 groups used for output

and value added. Re-exports and re-imports are not included in the exports and imports

…gures. We use bilateral imports and exports at the sectoral level from 1972 to 2007 from

the UN COMTRADE database. This dataset contains the value of all the transactions

with international partners reported by each country. Since every transaction is potentially

recorded twice (once reported by the exporter and once by the importer) we use the values

reported by the importer when possible and integrate with the corresponding values reported

by the exporter if only those are available.

   As discussed in the paper, the djnmt ’s are computed as the ratio between the value of

exports from m to n in sector j and total spending by n on sector j at time t, where total

spending is measured as gross output plus imports minus exports of that sector. The share




                                               55
djmmt is obtained as a residual from the accounting restriction:


                                                       X
                                                       N
                                    djmmt    =1               djmnt
                                                       n6=m



   We compute the surpluses as Total Exports - Total Imports, merge with the output

dataset and calculate the dij’s and dii using the formulas in the text.


D.5   Prices


The sectoral price indices come from the EU KLEMS database and data are available for

most of the core countries. We construct the sectoral de‡ators using a chain weighted

index. In particular, we compute for every year a weighted average of the growth rate of

the subsectoral price indexes, where the weights are the output shares in that year; then,

we apply this growth rate to the previous year’s sectoral price index (where the …rst year’s

price index is a weighted average of the subsectors). We then rescale so that the index is

100 in 1995 for all countries and sectors.

   The aggregate price of GDP relative to that of the United States are obtained from

the PWT 5.6 for Former USSR, Former Czechoslovakia and Former Yugoslavia and PWT

7.1 for the other countries. For the ROW, we compute a weighted average of the relative

prices of GDP for all the countries for which the PWT data are available (most of the

ROW countries), where the weights are each country’s share of total output. Similarly, for

Belgium-Luxemobourg, we compute the weighed average of the two.




                                                  56
D.6      Exchange Rates


The exchange rates used for the conversion of output data come from the IMF.


D.7      Alphas

                              j
To calibrate the                  s we use sectoral value added data according to the following procedure:

                   P
           :            j   j
                     n wnt Lnt
    1. sjt =      P P     k    k
                   k   n wnt Lnt



          j   :     sjt = j
    2.    t   =   P      k    k
                    k (st =       )



    To allow for more ‡exibility and accomodate world-wide structural changes over time we

do the calibration every year and then use a smoothed trend from the resulting time series.

Then renormalize so that the sum of alphas is 1 in all periods.


D.8      Prices


We use the sectoral price indexes from the EU KLEMS database to compute price de‡ators

for our three sectors (using a chain weighted index).

    The relative price of GDP comes from the PWT 7.1 for all countries except Former Soviet

Union, Former Czechoslovakia and Former Yugoslavia, for which we use the PWT 5.6. For

the ROW, we compute a weighted average of the relative prices of GDP for all the countries

for which the PWT data are available, where the weights are each country’s share of total

output.



E        Numerical Procedure for Model Equilibrium

We use nested loops to compute the model equilibrium.

                                                           57
E.1       Inner loop


For a given pair of sectoral resource allocation (Ljnt ) and sectoral wages (wnt
                                                                              j
                                                                                 ) solve the system

below for the aggregate price indexes Pnt :


                                     Y
                                     J
                                                           j
                                                                j
                                                                        j
                                                  j
                          Pnt =                                Pnt                                                                        (44)
                                     j=1
                                                      1
                           j                 j
                          Pnt =              nt                                                                                           (45)
                                                                                0                                       j
                                                                                                                          1
                                                  X
                                                  N                                   1                 j
                                                                                                            witj A
                              j
                              nt   = B   j
                                                               Tij Ajit         @ Pit                                                     (46)
                                                                                                       j
                                                      i=1                                              nit




Where
                                                                        +1
                                                  =


and
                                                               j                                       j
                                                      j                             j
                                     Bj =                          (1                   )    (1            )
                                                                                                               :


      Algebraic manipulations to arrive at a system of N equations and N unknowns. Simplify
 j
 nt   :

                                                                        0                                          j
                                                                                                                       1
                                             X
                                             N
                                                                                Pit     1         j
                                                                                                      witj
                         j
                         nt    = Bj                    Tij Ajit @                                                      A
                                                       | {z }                                 j
                                                                                              nit
                                             i=1              j
                                                           Z
                                                              it
                                                                j
                                                          Lit

                                             X
                                             N
                                                                            j                     j                              j
                               = B   j
                                                       Zitj Lit                  witj                      j
                                                                                                           nit         Pit   (       1)

                                             i=1
                                             XN
                                                                                              j                                  j
                               = Bj                    Zitj (Lit witj )                               j
                                                                                                      nit              Pit   (       1)

                                             i=1       |          {z                                               }
                                                                                 j
                                                                                Dnit

                                             X
                                             N
                                                        j                       j
                                     j                                      (           1)
                               = B                     Dnit Pit
                                             i=1


                                                                    58
Notice that we can compute the coe¢ cients of the equation (the D values) before starting

the search for the price vector.
                                                                                      j
   Use equation (45) and then the expression for                                      nt :



                                 Y
                                 J
                                                j
                                                     j
                                                              j
                                           j
                       Pnt =                        Pnt
                                 j=1

                                 Y
                                 J
                                                j
                                                              j
                                                                        1
                                                                                 j
                                           j
                            =                                 nt
                                 j=1

                                 Y
                                 J
                                                j        j    j
                                                                            j
                                           j
                            =                                 nt
                                 j=1
                                                                                                                                     !           j

                                 Y
                                 J
                                                j        j
                                                                                X
                                                                                N
                                                                                           j                            j
                                           j                                                                    (               1)
                            =                                     Bj                      Dnit Pit
                                 j=1                                            i=1
                                                                                                                                     !       j

                                 Y
                                 J
                                                j        j          j           X
                                                                                N
                                                                                       j                            j
                                           j                                                                (                   1)
                            =                                Bj                       Dnit Pit
                                       |            {z             }
                                 j=1                                            i=1
                                                    Kj
                                                !                                                                           !            j

                                   Y
                                   J                         Y
                                                             J          X
                                                                        N
                                                                                   j                        j
                                                                                                        (           1)
                            =              Kj                                     Dnit Pit
                                   j=1                       j=1         i=1


              QJ
Notice that    j=1   K j can be computed before the whole procedure.

   We could simplify this further by solving for Pnt                                              Pnt instead of Pnt :


                                                                                                        !               j
                                               Y
                                               J X
                                                 N
                                                                         j                    j
                                Pnt = K                                 Dnit Pit (                 1)
                                                                                                                                ;                    (47)
                                               j=1            i=1


   where
                                                    !                                                                           !
                                       Y
                                       J                                    Y
                                                                            J
                                                                                              j         j                   j
                            K                  Kj                                     j
                                                                                                            Bj
                                       j=1                                  j=1


and
                                    j                                                     j
                                   Dnit             Zitj (Lit witj )                              j
                                                                                                  nit       :


                                                                   59
   Then we solve the system for the vector P t by iterating on the right hand side of (47)

starting from P ;t 1 .


E.2    Middle loop


For a given resource allocation, Ljnt , this loop searches for sectoral wages wnt
                                                                               j
                                                                                  that solve the

nonlinear system of equations below.




                     j
                                           X
                                           N
                                                                               1               j
                    wnt Ljnt   =       j
                                                 djmnt        j
                                                                  wmt Lmt +           j
                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                   wmt Ljmt   (48)
                                           m=1
                                   X
                                   J
                                            j
                    wnt Lnt =              wnt Ljnt                                                           (49)
                                   j=1



   There are three important remarks:


      The system is separable in t, so we can solve the corresponding subsystem for each t

      separately.


      The system is nonlinear because d depends on sectoral wages by de…nition through


                                                                                j          j
                                                                                     j
                                                                       Pnt 1        wnt
                                                 B   j
                                                          Tnj Ajnt             j
                                                                               mnt
                               djmnt                                                                     :
                                                         PN     j j        Pit 1
                                                                                      j    j
                                                                                          wit
                                                                                                   j

                                            Bj            i=1 Ti Ait                 j
                                                                                     mit




      This is a system of the form x = A(x)x, where the matrix A(x) depends on x nonlin-

      early. To solve for x we can use the following iterative procedure.


        1. Start from an initial x0 .


                                                              60
       2. Iterate xi+1 = A(xi )xi + (1                      )xi 8i = 0; 1; : : : until xi converges to some x ,

          where     2 (0; 1] is a dampening parameter.


Nonlinear part To facilitate computation we introduce D, the coe¢ cients from the inner

loop. We can rewrite the de…nition of d as

                                       j
                                     Znt
                                         j
                                    Lnt
                                   z }| {                                 j                j
                                                                               j
                                                           Pnt 1              wnt
                                   Tnj Ajnt                          j
                                                                     mnt
                        djmnt =
                                  PN     j j                     Pit 1
                                                                                   j    j
                                                                                       wit
                                                                                               j

                                   i=1 Ti Ait                                     j
                                       | {z }                                     mit
                                                 j
                                             Z
                                                 it
                                                   j
                                         Lit

                                                       j                      j                               j
                                Z j Lnt       j
                                            wnt                                        j
                                                                                                   Pnt    (       1)
                             = P nt          j
                                                                                       mnt
                                                                                       j                          j
                                N     j
                                i=1 Zit Lit     witj                                           j
                                                                                               mit      Pit   (        1)


                                            mnt            Dj
                               z            }|                                                 {
                                          j         j                                                         j
                                 j            j                                        j                  (           1)
                               Znt Lnt      wnt                                        mnt         Pnt
                             =P              j                                         j                          j
                                N     j
                                i=1 Zit Lit     witj                                           j
                                                                                               mit      Pit   (            1)
                                    |           {z                                                  }
                                                                  j
                                                                 Dmit
                                                             j
                                Dj Pnt (                             1)
                             = PN mnt j                          (   j
                                                                              1)
                                i=1 Dmit Pit



Note that d does not depend on the resource allocation.


Linear part Substitute the sum from the second equation into the …rst one to get the

expression below:




                                                                61
                                                                         !                                       !
              j
                                X
                                N                       X
                                                        J
                                                                                     1            j
             wnt Ljnt   =   j
                                      djmnt       j            k
                                                              wmt Lkmt           +        j
                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                      wmt Ljmt
                                m=1                     k=1

              j
                                    X
                                    N             X
                                                  J                                                   X
                                                                                                      N
             wnt Ljnt   =   j   j
                                          djmnt          k
                                                        wmt Lkmt       +         (1           j
                                                                                                  )         djmnt wmt
                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                      Ljmt
                                    m=1           k=1                                                 m=1



   We gather the coe¢ cients on the right hand side to matrix A and then iterate on the

sectoral value added term according to the procedure described above. That is in iteration

i + 1 the new value of the value added term is calculated as


                     j          i+1                       i                  i                                       i
                    wnt Ljnt          = A           j
                                                   wnt             j
                                                                  wnt Ljnt       + (1                    j
                                                                                                      ) wnt Ljnt :



E.3   Wage Normalization

                                                                   j
Once the procedure converged, we get sectoral wages from dividing wnt Ljnt by Ljnt . Then we

scale sectoral wages so that we match the corresponding aggregate price with the observed

aggregate price index in the benchmark country.


E.4   Outer Loop


The goal of this loop is to …nd the sectoral resource allocations Ljnt that satisfy

                                                                                 !
                                              Ljnt                    j
                                                                     wnt Ljnt
                                                   = Et       1                       :
                                              Lnt                    wnt Lnt


This loop runs over iterations of Ljnt until it converges up to a prede…ned threshold. We

use a band pass …ltered trend that allows for breaks in growth rates to approximate the


                                                              62
expectation. The rest of this loop can be found in the main text.



F    The Kehoe–Ruhl Critique

Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) argue that if real GDP is measured as a chain weighted quantity index

of value added, then terms-of-trade changes (and as a consequence, import price changes)

do not a¤ect real GDP up to a …rst order. The basic argument in Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) is

as follows:

    Real GDP is output minus the cost of inputs, both evaluated at past-period prices



                                      yt = f (l; mt )         pt 1 mt :



We have chosen output as the numeraire. Labour is the only "…nal" input, and is …xed

over time (or, at least, not responding to pt ), as in our case. Chain-weighed GDP growth is

simply
                                          f (l; mt )        pt 1 mt
                                                                          :
                                       f (l; mt 1 )         pt 1 mt   1


Clearly, mt is chosen in response to pt , so that



                                            fm (l; mt ) = pt :



Taking a …rst-order Taylor approximation of f (l; mt ) around mt 1 ,



      f (l; mt )   f (l; mt 1 ) + fm (l; mt 1 )(mt          mt 1 ) = f (l; mt 1 ) + pt 1 (mt   mt 1 );




                                                       63
current GDP is

                                   yt              f (l; mt 1 )      pt 1 mt 1 ;


which is last period’s quantities at last period’s prices, so there is no …rst-order change in

the chain-weighted quantity index!


F.1     Multiple goods


Suppose now that the input bundle consists of a continuum of goods. Each good can be

sourced from the home country as well as the foreign country.


                                           Z       1                                   1=
                            mt =                       [mF t (i) + mHt (i)] di              :
                                               0




The relevant input price index of the …rm is


                               Z   1                                                   1=(1     )
                                                                              1
                        pt =           minfpF t (i); p(i)Ht (i)g                  di                :
                               0




The nominal GDP is still

                                                   f (l; mt )      pt m t ;


where
                                   Z       1
                         pt mt =               [pF t (i)mF t (i) + pHt (i)mHt (i)]di
                                       0


is the total spending on inputs. Let Mt denote the set of products in which the foreign

supplier is cheaper, so that the goods are imported. Total input spending can be split




                                                              64
among the two source countries,


                               Z                                Z
                     pt mt =             pF t (i)mF t (i)di +             (i)pHt mHt (i)di:
                                  i2Mt                          i62Mt




F.2   Real GDP in the model


What does real GDP look like in the model? It would be tempting to replace current-period

prices in nominal GDP with base-period prices, but this is not what is reported in NIPA.

In NIPA, nominal quantities are de‡ated by price indices to obtain the real quantities. It is

therefore important to see how these price indices would be calculated in our model.

   More speci…cally, real GDP is


                                  Z                                       Z
                            1                                        1
              f (l; mt )                  pF t (i)mF t (i)di                       pHt (i)mHt (i)di;
                           PF t    i2Mt                             PHt    i62Mt




where PF t is the import price index, and PHt is the producer price index of the domestic

inputs.

   Both price indices only measure a subset of goods, and, more importantly, a non-random

subset of goods. To be included in the price index, the good had to be transacted both in the

base period, as well as in the current period. Intuitively, this biases the price index towards

no change. If there is too big a price increase, …rms stop buying the product, and it will be

dropped from the index. In what follows, we try to quantify this bias. We show that in the

case the EK model, the bias is so severe that the price index is constant.




                                                      65
F.3   What does the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) measure?


The price index is a weighted average of price changes for goods that are in the sample in

both periods,
                                       R
                                                    pF t (i)mF 0 (i)di
                                PF t   R i2M0 [Mt
                                        i2M0 [Mt
                                                    pF 0 (i)mF 0 (i)di

for imports, and a similar expression for domestic prices.

   Suppose all products i are symmetric ex ante. Each draw a price at random from a

common distribution. Let

                                       t   = Pr(pF t     pHt )


denote the probability that a good is imported at time t. By the law of large numbers, this

is also the measure of Mt .

   Assume that the prices are independent across periods. This will be true if the produc-

tivity shocks in EK are independent. (For our argument to go through, we only need that

they are imperfectly correlated across periods.) Then the probability of being exported in

both periods is simply   0 t.




F.4   Why terms-of-trade changes a¤ect measured real GDP? An answer


A crucial assumption in Kehoe and Ruhl is that the BLS perfectly measures the prices that

are relevant for input demand. This is not the case, however. In particular, the BLS does

not (and cannot) measure the cost savings arising from input substitution, which are the key

driving force of the Eaton-Kortum model.

   What does the BLS measure? The BLS compares current import prices to the past prices

of the same good from the same supplier. If a …rm switches from a Mexican to a Chinese

                                                66
supplier, because it is cheaper, the BLS will miss the input price savings associated with it.

Moreover, the BLS certainly does not mix up import prices with domestic prices, they create

two separate price indices. So if the substitution is from an American supplier to a Chinese

supplier, the BLS will certainly miss it. This means that for models like EK in which the

extensive margin of suppliers plays a big role, the BLS would capture these terms of trade

changes as a¤ecting real GDP. The speci…c assumptions of the EK model actually ensure

that all cost saving will occur on the extensive margin, and the BLS will not record any of

the import price savings. That is, the Kehoe–Ruhl critique does not apply in this setting.

   The intuition is as follows. Suppose Chinese goods have become 20 percent cheaper. Due

to the winner-take-all nature of Ricardian competition, they will be competitive for a wider

range of goods. These goods are o¤ the radar from the BLS— they have been switched from

an American or higher-cost foreign supplier. In fact, the goods that the BLS does measure

are not a random sample from all goods— these are the ones in which China is still relatively

expensive and/or other suppliers are still relatively cheap (otherwise, a switch would have

occurred). The BLS will measure Chinese prices with an upward bias, all other prices with

a downward bias. Hence its estimate of the terms of trade will biased toward no change.

   In fact, in the EK model, the measured terms of trade remains constant. In any other

model, with only a partial role for the extensive margin, some of the price change would

show up in the terms of trade, some would go directly in measured productivity. This could

be the explanation for the observed correlation of terms of trade and productivity in the

data.




                                             67
