                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    TRI-PARTY REPO PRICING

                                             Grace Xing Hu
                                                Jun Pan
                                              Jiang Wang

                                         Working Paper 21502
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21502


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2015




We have benefited from comments from and discussions with Darrell Duffie, Haoxiang Zhu, Dmitry
Orlov, Fan Yu, and seminar participants at the WFA 2015 and CICF 2015 meetings. We thank Bo
Meng, Ai He, Xiang Yun and Yue Hu for excellent research assistance. The financial support from
a Hong Kong RGC Research Grant (Project #17501014) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Grace Xing Hu, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Tri-Party Repo Pricing
Grace Xing Hu, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21502
August 2015
JEL No. G1,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we examine the pricing determinants in the systemically important tri-party repo market.
Taking advantage of the recently available N-MFP reports filed by money market funds, we construct
a novel dataset that contains tri-party repo transactions between money market funds and dealer banks.
We find a large cross-sectional heterogeneity in repo pricing, reflected most significantly in the haircuts
of repos backed by equity and corporate bonds. Surprisingly, it is the fund families, not bank dealers,
who are the dominant factor in determining the pricing. Moreover, the repo market exhibits significant
segmentation, with fund families adopting three different pricing schemes: counter-party sensitive,
counter-party and collateral sensitive, and uniform. Most fund families use uniform haircuts by fixing
a constant haircut, which itself varies across families, for all repos within each asset class, regardless
of the quality of collateral or counter-party. Investigating further on the lending/borrowing relationship
between fund families and dealers, we find that, when faced with such a rich pricing pattern, dealers
do not shop around for a better haircut and are inclined to maintain a stable relationship with their
lenders. Finally, for repos backed by Treasury securities, there is little variation in both haircuts and
spreads, regardless of the fund family.


Grace Xing Hu                                        Jiang Wang
818 K.K.Leung                                        MIT Sloan School of Management
University of Hong Kong                              100 Main Street, E62-614
Hong Kong                                            Cambridge, MA 02142
gracexhu@hku.hk                                      and NBER
                                                     wangj@mit.edu
Jun Pan
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-624
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
junpan@mit.edu
1         Introduction
Repurchase agreements (repos) are considered to be the largest and the most important
short-term financing channel for a variety of financial institutions.1 For these institutions,
the loss of access to the repo market could be devastating. Moreover, there exists a strong
spillover eﬀect due to the highly interconnected structure of the repo market. As we experi-
enced in the recent financial crisis, disruptions in the repo market could impose a great risk
to the broad financial sector, adversely aﬀecting not only repo market participants but also
other investors holding similar assets. Despite of its systemic importance, the repo market
remains opaque to most market participants, including even the regulators. Because no of-
ficial data on repos exists, questions as basic as the overall size of the market are diﬃcult to
answer, let alone finding information on the market structure, activity and pricing. Lack of
data is the main reason why empirical work lags behind theoretical discussions in this area.2
        Using the recently available N-MFP reports filed by U.S. money market funds (MMFs),
we construct a novel data set that contains a large sample of monthly tri-party repo trans-
actions with key information on counter-parties, amount, haircut, rate, tenor and collateral.
Tri-party repos, with details discussed in Copeland, Duﬃe, Martin, and McLaughlin (2012),
are an important segment of the repo market.3 The main advantage of our tri-party repo
data is that the information is at the transaction-level and contains details of the underlying
collateral, including descriptions of issuer names, types of securities, coupons and maturity
dates. Using these descriptions, we hand match the collateral to the relevant databases,
security by security. The entire collateral pool covers a wide range of asset classes, but we
    1
    Because repo deals are transacted over-the-counter, the exact size of the aggregate repo volume is
unknown. Several papers, including Gorton and Metrick (2010), Gorton and Metrick (2012) and FRBNY
(2010), estimate the total outstanding amount to be approximately $10 trillion in the U.S. before the 2008
financial crisis.
    2
    The theoretical discussions include Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), He and Xiong (2012), Martin,
Skeie, and Thadden (2014), Zhang (2014), Lee (2015), among others.
    3
     Tri-party repos are an important form of secured short-term lending for money market funds. Money
market funds are always cash lenders, and dealer banks are always cash borrowers in our sample. Collectively,
money market funds account for around one-third of the total lending in the tri-party repo market. Money
market funds are generally regarded as safe investments because they can only hold short-term, high-quality
and high-liquidity assets. The weakness of industry was revealed by the Reserve Primary Fund’s “breaking
the buck” event in September 2008 and the subsequent “run” on money market funds. In the wake of the
crisis, money market funds in the U.S. went through a major regulatory reform in 2010, which aims to
strengthen the regulatory requirement for the industry and better protect investors. Under the new rules,
all U.S. money market funds need to disclose the details of their portfolio holdings with the SEC, through
the monthly N-MFP filings.


                                                     1
focus on matching repos on equities, corporate bonds and Treasuries, which have standard
and publicly accessible databases.4
       To our best knowledge, this level of granular collateral information has never been col-
lected and studied before. There are only two existing data sets on tri-party repos that we
are aware of.5 The one most related to ours is discussed in Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov
(2014), which is based on the top 20 money market fund families’ quarterly filings (N-CSR,
N-CSRS and N-Q) before the 2010 MMF reform. Since money market funds disclose only
the general asset classes in their quarterly filings, their repo data doesn’t have the collateral
information at the security level. The focus on only the top 20 fund families also raises the
question of how representative these repo transactions are. By contrast, our data covers the
repo transactions of all U.S. money market funds, totaling 751 individual funds from 160
fund families. Another set of tri-party repo data is collected by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, as discussed in Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2014). Their data contains aggre-
gate quantity numbers across lender-dealer pairs for various collateral asset classes. Due to
the aggregation, transaction-level repo information is lost. Hence the authors focus on the
average haircuts faced by each dealer in each collateral asset class.
       Taking advantage of our unique data, we investigate the determinants of tri-party repo
pricing, namely, haircuts and interest rates. We are particularly interested in how theoret-
ically important factors, such as the collateral characteristics, counter-party risk, lending
relationship and credit market conditions, aﬀect repo prices. Our repo data is ideal for these
pricing tests because the collateral details make it possible for us to quantify the risk of the
collateral pool and thereby examine the repo price sensitivity with regards to the collat-
eral. Moreover, we are able to control the collateral characteristics when investigating the
relations between repo prices and other potential factors such as counter-party risk. This is
important because results would be inconclusive and potentially misleading if the collateral
characteristics are left uncontrolled.
   4
    For the equity securities, we match them to the Compustat/CRSP database according to the issuer
names, and then use the historical returns to calculate volatilities and obtain other firm-level information
such as size and industry. For the corporate bonds, we match them to the Mergent FISD database by a
combination of issuer names, maturity dates and coupons. For the matched bonds, we obtain the bond-level
characteristics including ratings, issuance size, age and maturities. Similarly, for the Treasury securities, we
match them to the CRSP database according to the maturity dates and coupons.
   5
    In Gorton and Metrick (2010) and Gorton and Metrick (2012), the authors use a private repo data
provided by an anonymous dealer. However, the data covers only bilateral repos in the interbank market,
diﬀerent from the tri-party repos that we discuss in this paper.



                                                       2
       We find that there is a large heterogeneity in repo pricing, reflected most significantly
in the haircuts of repos backed by equity and corporate bonds. For example, over our main
sample period from November 2010 through August 2013, which falls under the relative
calm of post crisis, the median haircut of equity repo remains stable at around 8.01%. By
contrast, the haircuts at the 10th and 90th percentiles are 5.00% and 8.92%, respectively.
This large variation in haircuts, which is driven mainly by cross-sectional dispersion, is
contrary to the conventional wisdom that repo pricing is determined almost exclusively by
asset class. Unlike repos for equity or corporate bond, however, Treasury repos exhibit highly
homogeneous pricing: haircuts at the 90th percentile is 2.05%, only slightly higher than the
10th percentile of 2.00%. This indicates that the pricing of repos backed by risky assets such
as equity and corporate bonds involves more complexity.
       In order to understand the large variation in equity repo pricing, we consider important
characteristics including collateral quality, transaction size, counter-party risk, and lending
relationship. Surprisingly, we find that the large heterogeneity in the haircuts of equity
and corporate bond repos is driven mainly by diﬀerences across various money market fund
families.6 For example, haircuts demanded by Fidelity funds, the largest fund family in
terms of repo lending, range between 8% and 9%, while haircuts demanded by other fund
families vary from 2% to 8%. For corporate bond repos, there are also substantial diﬀerences
in the level of haircuts demanded by diﬀerent fund families. On the other side of the repo
transactions are dealers, who act as cash borrowers. They behave simply like price-takers:
when a dealer borrows from multiple fund families, it faces diﬀerent haircuts even though
the collateral of their repos are very similar. Overall, our evidence seems to suggest that it
is the fund families, not the dealers, that determine the haircuts.
       In addition to the diﬀerence in the level of repo pricing, fund families are also diﬀerent in
their pricing schemes. We observe three pricing schemes adopted by diﬀerent fund families:
counter-party sensitive, counter-party and collateral sensitive, and uniform. Fidelity, the
   6
    Within each fund family, all funds behave very similarly. This could be due to the fact that repo
transactions are usually negotiated by an asset manager responsible for all money market funds within
the same family. We rely on the investment adviser information provided by the money market funds
to determine its aﬃliated family. The investment advisers belonged to diﬀerent subsidiaries of a holding
company are manually grouped together. The only exception is BlackRock Fund Advisors (Sec no. 801-
22609). This investment company was formerly known as Barclays Global Fund, and became a subsidiary
of Blackrock after Barclays sold its fund unit to Blackrock in 2009. Our data shows that this fund family
behaves very diﬀerently from other Blackrock money market funds, probably due to historical inheritance
of Barclays’ trading desks. As a result, we treat this fund family as a stand-alone Barclays fund family.



                                                   3
top lender in equity repos, assigns haircuts mainly according to the identities of the counter-
parties. It demands higher haircuts for repos with JP Morgan relative to other counter-
parties. The median haircut of JP Morgan’s repos is 8.81% and the inter-quartile range,
across all transactions over our sample period, is only 0.18%. By comparison, all the rest of
the eleven counter-parties of Fidelity enjoy a median haircut of 8.01% and the inter-quartile
range is 0.08%. This higher haircut demanded for JP Morgan cannot be explained by the
collateral quality of its repo transactions. In fact, the equity collateral posted by JP Morgan
and other dealers has similar risk. Neither can this pricing diﬀerential be explained by
the potential counter-party risk associated with JP Morgan, whose average five-year CDS
spreads are actually lower than several of Fidelity’s other couter-parties during our sample
period. The size of its repo transactions with Fidelity is also on a par with that of Credit
Suisse, another counter-party of Fidelity.
      Money market funds in the Bank of America family use a pricing scheme that is sensitive
to both the dealer and the risk of the underlying collateral. In addition to charging diﬀerent
haircuts for diﬀerent dealers, Bank of America funds also consider the risk of the collateral
posted by these dealers.7 They demand higher haircuts for collateral that are concentrated in
a few stocks and collateral with higher volatility. That is, Bank of America demands higher
haircuts for repos backed by riskier equity securities. This pricing scheme is consistent with
the theory that a haircut serves as a safety check in the event that a counter-party defaults
and hence should be calibrated to the risk of the underlying securities.
      All of the remaining five fund families in the equity repo market use a uniform pricing
scheme. These fund families fix their repo haircuts to a constant level, regardless of the
counter-parties or the collateral quality. This constant level, however, varies from family to
family. For example, State Street and Goldman Sachs funds ask for a 8% haircut, Morgan
Stanley and Charles Schwab funds ask for 5%, and Federated Investors money market funds
ask for 2%. Since these fund families often accept collateral with similar quality and lend to
the same dealers, the variation across fund families is not related to collateral and counter-
party risk.
      These rich pricing patterns show a clear segmentation by fund families in the equity repo
market. Moreover, none of the two theoretical important variables, collateral and counter-
party risk, can explain this segmentation. Instead, we find that the market concentration
  7
    Though diﬀerent counter-parties face diﬀerent haircuts with Bank of America funds, this diﬀerence is
not related to the counter-parties’ default risks, which are measured using their CDS spreads.


                                                   4
is a potential reason why fund families follow diﬀerent pricing. The lending in the equity
repos is highly concentrated, with Fidelity funds alone accounting for approximately 70% of
the market. The second and third largest lenders, Morgan Stanley and Federated Investors,
account for another 17%. As the single dominant lender, Fidelity’s choice of asking for the
highest haircuts could be a rational decision to protect its large exposure in the equity repos.
Fidelity funds can also aﬀord the high haircuts because dealers with large demand of equity
repos have no choice but to trade with Fidelity, due to the limited financing capacity of the
other fund families. Smaller lenders such as Morgan Stanley and Federated Investors funds,
on the other hand, have to ask for lower haircuts in order to stay competitive in the market.
       This naturally raises the question of the dealers’ incentives and behaviors in this market.
In particular, when faced with such variations in pricing and pricing schemes, should dealers
shop around to minimize their haircuts and maximize their use of leverage? Under this
hypothesis, it should first borrow from non-Fidelity funds that charge low haircuts and then
fulfill the rest from Fidelity funds. As a result, we should observe a more stable relationship
between the dealer and its non-Fidelity counter-parties. The empirical evidence is, however,
somewhat mixed. We do find that JP Morgan maintains a more stable relationship with
its non-Fidelity counter-parties (Morgan Stanley funds), while managing the variation of its
monthly borrowing mainly by adjusting its repo amount with Fidelity funds. But we do not
observe this kind of behavior in other dealers, who split their borrowing from Fidelity and
non-Fidelity funds by a stable proportion over time.8 It is possible that dealers are not sensi-
tive to haircuts during the relative calm and liquid post-crisis sample period. Dealers might
also care more about maintaining a stable relationship with their lenders. Indeed, dealers do
tend to trade consistently with the same set of counter-parties across time, suggesting that
their relationship with the lenders is important for them. Overall, it is clear that pricing is
not the only factor that determines dealers’ behavior in the tri-party repo market.
       The pricing in the corporate bond repo market is similar to the equity repo market. Fund
families dominate the repo pricing, and most fund families use the uniform haircut pricing
scheme. Among the uniform pricing schemes, there is also substantial variation in the levels
of haircuts chosen by diﬀerent fund families. For example, Blackrock funds assign a 7%
haircut for most of their corporate bond repos, approximately 5 percentage points higher
than the 2% haircut demanded by the Federated Investors funds. It is worth noting that
   8
    These examples include Credit Suisse and Barclays, which are the largest- and the third-largest dealers
in the equity repo market.


                                                    5
most of the fund families in our sample do accept both investment grade and non-investment
grade bonds as collateral. Nevertheless, fund families that use the uniform pricing scheme
assign the same haircuts across all repos, regardless of the underlying corporate bonds.
       Besides the uniform pricing scheme, some fund families use a collateral sensitive pricing
scheme. But this pricing scheme is sensitive only to the broad rating category, investment
grade or high-yield, of the underlying corporate bonds. Within each rating category, however,
the haircuts are uniform and are not sensitive to any bond characteristics. Morgan Stanley
funds, for example, assign an approximately 5% haircut for repos with investment-grade cor-
porate bond collateral and an approximately 6% haircut for repos with high-yield corporate
bond collateral. We don’t find any fund family that uses the counter-party sensitive pricing
scheme in the corporate bond repo market.9
       Since a tri-party repo is essentially a collateralized loan, an additional important pricing
variable is the interest rate. Because interest rates on tri-party repos follow short-term
interest rates closely, our main interest rate variable is repo spread, calculated as the repo
interest rate in excess of the overnight Fed Fund Rate. Repo spreads are determined mainly
by the maturity, which is not surprising given the term structure eﬀect of interest rates.
For one standard deviation increase in maturity, or 29 business days in the case of equity
repos, the spread increases by 4.9 bps. For one standard deviation increase in maturity, or 15
business days in the case of corporate bond repos, spread increases by 3.8 bps. Repo spreads
are not sensitive to collateral and counter-party risk. We also don’t find any substitution
eﬀect between spreads and haircuts for tri-party repos.
       In addition to the fund family and the dealer, another important player in the tri-party
repo market is the third-party clearing bank, either JP Morgan Chase or Bank of New
York Mellon. Due to the daily unwind arrangement, the large intra-day exposure of the
two clearing banks is an important risk factor for the overall financial system, and can
potentially aﬀect the pricing in the tri-party repo market. To address these concerns, we
look at the time-series variations in our sample, which luckily covers a period during which
the unwind procedure went through several major changes. During the early part of our
sample period, the unwind happened between 8:00 and 8:30 in the morning; since August
22, 2011, the unwind has moved to 3:30 in the afternoon; and at the end of 2012, JP Morgan
   9
     Unfortunately, Fidelity funds, which adopt the counter-party sensitive pricing scheme in the equity repo
market, do not show up in our corporate bond repo data because of a reporting error in the funds’ N-MFP
filings. Fidelity represents approximately 30% to 40% of the lending in the corporate bond repos


                                                     6
Chase stopped intra-day lending on non-maturing repo transactions. Despite these changes,
the distributions of haircut and spread remain stable across time during our sample period.
Moreover, we find no fund family adjusts its pricing scheme with respect to the changes in
the unwinding time. Overall, the concerns for the clearing banks’ intra-day exposure are not
reflected in the repo pricing during our sample period.
    In relation to the existing literature, the two papers that are most related to ours are
Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014) and Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2014). We
complement Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014) by focusing on the cross-sectional
variations of haircuts, taking advantage of our unique deal-level data with collateral infor-
mation. We also add to Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2014) by identifying that the main
determinant of repo pricing is the fund family. The demands made by diﬀerent fund families,
not by dealers, cause the wide variation in haircuts. Both papers document interesting facts
during the crisis period, but our results help shed light on how the repo market works under
normal market conditions in the post crisis period. Our work is also related to the literature
on money market funds. This strand of literature includes McCabe (2010), Kacperczyk and
Schnabl (2013), Chernenko and Sunderam (2012), Strahan and Tanyeri (2012), among oth-
ers. Our focus is on money market funds’ tri-party repos, which are an important component
of their investment portfolios.
    The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes how we collect the repo
data and match the individual securities. Section 3 investigates the determinants of haircuts
and spreads for repos backed by equities. Section 4 studies the corporate bond repos, and
Section 5 studies the Treasury repos. Section 6 concludes the paper. In the Appendices, we
discuss the tri-party repo market before November 2010.


2     Data
2.1    The Repo Market
A repurchase agreement is a spot sale of securities coupled with a forward agreement to
buy back the same securities in the future with interest. In its simplest form, a repurchase
agreement is very much like a short-term collateralized loan between two counter-parties, a
lender who originally buys the securities and a borrower who uses its securities for a secured
cash loan. There are two major types of repos used in the market: bilateral repos and
tri-party repos.

                                              7
   In a bilateral repo, the collateral and cash are exchanged directly between two counter-
parties at both the onset and the maturity of the repo transaction. Tri-party repos use a
third-party bank, which acts as both the custodian and the clearing agent for the two counter-
parties in a repo deal. The third-party bank, either JP Morgan Chase or Bank of New York
Mellon in the U.S., handles all the administrations of the repo transaction, including receiving
and delivering securities and cash, marking securities to market and etc. Counter-party risk
is alleviated in tri-party repos because both collateral and cash are deposited at the third-
party’s account. The clearing service provided by the third-party bank helps minimize the
operational burden of the lenders, especially those who don’t have personnel or technologies
to handle complicated collateral posted by the borrowers. The third-party bank also acts
as the intra-day financier for the cash borrower during the time gap associated with the
unwinding of repos. Copeland, Duﬃe, Martin, and McLaughlin (2012) provides a detailed
discussion of the role of the clearing banks in tri-party repo transactions.
   Besides diﬀerences in the settlement arrangement, these two forms of repos also have
very diﬀerent clienteles. Bilateral repos are commonly used by dealers to provide funding for
their hedge fund clients, or among dealers to redistribute cash and certain securities. In a
tri-party repo market, dealers are usually cash borrowers and lenders are cash-rich investors
such as money market funds, security lenders, and sovereign funds. Most importantly, unlike
bilateral repos whose transaction details are seldom disclosed to the public, recently available
filings of money market funds provide a unique opportunity for us to study the tri-party repo
market empirically.

2.2    Repo Data After November 2010
Our main data source of tri-party repurchase agreements comes from monthly portfolio
holdings of money market funds after November 2010. Following the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s money market fund reforms in 2010, money market funds in the U.S. are
required to file their detailed portfolio information, at individual security level, with the SEC
through N-MFP forms. The N-MFP forms reflect money market funds’ portfolio holdings
on the last business day of each month and must be filed before the fifth business day in the
following month. The SEC then makes the monthly N-MFP data publicly accessible after a
60-day delay.
   We download all N-MFP forms available on the SEC’s EDGAR website for the period


                                               8
from November 2010 to August 2013, and then parse these text files to extract informa-
tion for each item on these forms.10 Our main interest is money market funds’ repurchase
agreement holdings.11 Compared with other reports filed by money market funds before the
2010 reforms, the new N-MFP forms require money market funds to report not only basic
information about their repurchase agreements such as the counter-party dealer, maturity,
amount, haircut and interest rate, but also all the security details underlying each repurchase
agreement. For each underlying security, money market funds need to report the security
type, name of the issuer, maturity date, coupon or yield, principal amount and collateral
value. However, to avoid extremely lengthy filings, the SEC does allow a fund to simply
select the range for the number of the securities from one of the four categories: 51-100, 101-
500, 501-1000 or more than 1000, instead of listing all the collateral security by security.12
Some money market funds adopt this practice, but we do observe many cases in our data
where money market funds routinely report the full list of collateral even when the number
of the underlying securities exceeds 50.

2.3     Collateral Matching
Although money market funds describe the underlying securities in the N-MFP forms, the
descriptions required by the SEC don’t include security identifiers such as CUSIP or ISIN
codes. Thus the biggest challenge in our data processing procedure is to identify these
securities through the text descriptions provided by money market funds. We focus on
matching securities in three asset classes (equities, corporate bonds and Treasuries) because
only these securities have standard and publicly accessible databases on their issuance and
historical prices. Our collateral matching procedure follows two major steps: First, we
   10
      Our data covers 751 money market funds in the U.S., sponsored by 160 unique fund families. Among
all the money market funds, there are 310 prime funds, 131 government/agency funds, 80 Treasury funds,
121 single state funds and 109 tax-exempt funds.
  11
    The SEC requires money market funds to categorize their investment into 16 groups in item 31 of the
N-MFP form: Treasury Debt Government Agency Debt, Variable Rate Demand Note Other Municipal Debt,
Financial Company Commercial Paper, Asset Backed Commercial Paper, Other Commercial Paper Certifi-
cate of Deposit, Structured Investment Vehicle Note Other Note, Treasury Repurchase Agreement, Govern-
ment Agency Repurchase Agreement Other Repurchase Agreement, Insurance Company Funding Agreement
Investment Company, or Other Instrument. If the investment type falls into repurchase agreements, i.e.,
Treasury Repurchase Agreement, Government Agency Repurchase Agreement and Other Repurchase Agree-
ment, the details of the underlying securities backing the repurchase agreements need to be reported in item
32.
  12
    For more information on the SEC’s regulation of the N-MFP filings, readers can check the SEC’s website
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/guidance/formn-mfpqa.htm.


                                                     9
select potential equity, corporate bond and Treasury collateral according to the security
type, maturity and coupon. Next, we manually compare the collateral names listed on
the N-MFP forms with the oﬃcial names in the corresponding database to get individual
collateral’s unique CUSIP number.
       After we find collateral’s CUSIP codes, we consider a repurchase agreement as an equity
repo if more than 85% of its collateral can be matched as equities. Similarly, if more than
85% of collateral can be matched as corporate bonds, we classify this repurchase agreement
as a corporate bond repo.13 For a Treasury repurchase agreement, we require all of its col-
lateral matched to Treasury securities to eliminate noises in pricing due to non-Treasury
securities in the collateral pool. This bottom-up approach allows us to determine a repur-
chase agreement’s collateral asset class by examining its collateral pool security by security, a
more accurate approach than those of previous studies that rely on self-reported repo types.
       In total, we have 3,350 equity repos, 1,291 corporate bond repos and 15,436 Treasury
repos with matched collateral information from November 2010 to August 2013. Compared
with the statistics compiled by SIFMA, our matched sample accounts for 14% to 20% of
the tri-party repos in these three asset classes during our sample period.14 The smaller
sample size is due to several reasons. First, our sample covers only tri-party repos by U.S.
money market funds, which accounts for approximately one third of the entire tri-party repo
market. Other repo lenders, such as security lenders, are not in our sample of tri-party
repos. Second, not all securities have descriptions clear enough to establish a unique match.
In equities, we are able to match 98% in terms of collateral numbers and 68% in terms
of collateral value. Most of the unmatched cases are because money market funds only
disclose the numbers of collateral, not the specific issues. The matching is much noisier in
corporate bonds because more information is needed to pin down a unique bond. As a result,
some repos are not in our matched sample because we couldn’t match the securities in the
collateral pool. In addition, we consider only repos consisting primarily of securities from
the same asset class and discard those with mixed asset classes. Nevertheless, we do have a
  13
    Since mixed collateral categories are common in tri-party repurchase agreements, especially for non-
government repos, we choose the 85% threshold to balance between the sample size and the potential biases
caused by collateral in diﬀerent asset classes. Our main results do remain robust if we choose higher thresholds
such as 90% or 100%.
  14
    According to the statistics released by SIFMA, the total tri-party repo market has 243,624 deals with
total repo value of $59 trillion for the 34 months from November 2010 to August 2013. Among which, the
total numbers of equity, corporate bond and Treasury repos are 17,054; 9,014; and 85,268, respectively.



                                                      10
reasonably large repo sample with collateral from various asset classes. More importantly,
the matched securities cover a great range of securities in each asset class. The granular
security-by-security collateral information enables us to examine the determinants of repo
prices at a much finer scale than general asset categories.

Matching Equity Collateral

We consider a security a potential equity collateral if item 32.d in the N-MFP form contains
the following keywords: COMMON, STOCK, ETF, STOCK OR ETF, EQUITY, SHARES,
DEPOSITORY RECEIPT and GLOBAL DEPOSITORY RECEIPT. In addition, the col-
lateral needs to have null coupon (item 32.c) and maturity date (item 32.b). We then
manually match the collateral names (item 32.a) with the oﬃcial company names in the
CRSP/Compustat database. When there are multiple matches, we choose the parent com-
pany’s CUSIP and assign it to the collateral security.
      For the 34 months from November 2010 to August 2013, we classify 80,354 collateral as
potential equity securities, with total collateral value around $505 billion. Among which, we
are able to match 78,466 collateral with a total worth of $341 billion. In other words, we
are able to match more than 98% of the collateral by their names, but the remaining 2%
carry a significant value of $164 billion. The reason is that there are 253 unmatched cases
where the issuer names fall into the categories of 51-100, 101-500, 501-1000 or more than
1000. These cases represent $156 billion, or 95% of the value of the unmatched securities.
The remaining 1,635 unmatched cases, worth $8 billion in value, are only a tiny fraction of
our pool of potential equity securities. Overall, our procedure does a good job in matching
collateral by their descriptions in the N-MFP forms.

Matching Corporate Bonds

For potential corporate bond collateral, we check whether item 32.d in the N-MFP form
contains the following keywords: BOND, CBND, CORP, CORPORATE, OTHER NOTE
and FIXED INCOME. To rule out non-corporate bonds, we also require that the issuer
names don’t contain keywords such as TREASURY, MORTGAGE, FNMA, STRIP, TIPS
and etc.15 We then manually match the collateral name (item 32.a) with the oﬃcial corporate

 15
   The full list of keywords include FNMS, FXMS, FGHF, FGPC, FMCC, FMHS, FMPC, FRPC, FNAR,
FXAR, FGAR, FMPA, FRAR, FMAR, FNMA, GNMA, GMAC, MORTGAGE, ASSOCIATION for agency
bonds; TINT, TPRN, PRIN, PMT, INT, STRIP, TRPX for Treasury STRIPS; TIPS, INF, IX, USTIIN,


                                             11
bond issuer names in the Mergent FISD database. If we find a match in the issuer’s name, we
check the maturity date (item 32.b) and coupon (item 32.c) of all bonds issued by the issuer
to see whether we can find a unique match. If there are multiple matched bonds, we choose
the most recently issued bond. If there is no match, we relax the condition and match only
on the maturity date as money market funds sometimes report null or bond yields for the
bond coupon item (item 32.c) in the N-MFP forms. In addition, we exclude all convertible
bonds.
       For the period from November 2010 to August 2013, we classify 257,347 collateral as
potential corporate bond securities, with total collateral value at approximately $824 billion.
Among which, we are able to match 166,809 collateral with total collateral value of $329
billion. For the remaining 90,538 unmatched collateral, most of the cases are due to poor
data quality, such as missing or null issuer names, maturity or coupons. For example, 30,408
of the unmatched corporate bond collateral are by Fidelity money market funds, all due to
the reason that the maturity date information is missing in the original N-MFP forms. As
a result, we don’t have Fidelity money market funds’ corporate bond repos in our matched
sample even though Fidelity is a large lender in the corporate bond repo market.16

Matching Treasury Bonds

For potential Treasury bond collateral, we check whether item 32.d in the N-MFP forms
contains the following keywords: UNITED STATES, TREASURY, TREAS, NOTE, BILL,
BOND, NTS, BDS and NOTY. In addition, we rule out collateral which have keywords
suggesting the bonds are likely to be agency bonds, Strips, Tips, or corporate bonds. The
collateral must also have valid coupon (item 32.c) and maturity date (item 32.b). We then
search the CRSP Treasury database to find Treasury securities with the exact same coupon
and maturity date. For collateral that can be matched, the matching is always unique as
there exists no two Treasury securities with the same coupons and maturity dates.
       We consider 137,804 collateral as potential Treasury securities, totaling 4.5 trillion in

USTIIB, TRIN, TRIB for Treasury inflation protected bonds; TREASURY, UNITED STATES, TREAS,
NOTE, BILL, NTS, BDS and NOTY for Treasury bonds.
  16
    An example is the filing of a Fidelity fund (EDGAR series id: S000004822) on June 2013. The fund
has a $17 million corporate bond repo with BNP Paribas Securities Corp. However, the fund doesn’t
report the maturity date information for all the underlying bonds, even though it classifies all collateral as
CORPORATE and reports their coupons correctly.




                                                     12
dollar value.17 Out of which, we are able to match 128,782 collateral, 93% in terms of
numbers and 91% in terms of collateral value. Judging by the reported numbers for item
32.c in the N-MFP forms, most of the unmatched cases are because money market funds
report yields instead of coupons for the collateral. Since it is very common for multiple
Treasury securities to mature on the same date, we don’t relax the criteria to match solely
on the maturity date as it often gives multiple matches in the case of Treasury collateral.

2.4       Repo Data Before November 2010
Since the N-MFP filings are implemented only after the 2010 reform, we rely on the annual
(N-CSR), semi-annual (N-CSRS) and quarterly (N-Q) filings of money market funds to
obtain the tri-party repo data before November 2010. In these reports, money market funds
list the basic information for their repurchase agreement holdings such as the counter-party,
amount, collateral value, haircut, interest rate and maturity date. However, they are not
required to report the details of the underlying securities. Nevertheless, in many cases,
money market funds do describe the collateral asset classes for their repo positions.
       Unlike the standard text format used by N-MFP filings, the N-CSR, N-CSRS and N-Q
filings don’t have a standard format and are sometimes not even in text files. Thus, most of
the data have to be manually collected. We download the N-CSR, N-CSRS and N-Q filings
for the top 50 prime funds, the top 25 agency funds and the top 25 Treasury funds during
the period from January 2005 to September 2010. The rank is determined by money market
funds’ average fund size from November 2010 to August 2013. Since money market funds
from the same fund family occasionally file their reports in one form, we end up checking 129
unique money market funds, among which 102 funds have repurchase agreement holdings
from January 2005 to September 2010.
       In total, we collect 18,187 repo transactions with total repo value of approximately $7.9
trillion. Based on the collateral asset classes reported by the money market funds, we
classify these repurchase agreements into the following categories: Treasury, agency, equity,
corporate bond and others. In the sample we collected, there are 5,947 Treasury repos with
total value of $2.9 trillion, 4,285 agency repos with a total value of $2.0 trillion, 677 equity
  17
     During the period from November 2010 to August 2013, 28,880 repos are reported as Treasury Repurchase
Agreements by money market funds (item 31). These repos have in total 210,644 collateral. Of these
collateral, we consider 72,840 securities as Strips, Tips, agency bonds, corporate bonds or with missing
maturity. We exclude these securities in our matching process.



                                                   13
repos with a total value of $199 billion and 2,513 corporate bond repos with a total value
of $557 billion. The rest are repurchase agreements with either no collateral asset class
information, collateral with mixed asset classes, or collateral in other asset classes such as
structural finance products, commercial papers, municipal bonds and etc.

2.5    Data Summary

Growth of The Tri-Party Repo Market

The growth of the tri-party repo market is illustrated as the two time series plots in Figure 1.
The solid lines aggregate the repo transactions of all U.S. money market funds from November
2010 to August 2013; the dotted lines aggregate the repos by a sub-sample of 102 large funds
for which we manually collect the quarterly data from 2005 Q1 to 2010 Q3. Since money
market funds’ quarterly filings are usually reported at diﬀerent calendar months, the total
tri-party repo numbers and amount before November 2010 are added up for every calendar
quarter and reported at the quarterly frequency. As a comparison with the full sample, we
also plot the sub-sample funds’ monthly repo positions from November 2010 to August 2013.
The 102 large funds in our sub-sample account for a majority of the total repo lending by
money market funds, approximately 60% in numbers and 85% in amount. Both the full
sample and the sub-sample show similar time-series trends after November 2010, suggesting
that the 102 funds are a representative sample of the money market fund lenders in the
tri-party repo market.
   Both the total number and the value of tri-party repos show a steady growth before 2008
Q1. Money market funds then reduce their lending following the collapse of Bear Stearns
and throughout the 2008 financial crisis. At the last quarter of 2008, the worst period of
the 2008 financial crisis, the total number of repo deals drops to 627, approximately 34
percentage points lower than one year ago in 2007. Though a big reduction in the number of
deals, the total loan value shrinks only by $57 billion to $400 billion, a mere 12 percentage
points decrease. One year later at 2009 Q4, the tri-party repo market bounces back to
1,033 deals of $424 billion, similar to the pre-crisis levels. This observation is consistent
with Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014), in which the authors also document a relative
moderate contraction of the tri-party repo market during the 2008 financial crisis.
   After the financial crisis, the tri-party repo market continues to grow and peaks at the
end of 2012. The upward trend is then reversed in 2013, as the total deal value declines

                                              14
approximately 30% from the peak to around 500 billion by the end of August 2013. According
to the statistics complied by SIFMA, the entire tri-party repo market, including other lenders,
such as security lenders and sovereign funds, has 7,792 repo deals with a value of $1,630 billion
in August 2013. Therefore, our sample of repos by the U.S. money market funds account
for approximately 30% of the total lending in the tri-party repo market.

Cross-Sectional Variations in Pricing

Table 1 summarizes the repo characteristics for the three classes of repos that we constructed
using the matched methods discussed before. We divide the period from January 2005 to
August 2013 into four intervals: pre-crisis period from 2005 Q1 to 2008 Q2, crisis period
from 2008 Q3 to 2009 Q2, post-crisis period from 2009 Q3 to 2010 Q3 and the most recent
period from November 2010 to August 2013. The cross-sectional distributions of haircuts
and spreads are also graphically presented as time-series plots in Figure 2. It is apparent
that the levels of haircuts and spreads in the tri-party repo market depend very much on
the underlying collateral’s asset classes. At all times, including both crisis and non-crisis
periods, the median haircuts and spreads for riskier securities, equities and corporate bonds,
are always above safe Treasuries.
      More interestingly, there is a large cross-sectional variation in the haircuts and spreads
of repos backed by equities and corporate bonds. We focus on the sample period from
November 2010 to August 2013, during which our sample contains repos with matched
collateral information.18 Among the total 3,350 equity repos, the first decile of haircuts is
5.00% and the ninth decile of haircuts is 8.92%. The inter-decile range is a striking 3.92%, not
only large in magnitude but also important economically compared with the median haircut
of 8.01%. Moreover, as the cross-sectional distribution remains relatively stable across time
during this period, this variation comes mainly from the cross-sectional diﬀerences and is
not from the time-series changes. The pattern is very similar for corporate bond repos. The
inter-decile range of haircuts for the 1,291 corporate bond repos is a significant 4.00%. By
comparison, haircuts on Treasury repos are much more homogeneous, with an inter-decile
range of haircuts at merely 0.05%. For repo spreads, the cross-sectional dispersions in equity
and corporate bond repos are also larger than Treasury repos.
 18
      We discuss the tri-party repos before November 2010 in the appendix.




                                                    15
3        Equity Repos
In this section, we examine the pricing in the equity tri-party repo market. Equity securities,
as a whole, constitute $90 billion in dollar value or approximately 5% of the entire tri-party
repo market.19 As a comparison, the average daily trading volume is around $40 billion
for the New York Stock Exchange in 2013.20 Albeit only a fraction of the entire tri-party
repo market, equity tri-party repos serve as an important channel for dealers to finance their
securities holdings and meet their clients’ trading needs in the stock market.
       Table 2 summarizes our sample of 3,350 equity repos with matched collateral during the
34-month period from November 2010 to August 2013. It is clear that the large heterogeneity
in the haircuts of equity repos is largely a result of the variations across fund families. Money
market funds in diﬀerent fund families charge very diﬀerent haircuts. Fidelity funds ask for
haircuts above 8%; Bank of America, State Street and Goldman Sachs funds ask for haircuts
around 8%; Morgan Stanley and Charles Schwab funds ask for 5%; Federated Investors funds
ask for only 2%.
       Within each fund family, haircuts are much more homogeneous. For the largest lender,
i.e., Fidelity money market funds, the standard deviation of haircuts is only 0.89% and
the inter-quartile range is 0.82%. Both numbers are significantly smaller than the standard
deviation and inter-quartile range of the full sample. For the second largest lender, Morgan
Stanley, the standard deviation of haircuts is a mere 0.46% and the inter-quartile range
is close to zero, at 0.01%. In fact, among the remaining five fund families, four of them
have inter-quartile ranges in haircuts less than 0.1%. The only fund family that has a wide
variation in its haircuts is Bank of America, with the standard deviation at 2.19% and the
inter-quartile range at 3.01%.
       Compared with the relative similar haircuts charged by funds within each fund family,
haircuts faced by a dealer are much more dispersed, especially when the dealer borrows
from multiple fund families. For example, the inter-quartile range in haircuts is 2.96%
for Credit Suisse and 3.00% for Deutsche Bank. These large dispersions are the results of
diﬀerent haircuts charged by money market funds from diﬀerent fund families. Credit Suisse
borrows from money market funds belonging to five fund families: Fidelity, Morgan Stanley,
  19
    The numbers are based on the average tri-party repo market statistics from November 2010 to August
2013, provided by The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA).
  20
       The trading volume data of NYSE is provided by NYXDATA.


                                                 16
Federated Investors, Bank of America, and State Street. Deutsche Bank borrows from four
fund families: Fidelity, Morgan Stanley, Charles Schwab and Bank of America.
   By comparison, the dispersions in haircuts are much smaller for dealers that borrow
mainly from one fund family. This type of dealers include JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs and
Mizuho. Take JP Morgan as an example, the inter-quartile range of haircuts is only 0.17%.
This is because 1,068 of its equity repo deals are with Fidelity and only 87 deals are with
Morgan Stanley and Bank of America. Therefore, the small variation in haircuts is due to
the fact that JP Morgan borrows most from Fidelity, and Fidelity assigns similar haircuts
for all of its equity repos with JP Morgan. Similarly, the variations of haircuts are small for
Goldman Sachs and Mizuho because these dealers mainly borrow from one fund family.
   The above observation is confirmed in Figure 3, which compares equity repos’ haircuts
against the underlying collateral’s volatility, a common risk measure for equity securities.
We plot repos of the top four fund families that have more than 100 repo deals, i.e., Fidelity,
Morgan Stanley, Charles Schwab and Bank of America. As a comparison, we also plot the
repos of the top two dealer banks: JP Morgan and Credit Suisse. Clearly, when a dealer
borrows from multiple money market funds families, its haircuts vary significantly even
though the repos are backed by collateral with similar volatility. For example, JP Morgan’s
repos with Fidelity funds always have haircuts more than three percentage points higher
than those with Morgan Stanley funds. The pattern is similar for the repos borrowed by
Credit Suisse.
   In short, it is clear that fund families dominate the pricing in the equity repo market.
In our following analysis, we first examine the equity securities in the collateral pool. Then,
taking advantage of the security-level collateral information, we investigate diﬀerent pricing
schemes adopted by diﬀerent fund families. Lastly, we discuss the implications of the repo
pricing on quantities and MMF-dealer relationship in the equity repo market.

3.1    Collateral Characteristics
The 3,350 equity tri-party repos are backed by 66,347 equity securities. Among which, we
are able to identify 65,718 equity securities issued by 4,008 unique firms. Table 3 lists the top
20 securities used as equity repo collateral. Most of these stocks are large company stocks,
covering major industries such as manufacturing, technology, finance, and pharmaceutical
etc.


                                               17
   For each equity tri-party repo, we calculate the percentage of collateral that can be
matched as equities (matched), the number of collateral (#cols), the value-weighted number
of collateral (#cols (vw) ), the value-weighted firm size (size), the volatility of a value-
weighted portfolio of the underlying collateral (port vol), the value-weighted average volatil-
ity of the underlying collateral (avg vol), and the percentage of financial firms (fin). We
have two volatility measures: the portfolio volatility and the average volatility. The first
measure treats the collateral pool of a repo as a value weighted portfolio, weighted by the
collateral value of individual securities. The portfolio volatility is the standard deviation of
daily portfolio returns in the one-year window before the repo date. The second measure is
the average volatility of the individual stocks, value weighted by the collateral value. Each
individual stock’s volatility is calculated using its daily returns in the same one-year window
preceding the repo date. Therefore, the diﬀerence of the two volatility measures depends
on the cross-correlations between the underlying securities in a repo’s collateral pool. We
are also interested in the percentage of financial firms because of potential wrong-way risk
- collateral risk is adversely correlated with the credit quality of the counter-party, which is
always a dealer bank in our sample of tri-party repos.
   The characteristics of the equity securities accepted by diﬀerent fund families are sum-
marized in Table 4. Most of the collateral of our sample of equity repos are indeed matched.
Even though we set the lower-bound to be 85%, the majority of the repos are fully matched.
The average percentage of matched securities is close to 100%, with a tiny standard deviation
of 1.47%. The equity collateral are usually large-capitalization firms. The average size is
from 9.44 to 10.97, or $13 billion to $58 billion on a dollar basis. On average, 17% to 23%
of the collateral are financial company stocks.
   The most noticeable diﬀerence across diﬀerent fund families is in the collateral concen-
tration. Equity repos by Fidelity and State Street funds have smaller number of collateral
per repo and hence higher collateral concentration. For Fidelity’s repos, the average number
of collateral per repo is 7.17. After taking into account the relative size of the individual
securities, the value-weighted number of collateral per repo drops to only 3.82. Similarly, the
average value-weighted number of collateral per repo is only 7.19 for State Street’s funds.
By comparison, the collateral pool for the rest five fund families’ repos are much more diver-
sified. The number of collateral per repo ranges from 30.34 to 71.48 and the value-weighted
number of collateral per repo ranges from 13.02 to 39.83. As a result of the more concen-



                                              18
trated collateral pool, the average portfolio volatilities for Fidelity and State Street funds
are among the highest, 29.61% and 28.08%, respectively. For the rest of the fund families,
the average portfolio volatility is from 18.70% to 22.05%.

3.2    Haircuts
We find three pricing schemes in haircuts: counter-party sensitive, counter-party and collat-
eral sensitive, and uniform. We discuss these diﬀerent pricing schemes through the examples
of representative fund families. In our sample, Fidelity funds use the counter-party sensitive
pricing scheme; Bank of America funds use the counter-party and collateral sensitive pricing
scheme. The remaining fund families use the uniform haircut scheme. However, among
the uniform haircuts, there is substantial variation in the haircuts chosen by diﬀerent fund
families.

Fidelity

Fidelity is the largest lender in the equity tri-party repo market. In our sample of equity
repos with matched collateral, it has 2,168 repo deals with 12 counter-parties. Fidelity’s
largest two counter-parties are JP Morgan and Credit Suisse. For its 1,068 repo deals with
JP Morgan, the average repo haircut is 8.83% and the standard deviation is a mere 0.15%.
In fact, most of the repos between Fidelity and JP Morgan have haircuts between the 8.70%
(the 1st decile) and 9.00% (the 9th decile). Similarly, among the 465 repo deals between
Fidelity and Credit Suisse, 431 repo haircuts are within a narrow band around 8.00%, ranging
from 8.00% to 8.34%; the remaining 34 repo haircuts are around 5.00%, ranging from 5.00%
to 5.26%.
   It appears that Fidelity funds use a dealer-sensitive scheme on haircuts. Between its
two dealers, JP Morgan and Credit Suisse, Fidelity demands higher haircuts for JP Morgan
than Credit Suisse. This diﬀerential treatment in haircuts is unlikely to be explained by
the collateral quality or the counter-party default risk. The equity collateral provided by
JP Morgan and Credit Suisse have similar risk: the average collateral portfolio volatility is
31.4% for JP Morgan and 30.6% for Credit Suisse. In terms of the counter-party default
risk, JP Morgan’s average five-year CDS spreads is 99 bps, 27 basis points lower than the
average five-year CDS spreads of Credit Suisse. The size of JP Morgan’s repo transactions




                                             19
with Fidelity is also comparable with that of Credit Suisse.21
       We formally test Fidelity’s haircut policy on equity tri-party repos in a set of regressions.
The results are summarized in Table 5.22 The regression results confirm our conjecture
that money market funds in the Fidelity fund family set haircuts mainly according to the
identities of the counter-parties. Variables such as repo size, repo maturity and dummy
variables for time explain 10.6% of the total variation in haircuts. By comparison, adding
dummy variables for the dealers significantly increases the R-square by 24.5 percentage points
to 35.1%. None of the collateral variables nor the dealers’ CDS spreads is significant in the
regressions, whether used alone or in combinations. Not surprisingly, collateral variables and
dealers’ CDS spreads also don’t help improve the R-square of the regressions on haircuts.

Bank of America

Though Bank of America has only 146 equity tri-party repos in our matched sample, it is
the only fund family that shows a wide dispersion in the haircuts. The inter-quartile range
is 3.01%, the largest among all fund families. We pool together all of Bank of America’s
equity tri-party repos and run a battery of regressions in Table 6. Similar to Fidelity, the
dealer fixed eﬀect is strong in the regression on the haircuts of Bank of America’s equity
repos. Adding dealer dummies significantly improves the R-square of the regressions by 35.5
percentage points. Repo size, repo maturity, fixed dummies for time and dealers together
explain 79.2% of the total variations in Bank of America’s equity repo haircuts. Four out
of the five dealer dummies are statistically significant at the 5% level. In short, Bank of
America’s haircuts are sensitive to the counter-parties.
       More interestingly, Bank of America’s haircuts are also sensitive to the underlying collat-
eral. It assigns higher haircuts for repos backed by riskier collateral, which is most reflected
in collateral concentration ($col (vw)) and collateral volatility (port vol). Bank of America
asks higher haircuts for repos backed by more concentrated securities. A one standard devi-
ation decrease in the value-weighted number of collateral per repo increases repo haircuts by
0.40 percentage point. Bank of America also requires higher haircuts for equity repos backed
by more volatile securities. A one standard deviation, or 6.85 percentage points, increases in
  21
    The total monthly equity repo transactions is on average 2.7 billion between Fidelity and JP Morgan,
and 3.1 billion between Fidelity and Credit Suisse. The numbers are based on the full sample of equity repos
which include those with unmatched collateral.
  22
    Since we don’t have CDS data for Mizuho Financial Group, the 197 equity repos between Mizuho and
Fidelity are not included in the tests.


                                                    20
the collateral portfolio volatility raises the repo haircuts by 1.49 percentage points. Among
all the collateral variables, the collateral portfolio volatility is the one with the largest eco-
nomic impact and the one with the most significant t-value. The strong explanatory power
of the collateral portfolio volatility is also reflected in the eight percentage points increase in
the R-square of the regressions on repo haircuts.

Other Fund Families

Aside from Fidelity and Bank of America, money market funds in the rest of the fund
families use the uniform pricing scheme. The uniform haircuts required by these funds are
approximately 5% for Morgan Stanley and Charles Schwab funds, 2% for Federated Investors
funds and 8% for State Street and Goldman Sachs funds.
   Within each fund family, repo haircuts exhibit tiny dispersions. The inter-quartile range
in haircuts for the five fund families range between 0.01% and 0.06%. In other words, these
fund families fix their haircuts to a constant level, regardless of the counter-parties and the
collateral. More importantly, this uniform haircut scheme is not because these fund families
accept only a certain type of collateral or because they lend to only one dealer. In fact, these
funds do accept a wide range of equity securities as collateral and lend to multiple dealers.
   It is not obvious why diﬀerent fund families chose diﬀerent levels of haircuts, especially
given that they often lend to the same group of dealers and accept similar collateral. For
example, State Street, Morgan Stanley and Federated Investors funds all lend to Credit
Suisse, yet these funds choose to ask for very diﬀerent haircuts. Therefore, we think the
levels of haircuts, to a certain extent, reflect diﬀerent fund families’ risk tolerance. Federated
Investors is the most aggressive one, by charging haircuts at approximately two times the
average daily price volatility (1.28%) of the underlying equity securities. Other fund families
are more conservative and set a larger buﬀer in haircuts relative to the volatility of the
underlying collateral.
   The dominant role played by the fund families is also evident in the regressions of Table 7,
where we pool together all but Fidelity and Bank of America funds’ equity repos. Variables
such as repo size, repo maturity and the time dummies explain only 22.0% of the total
variation in haircuts. Adding four fund family dummies drastically improves the R-square
by 72.6 percentage points to 94.6%. By contrast, including additional dealer dummies helps
improve the R-square only by a marginal one percentage point. Moreover, none of the
collateral variables is statistically significant, confirming that these fund families’ pricing

                                                21
schemes are uniform and don’t depend on the underlying collateral.
       Besides the fund family and the dealer, another important agent in the tri-party repo
market is the third-party clearing bank. Unfortunately, our repo data does not contain the
identifies of the third-party banks. However, the rich pricing patterns exhibited by diﬀerent
fund families suggest that the pricing is unlikely to be explained by the associated third-
party bank, which is either JP Morgan Chase or Bank of New York Mellon. Our sample
also covers a period during which the unwind procedure of the two clearing banks went
through several major changes that greatly reduced the intra-day exposure of the two banks.
However, we don’t observe any fund family adjusts its pricing scheme with respect to these
changes. Overall, the evidence suggests that the clearing bank does not play an important
role in the pricing of repos, at least not in our sample period.

3.3       Spreads
Next, we investigate the interest rates of the tri-party equity repos. Given the strong role
played by fund families in setting haircuts, we examine the determinants of repo rates not
only for the full sample but also separately for Fidelity, Morgan Stanley, Charles Schwab
and Bank of America funds.23 Our main variable of interest is the repo spread, measured as
the repo interest rate minus the over-night Fed Fund Rate. The results are summarized in
Table 8.
       The most important explanatory variable for spread is the repo maturity. This is not
surprising given the term structure eﬀect of interest rates. For one standard deviation in-
crease in repo maturity, or 29 business days, repo spread increases by 4.90 bps. The maturity
eﬀect on repo spread is quite robust. The regression coeﬃcients on the repo maturity are
positively significant for three out of the four fund families that we tested, with the exception
of Charles Schwab funds.
       In addition to the maturity eﬀect, size is also related to spread for equity repos. Large
repos tend to have lower spreads - an increase of one standard deviation in the log of repo
size decreases repo spread by -1.44 bps. However, this negative relationship is largely driven
by the repos of Fidelity funds, and is not significant for the other three fund families that
we tested.
  23
    We don’t run regressions separately for Federated Investors, State Street and Goldman Sachs because
these fund families have equal or less than 100 repos.



                                                  22
   None of the three collateral variables, collateral concentration, volatility and the percent-
age of financial firms, can help explain the variation in repo spreads. We also find no robust
relationship between borrowers’ credit risk and repo spread. In the full-sample regression,
dealers’ CDS spreads are positively related to repo spreads. A 100 bps increase in a dealer’s
CDS spreads will raise its repo spread by 6.70 bps. But this positive eﬀect is only significant
for Charles Schwab funds, and not significant for the other fund families.
   Lastly, we investigate the relationship between the two pricing variables: haircut and
spread. In theory, the relationship could be negative if there is a substitution eﬀect between
haircut and spread. The relationship can also be positive if lenders demand higher haircut
and, at the same time, higher interest rate for accepting riskier collateral. In practice, it is
clear that the relationship is positive across collateral asset classes. For example, haircuts on
equity repos are higher than Treasury repos because equities are in general riskier than Trea-
suries; spreads on equity repos are also higher because lenders demand higher compensation
for holding riskier equity securities. However, it is unclear what the relationship should be
for repos backed by the same collateral asset class.
   For three out of four fund families that we tested, haircuts are not significantly related
to spreads. This is not surprising as most fund families use the uniform haircut scheme,
which will result no variation in the haircuts of repos within each fund family. However, for
Fidelity funds’ repos, there is a strong negative relation between haircuts and spreads. This
substitution eﬀect is strong - an increase of one percentage points in haircut is couple with
a 5.67 bps reduction in spread.

3.4    MMF-Dealer Relationship
The rich pricing patterns suggest that there is a clear segmentation in the equity repo market.
More importantly, neither collateral nor counter-party default risk can explain the diﬀerent
pricing and pricing schemes chosen by the fund families. To further understand this market
segmentation and its implication for the behavior of the lenders and borrowers, we look
at the trading relationship between money market funds and dealers in the tri-party repo
market.
   For this part of the analysis, we don’t rely on the previous repo sample with matched
collateral securities. Instead, we use the full sample of repos that we can identify the asset
class of the collateral. Compared with the matched repos, this sample is larger and avoids


                                               23
potential bias in our matching procedure caused by inaccurate reporting by MMFs. Though
without the information of the individual collateral, it better captures the complete MMF-
dealer trading relationship in the repo market.
   We identify a collateral’s asset class by checking the keywords in the collateral type and
collateral subtype (item 32.d). A repo is considered as an equity repo if more than 85% of
its collateral are classified as equities; a repo is consider as a corporate bond repo if more
than 85% of its collateral are classified as corporate bonds. We consider all repos reported
as “Treasury Repurchase Agreement” (item 31) by money market funds as Treasury repos.
In total, we have 3,840 equity repos, 5,748 corporate bond repos and 28,880 treasury repos.
Table 9 summarizes the top fund families and their major borrowers in these three repo asset
classes; Table 10 summarizes the top dealers and their major lenders. Figure 4 graphically
present the pairs of fund families and dealers that have trading relationship in tri-party
repos.

Market Concentration

It is clear that the repo lending in the equity repo market is dominated by a few large fund
families. Fidelity fund family alone represents approximately 70% of the lending. Morgan
Stanley and Federated Investors, the second and the third largest lenders, account for another
17%. The top five fund families, in total, cover approximately 95% of the lending backed by
equity securities.24
   The picture is similar on the borrowers’ side. Though there are in total 16 dealers, the
top five, Credit Suisse, JP Morgan, Barclays, Merill Lynch and Bank of America, account
for approximately 80% of the borrowing. Credit Suisse and JP Morgan are the largest two
borrowers, with average monthly repo amount ranging from 3.2 billion to 4.6 billion.
   We observe a many-to-many relationship between fund families and dealers. A fund
family usually lends to multiple dealers and a dealer usually borrows from multiple fund
families. The two largest lenders, Fidelity and Morgan Stanley, lend to almost every dealer.
The smaller fund families have few counter-parties. On the borrowers’ side, large dealers
usually borrow from both large and small fund families, while small dealers mainly borrow
from the two largest fund families, i.e., Fidelity and Morgan Stanley.
  24
     Compared with the matched equity repo sample, there are two new fund families, UBS and American
Beacon Advisors. But these two fund families account for only a tiny fraction of the total lending in the
equity repo market.


                                                   24
    Though fund families and dealers have multiple counter-parties, most of their trading is
concentrated with a few partners. The number of counter-parties is significantly reduced
after taking the relative repo amount into account . For the largest lender, Fidelity, the
value-weighted number of counter-parties at each month is only 3.4.25 Among which, Credit
Suisse and JP Morgan account for approximately 60% of Fidelity’s total lending. For the
rest of the fund families, the value-weighted number of dealers is typically between one and
three. For dealers, the value-weighted number of fund families is also quite low, usually
between one and two. This suggests that relationship could be very important for both fund
families and dealers, as most of their trading is with a few fixed counter-parties. In addition,
for a pair of fund family and dealer that are major trading partners, they tend to trade
consistently every month in our sample period.

Repo Pricing and Quantity

The highly concentrated market structure could be a reason why we observe a clear market
segmentation in the pricing of equity repos. Among all the major fund families, Fidelity
funds ask for the highest haircuts, mostly between 8% and 9%. Given that Fidelity is the
dominant lender in the equity repos, this could be a rational decision to protect its large
exposure. In addition, since Fidelity is the only lender with a large financing capacity, it can
aﬀord the high haircuts as dealers with large demand of equity repos have no other choice in
the equity repo market. Smaller non-Fidelity lenders such as Morgan Stanley and Federated
Investors funds, due to their limited financing capacity, have to ask for lower haircuts in
order to stay competitive in the market.
    The natural question to ask next is: what are dealers’ incentives and behaviors in this
market? Because the pricing is set by fund families, dealers are basically price takers.
However, a dealer can still decide its quantities with diﬀerent counter-parties. A potential
hypothesis is that the dealer’s priority is to minimize its haircuts and maximize its use of
leverage. Under this hypothesis, a dealer should shop around diﬀerent fund families for
the most lenient haircuts. Given the very concentrated market structure, the dealer should
first borrow from non-Fidelity funds that charge low haircuts and then fulfill the rest with
Fidelity funds. Therefore, we should observe a more stable relationship between the dealer
  25
     The number of value-weighted counter-parties are calculated as the inverse of the Herfindahl index based
on the repo amount between a fund family and a dealer. It is equivalent to the number of counter-parties
with the same repo size.


                                                     25
and the non-Fidelity funds.
    The empirical evidence is, however, mixed. We find some positive evidence supporting
the hypothesis. The bottom panel of Figure 5 shows that JP Morgan has a more stable
relationship with Morgan Stanley funds from November 2011 to February 2013, compared
with its relationship with Fidelity funds. During this period, JP Morgan’s borrowing with
Morgan Stanley shows very little variations, while its borrowing with Fidelity fluctuates
significantly. In other words, JP Morgan manages its monthly borrowing mainly through
adjusting its repo quantities with Fidelity funds. The caveat is that we only observe this
pattern for JP Morgan during a short period of time.
    On the other hand, there are many dealers whose borrowing with Fidelity and non-
Fidelity funds show similar variations through time. Credit Suisse, for example, reduces its
borrowing significantly during our sample period. Under the hypothesis, it should first cut
its borrowing with Fidelity because of the higher haircuts. However, we find that Credit
Suisse splits its borrowing from Fidelity and non-Fidelity funds by a stable portion over
time. Not only it cuts its borrowing with Fidelity funds, it also reduces its borrowing with
Morgan Stanley and Federated Investors funds, which are two other major counter-parties
that charge low haircuts. As a result, Credit Suisse’s equity repo quantities between Fidelity
and non-Fidelity counter-parties have similar time-series variations. Barclays, the third-
largest dealer in the equity repo market, also behaves similarly like Credit Suisse.
    In short, we don’t find strong evidence that suggests dealers are fully optimizing their
use of leverage by shopping around diﬀerent fund families. Of course, given that our sample
covers a period with ample liquidity and historical-low interest rates, the dealers may not
be very sensitive to the cost of repo financing. Nevertheless, the results suggest that prices
are not the only determining factor in the tri-party repo market. Dealers seem to also value
the trading relationship with their major counter-parties.


4     Corporate Bond Repos
Corporate bonds are also a popular form of non-government securities in the tri-party repo
market. According to the statistics provided by SIFMA, the amount of corporate bonds
posted as collateral in the tri-party repo market has similar magnitude as the equities, at
approximately $85 billion per month from November 2010 to August 2013.
    In our sample, we have 5,748 corporate bond repos and 1,291 corporate bond repos with


                                             26
matched collateral. The main reason we have fewer matched corporate bond repos is because
the corporate bond securities require three types of information (issuer name, coupon and
maturity date) to find a unique match, thereby making the matching process more diﬃcult
due to the limited disclosure quality in money market funds’ N-MFP filings. For example,
Fidelity, an important lender in the corporate bond repo market, is not in our sample because
the maturity date information is missing in most of its filings. Luckily, our sample still
contains a wide variety of fund families and dealers, which allows us to investigate diﬀerent
pricing schemes in the corporate bond repo market. Moreover, the matched corporate bonds
cover a broad range of securities from diﬀerent rating classes and issuer firms. This enables
us to investigate the repo price sensitivity to the underlying collateral.

4.1    Summary Statistics
The lending in the corporate bond repo market is also highly concentrated, but less so
compared with the equity repo market. The top lender, Fidelity, has on average 5.4 billion
outstanding repos at the end of every month, accounting for approximately 40% of the
market. The second and the third largest lenders are Bank of America and Morgan Stanley
funds. The top five fund families account for approximately 80% of the total lending. On
the dealers’ side, JP Morgan is the largest borrower, followed by BNP Paribas and Barclays
Group. The lending relationship between the money market funds and dealer is plotted in
the panel (b) of Figure 4. For the 1,291 matched sample of repos, we report the distributions
of haircut, spread, maturity and size in Table 11.
   Table 12 summarizes the corporate bond collateral for the matched repo sample. Most
of the corporate bond repos are backed by a mixture of investment-grade and high-yield
bonds. On average, a repo’s collateral pool has 92% rated bonds and 70% investment-grade
bonds. The average corporate bond rating is 8.95, between Baa1(numerical rating 8) and
Baa2 (numerical rating 9). Most of the corporate bonds are old long-term bonds with large
issuance size. The average age is 3.32 years; the average remaining maturity is 7.84 years;
the average log issuance size is 20.38, or $709 million in dollar terms.

4.2    The Role of Fund Families
Similar to equity repos, fund families play the dominant role in assigning haircuts for the
corporate bond repos. This can be shown in Figure 6, where we plot the corporate bond


                                              27
repo haircuts against the underlying collateral’s average credit ratings for the top four fund
families, i.e., Bank of America, Morgan Stanley, Blackrock and Federated Investors. Out
of these top four, three fund families use the uniform pricing scheme. Federated Investors
funds’ repo haircuts are in a narrow range around 2%, even though the fund family lends
against both investment grade and non-investment grade bonds. Similarly, Blackrock funds
give a 7% haircut for most of its corporate bond repos, though the fund family trades
with eight diﬀerent dealers and accepts corporate bonds with ratings that range from Aa1
to B3. Another example is Bank of America funds, which give a constant 5% haircut.
However, diﬀerent from the previous two fund families, Bank of America’s collateral are
mostly investment-grade corporate bonds.
   In contrast to the uniform pricing scheme, Morgan Stanley funds use a collateral-sensitive
pricing scheme, but only sensitive to the collateral’s rating category - investment grade or
non-investment grade. Morgan Stanley funds’ haircuts fall into roughly two categories: 5%
for repos with average collateral ratings at Baa3 or above, and 6% for repos with average
collateral ratings below Baa3. Within each rating category, the haircuts are not sensitive to
the individual repos’ collateral ratings. This is consistent with the common belief that in-
vestment grade and non-investment grade corporate bonds are considered two diﬀerent asset
categories in the tri-party repo market. But, it is worth emphasizing that many fund fam-
ilies in the corporate bond repo market don’t diﬀerentiate bond ratings and assign uniform
haircuts for both investment grade and non-investment grade bonds.

4.3    Regression Analysis on Haircuts and Spreads
In this part of the analysis, we use regressions to examine the determinants of corporate
bond repo haircuts and spreads. Given that some fund families price investment grade and
non-investment grade corporate bond repos diﬀerently, we also run regressions separately
for these two rating categories. The majority of the repos in our sample have collateral that
are a mixed pool of investment grade and non-investment grade bonds. We, therefore, try
two methods to classify corporate bond repos. The first method is by the average ratings
of the collateral and the second method is by the percentages of investment grade bonds
in the collateral pool. Table 13 summarizes the regressions results on haircuts; Table 14
summarizes the regressions results on spreads.
   It is clear that fund families play the dominant role in setting corporate bond repo


                                             28
haircuts, similar to the equity repo market. This is reflected in the drastic improvement of
R-square of the regressions on haircuts. Controlling collateral, month dummies and dealer
dummies, the R-square of the full-sample regression on haircuts is only 38.7%. Adding fund
family dummies improves the R-square by 45.4 percentage points to 84.1%.26
       For all the collateral variables, only collateral rating is significant in the full-sample re-
gression. An improvement of one standard deviation in rating will reduce the repo haircut by
0.38 percentage point. However, this strong relationship is simply driven by the diﬀerence in
haircuts across the two major rating categories. Within the investment grade only repos and
non-investment grade only repos, collateral rating can no longer explain the cross-sectional
variations in haircuts. In fact, none of the collateral controls is a significant determinant of
the haircuts of corporate bond repos.
       The results are similar for repo spread. Non-investment grade repos have higher spreads
than investment grade repos. But, within the investment grade only repos and non-investment
grade only repos, spreads are not related to any of the collateral characteristics, including
the collateral rating. Repo spread does not depend on the dealer’s credit risk either. The
most robust explanatory variable for spread is the maturity of the repo. For one standard
deviation increase in repo maturity, or 15 business days, repo spread increases approximately
3.8 bps.


5        Treasury Repos
Our main focus in this paper is the pricing of repos backed by risky corporate collateral,
i.e., equities and corporate bonds. However, it is worth emphasizing that the majority of
the repos between money market funds and dealer banks are backed by safer government
collateral, mainly Treasuries and Agency securities. To draw a parallel with the pricing of
risky repos, we also investigate the pricing in the Treasury market.27 In total we have 28,880
Treasury repos. Out of which, we are able to match the underlying Treasury securities for
15,436 repos.
       Unlike the very concentrated equity and corporate bond repo markets, the treasury repo
  26
   Adding fund family dummies also significantly improves the R-square of the regressions based on invest-
ment grade only repos and non-investment grade only repos.
  27
    We didn’t investigate the pricing in the Agency repos because there is no standard database on the
prices of the Agency securities.



                                                   29
market is more diversified and involves a large number of fund families and dealers. On the
lenders’ side, there are 88 unique fund families. Fidelity remains to be the largest lender in
the Treasury repo market, but it accounts for only 11.6% of the total lending. This is much
less than Fidelity’s market share in the equity and corporate bond repo markets. The second
and third largest lenders are Federated Investors and Dreyfus. The total market share of the
top five fund families is approximately 45%.
       On the borrowers’ side, there are in total 35 dealers. Barclays is the largest borrower,
followed by Deutsche Bank, Royal Bank of Scotland, Credit Suisse and BNP Paribas. All
five are non-US European banks. Together, the top five dealers borrow 47% and the rest 30
dealers split the remaining 53%. The lenders and borrowers are also more inter-connected
in the Treasury tri-party market. The panel (c) of Figure 4 shows a complicated and highly
intertwined network, in which every fund family lends to multiple dealer banks and every
dealer bank borrows from multiple fund families.28 Compared with the equity and corporate
bond repo markets, both fund families and dealers have more counter-parties in the Treasury
repos.
       On the collateral’s side, most of the Treasury collateral are Treasury Notes. Table 15
summarizes the underlying Treasury securities in the collateral pool. On average, 79% of
securities are Treasury Notes, 15% are Treasury Bonds and the remaining 6% are Treasury
Bills. The average age is 2.39 years. A small fraction of the collateral, around 10.83%, are
on-the-run securities. The number of collateral per repo is also fewer, compared with the
equity and corporate repos. On average, there are approximately 3.43 securities, or 2.23
equal-size securities, per Treasury repo.
       Panel C of Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the 15,436 Treasury repos that we
can match the underlying collateral; Table 16 reports the summary statistics for the top ten
fund families and the top ten dealers. For the haircuts, the 1st decile of haircuts is 2.00%
and the 9th decile is only slightly higher at 2.05%. Thus, the majority of the Treasury repos
are simply charged with a constant haircut at approximately 2%. Compared with equity and
corporate bond repos, the spreads of Treasury repos have lower levels and smaller variations.
The 1st decile of Treasury repo spreads is -5 bps; the 9th decile is 8 bps. The spreads
are lower because investors demand lower premiums for holding safer Treasury securities as
collateral. It is also related to the shorter maturity. The majority of the Treasury repos
  28
    For simplicity, only the trading relationship between the top 20 lenders (fund families) and the top 20
borrowers (dealer banks) are plotted.


                                                    30
are over-night, while equity and corporate bond repos tend to have maturities around one
month.
    The small variations in haircuts and spreads indicate that the pricing in the Treasury
tri-party repo market is quite flat. We formally test this hypothesis by a set of regressions
on haircuts and spreads. Not surprisingly, none of the collateral variables is related with
haircut or spread. Nor is the counter-party risk variable, which is measured as dealers’ CDS
spreads. For spreads, month dummies alone can explain close to 50% of the total variations.
Therefore, the variations in spreads are likely due to the time-series changes of the overall
credit market.


6     Conclusion
We collect a unique dataset of tri-party repo transactions between U.S. money market funds
and dealer banks. Taking advantage of the detailed collateral information in the dataset,
we examine the pricing in the tri-party repo market, focusing on the repos backed by equity
and corporate bonds which have rich pricing patterns. We find that pricing relies mostly
on haircuts and much less on rate spreads. Surprisingly, haircuts are largely decided by
the associated fund families and not by the dealers. Some fund families use counter-party
sensitive and collateral sensitive pricing schemes, but most of the fund families use uniform
haircuts. Among the uniform haircuts, there is substantial variation in the levels of haircuts
chosen by diﬀerent fund families. Facing various pricing schemes from diﬀerent fund families,
dealers behave simply like price-takers and do not shop around for the best haircuts. Instead,
they seem to value more about maintaining a stable relationship with their lenders. Repo
spread is determined mainly by the maturity and does not depend on the collateral or the
dealer’s credit risk. Compared with the equity and corporate bond repos, the pricing of
Treasury repos is much more homogeneous: the haircuts are unanimously set at 2% and the
repo rates follow closely with the Fed Fund Rates.




                                             31
                                                              (a) Total Number of Repos
                              4000                              BS   Leh       End Of Crisis         Qtr Data End




                              3000
           Number of Repos




                              2000




                              1000




                                                                                                         All money market funds       Subsample of 102 funds
                                 0
                                200412   200512   200612   200712          200812           200912          201012           201112      201212           201312
                                                                                    Month

                                                              (b) Total Amount of Repos
                              700                              BS    Leh       End Of Crisis         Qtr Data End




                              600




                              500
           Repo Amount ($B)




                              400




                              300




                              200



                                                                                                         All money market funds       Subsample of 102 funds
                              100
                               200412    200512   200612   200712      200812               200912          201012           201112      201212           201312
                                                                                    Month


     Figure 1: Time-Series of Tri-Party Repos by U.S. Money Market Funds
The dark line plots the repos positions of all U.S. money market funds and the gray line plots the repo
positions for a sub-sample of 102 money market funds. The numbers before November 2010 are aggregated
at the quarterly frequency; the numbers at and after November 2010 are at the monthly frequency.


                                                                              32
                                                   (a) Equity Repo Haircut                                                                                                                         (b) Equity Repo Spread
               14                             BS      Leh     End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End                                                              600                              BS       Leh    End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End


                                                                                                                                                             500
               12


                                                                                                                                                             400
               10

                                                                                                                                                             300




                                                                                                                                              Spread (bps)
 Haircut (%)




                8

                                                                                                                                                             200

                6
                                                                                                                                                             100

                4
                                                                                                                                                               0


                2
                                                                                                                                                             -100


                                                                                                   Median       P10            P90                                                                                                                 Median       P10            P90
                0                                                                                                                                            -200
               200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312                    200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312
                                                                  Month                                                                                                                                           Month


                                          (c) Corporate Bond Repo Haircut                                                                                                                 (d) Corporate Bond Repo Spread
               14                             BS      Leh     End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End                                                              600                              BS       Leh    End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End


                                                                                                                                                             500
               12


                                                                                                                                                             400
               10

                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                              Spread (bps)
 Haircut (%)




               8

                                                                                                                                                             200

               6
                                                                                                                                                             100

               4
                                                                                                                                                               0


               2
                                                                                                                                                             -100


                                                                                                   Median       P10            P90                                                                                                                 Median       P10            P90
                0                                                                                                                                            -200
               200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312                    200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312
                                                                  Month                                                                                                                                           Month


                                               (e) Treasury Repo Haircut                                                                                                                      (f) Treasury Repo Spread
               14                             BS      Leh     End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End                                                              600                              BS       Leh    End Of Crisis        Qtr Data End


                                                                                                                                                             500
               12


                                                                                                                                                             400
               10

                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                              Spread (bps)
 Haircut (%)




               8

                                                                                                                                                             200

               6
                                                                                                                                                             100

               4
                                                                                                                                                               0


               2
                                                                                                                                                             -100


                                                                                                   Median       P10            P90                                                                                                                 Median       P10            P90
                0                                                                                                                                            -200
               200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312                    200412   200512   200612   200712         200812           200912          201012       201112         201212         201312
                                                                  Month                                                                                                                                           Month




                                 Figure 2: Cross-Sectional Variations of Haircuts and Spreads
The cross-sectional median, the first decile and the ninth decile of the haircuts and spreads are plotted for
equity, corporate bond and Treasury repos from 2005 Q1 to November 2013.



                                                                                                                                     33
                                   (a) Fund Family: Fidelity                                                                                                (b) Fund Family: Morgan Stanley
               16                                                                                                                             16



               14                                                                                                                             14


               12                                                                                                                             12



               10                                                                                                                             10
 haircut (%)




                                                                                                                                haircut (%)
                8                                                                                                                              8



                6                                                                                                                              6


                4                                                                                                                              4


                2                                                                                                                              2


                                                                            JPM         CS         DB             MFG                                                                                     JPM         CS         DB             MFG
                0                                                                                                                              0
                    0   20            40                               60                    80                           100                      0   20           40                               60                    80                           100
                                           collateral volatility (%)                                                                                                     collateral volatility (%)


                               (c) Fund Family: Charles Schwab                                                                                              (d) Fund Family: Bank of America
               16                                                                                                                             16



               14                                                                                                                             14


               12                                                                                                                             12



               10                                                                                                                             10
 haircut (%)




                                                                                                                                haircut (%)




                8                                                                                                                              8



                6                                                                                                                              6


                4                                                                                                                              4


                2                                                                                                                              2


                                                                                                        DB          GS                                                                                                 JPM       CS             DB
                0                                                                                                                              0
                    0   20            40                               60                    80                           100                      0   20           40                               60                    80                           100
                                           collateral volatility (%)                                                                                                     collateral volatility (%)


                                       (e) Dealer: JPM                                                                                                                   (f) Dealer: CS
               16                                                                                                                             16



               14                                                                                                                             14


               12                                                                                                                             12



               10                                                                                                                             10
 haircut (%)




                                                                                                                                haircut (%)




                8                                                                                                                              8



                6                                                                                                                              6


                4                                                                                                                              4


                2                                                                                                                              2


                                                                Fidelity          Morgan Stanley        Bank of America                                                                       Fidelity          Morgan Stanley        Bank of America
                0                                                                                                                              0
                    0   20            40                               60                    80                           100                      0   20           40                               60                    80                           100
                                           collateral volatility (%)                                                                                                     collateral volatility (%)




                             Figure 3: Equity Repo Haircut v.s. Collateral Volatility
Equity repos’ haircuts are plotted against the underlying collateral’s volatilities. For each repo, we first
calculate the value-weighted daily return of all stocks in the collateral pool, weighted by the collateral value
of individual securities. The collateral volatility is then calculated as the standard deviation of the daily
returns in the one-year window before the repo date.


                                                                                                                    34
                                                                                                         (a) Equity Repos


                                         Fidelity            Morgan Stanley          Federated         Charles Schwab           Bank of America          UBS                 Goldman Sachs          State Street           Ame. Beacon




                                   CS          JPM         BCS         MER          BAC          DB       GS            MFG           GLE          AMA          MTU          BNP        C           ING            UBS         RY




                                                                                                  (b) Corporate Bond Repos


                             Fid        BoA         MS     Blk      Fede      GS          Bar    SEI   Banc      Drey         Putm      Inv       Deut   JPM          Nor     ABea     Hun    UBS          Col      Prud




                             JPM        BNP         BCS    WFC       UBS      ING         MFG    BAC    HBC       RY           DB        CS        C     RBS          TD       GS      MS     MTU          BK        BMO




                                                                                                       (c) Treasury Repos


                              Fi        Fede         Dre    Blk      JPM      SSg         WF     MS      Ban      GS          UBS        IVO       NT     BoA          Leg     Deu      TRo   Van           Bar      Cha




                             BCS         DB         RBS    CS        BNP      ACA         HBC    GLE    BAC        C          UBS       GS        AMA     RY          JPM     BNS       TD    MS           MER       BMO




        Figure 4: MMF-Dealer Relationship in The Tri-Party Repo Market
The blue circles represent diﬀerent fund families and the red squares represent diﬀerent dealers. The fund
families and dealers are plotted from left to right, ranked by their total repo amount from November 2010
to August 2013. A pair of fund family and dealer are connected by a solid line if they have repo transactions
during our sample period from November 2010 to August 2013. For Treasury repos, only the top 20 fund
families and the top 20 dealers are plotted.          35
                                                                                                             (a) Credit Suisse
                                                       9,000                                                                                                                             3,000


                                                       8,000


                                                       7,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                 monthly repo amount of Non-Fidelity MMFs ($M)
           monthly repo amount of Fidelity MMFs ($M)




                                                       6,000                                                                                                                             2,000


                                                       5,000


                                                       4,000


                                                       3,000                                                                                                                             1,000


                                                       2,000


                                                       1,000


                                                           0       Fidelity                                                                     Non-Fidelity (Morgan Stanley + Federated) 0
                                                          201009    201012       201103   201106   201109   201112   201203   201206   201209   201212 201303            201306 201309
                                                                                                                     month

                                                                                                               (b) JP Morgan
                                                       6,000                                                                                                                             1,000




                                                       5,000
                                                                                                                                                                                         800




                                                                                                                                                                                                 monthly repo amount of Non-Fidelity MMFs ($M)
           monthly repo amount of Fidelity MMFs ($M)




                                                       4,000

                                                                                                                                                                                         600


                                                       3,000


                                                                                                                                                                                         400

                                                       2,000



                                                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                       1,000




                                                           0          Fidelity                                                                             Non-Fidelity (Morgan Stanley) 0
                                                          201009    201012       201103   201106   201109   201112   201203   201206   201209   201212     201303        201306 201309
                                                                                                                     month


         Figure 5: Equity Repo Borrowing of Credit Suisse and JP Morgan
The left y-axis corresponds to the monthly equity repo amount between the dealer and the Fidelity funds;
the right y-axis corresponds to the monthly equity repo amount between the dealer and the non-Fidelity
funds.


                                                                                                                     36
               10                                                     Baa3 Ba1


                9


                8


                7


                6
 haircut (%)




                5


                4


                3


                2


                1


                0
                    0      2             4     6               8       10          12          14   16             18     20   22
                                                                      collateral rating
                               Fund Family   Bank of America       Blackrock            Federated        Morgan Stanley

                        Figure 6: Corporate Bond Repo Haircut v.s. Collateral Rating
Corporate bond repos’ haircuts are plotted against the underlying collateral’s ratings. A repo’s rating is
calculated as the value-weighted average rating of all rated corporate bonds in the collateral pool, weighed
by the collateral value of the individual securities. A corporate bond’ rating is a numerical translation of
Moodys rating, where 1=Aaa and 21=C.




                                                                        37
                                            Table 1: Tri-Party Repos Summary Statistics, 2005 - 2013
                                                                        Panel A: Equity Tri-Party Repos
                                                                            Repo Haircut (%)                 Repo Spread (bps)           Repo Maturity (#bizdays)             Repo Size ($M)
     period            #FFs #MMFs    #dealers   #repos amt ($B)      mean     std   P10   med   P90   mean     std   P10   med   P90    mean   std   P10   med   P90   mean   std    P10   med P90
     Jan 05 - Jun 08      2     15         10       202         84    5.05 0.80 5.00      5.01 5.07    29.2 31.3 8.0       22.0 65.0    18.3 30.0      1     1    66    415 402       35   300   849
     Sep 08 - Jun 09      1     11          9       183         58    9.10 2.00 5.03      10.0 10.2    77.4 99.1 28.0      40.0 176     15.9 19.9      1     1    43    316 459        8    94   987
     Sep 09 - Sep 10      3     17         10       292         57    8.47 1.89 5.00      8.05 10.1    31.4 9.9 21.0       30.0 43.0    26.9 30.3      1    20    64    196 349        5    64   497
     Nov 10 - Aug 13      7     36         15     3,350        286    7.39 1.96 5.00      8.01 8.92    38.5 19.1 16.0      39.0 62.0    24.1 29.3      1     8    68     85 145        2    33   249

                                                                      Panel B: Corporate Tri-Party Repos
                                                                            Repo Haircut (%)                 Repo Spread (bps)           Repo Maturity (#bizdays)             Repo Size ($M)
     period            #FFs #MMFs    #dealers   #repos amt ($B)      mean     std   P10   med   P90   mean     std   P10   med   P90    mean   std   P10   med   P90   mean   std    P10   med P90
     Jan 05 - Jun 08      9     28         22     1,271        399    3.65 1.46 2.00      3.21 5.17    29.2 36.3 4.0       18.0 66.0    28.7 120       1     1    64    314 361       21   200   747
     Sep 08 - Jun 09      5     16         17       203         47    5.01 0.58 5.00      5.02 5.21    81.6 120 22.0       41.0 130     10.9 13.8      1     1    23    234 335        8   100   600
     Sep 09 - Sep 10      9     27         15     1,039        110    6.82 2.02 5.00      7.00 8.51    30.3 13.9 16.0      27.0 49.0    39.3 33.5      1    58    64    106 223        2    31   250
     Nov 10 - Aug 13     17     53         20     1,291        107    4.87 1.40 3.00      5.00 7.00    20.3 12.9 7.0       17.0 40.0     6.7 15.2      1     1    23     83 96        10    50   195




38
                                                                      Panel C: Treasury Tri-Party Repos
                                                                            Repo Haircut (%)                 Repo Spread (bps)           Repo Maturity (#bizdays)             Repo Size ($M)
     period            #FFs #MMFs    #dealers   #repos    amt ($B)   mean    std    P10   med   P90   mean    std    P10   med   P90    mean   std   P10   med   P90   mean    std   P10   med   P90
     Jan 05 - Jun 08     16    67         33     3,325       1,524   2.20 0.78 2.00       2.00 2.45   −14 48.0 −60 −6.0          20.0    13.9 42.1     1     1    41    458 593       27   250 1100
     Sep 08 - Jun 09     17    72         26     1,016         692   2.09 0.37 2.00       2.00 2.08   −1.1 73.1 −23 −1.0         17.0     5.6 18.1     1     1    12    681 924       50   391 1600
     Sep 09 - Sep 10     21    83         27     1,606         717   2.37 0.80 2.00       2.00 3.12    2.0 8.2 −5.0  1.0          8.0    11.6 24.1     1     1    54    446 542       29   250 1000
     Nov 10 - Aug 13     82   290         30    15,436       2,849   2.02 0.28 2.00       2.00 2.05    1.4 5.0 −5.0  2.0          8.0     1.6 3.7      1     1     2    185 293       10    90 500


      This table reports the distributions of haircut, spread, maturity and size for equity, corporate bond and Treasury tri-party repos, from January
      2005 to August 2013. The summary statistics for the period from January 2005 to June 2008, September 2008 to June 2009, and September
      2009 to September 2010 are based on the repos collected from the quarterly filings of 102 U.S. money market funds. The summary statistics
      for the period from November 2010 to August 2013 are based on the repos with matched collateral securities, collecting from the monthly
      N-MFP filings of all U.S. money market funds. In addition to the distributions of repo characteristics, we also report the total number of
      fund families (#FFs), the total number of money market funds (#MMFs), the total number of dealers (#dealers), the total number of repos
      (#repos) and the total amount of repos in billions (amt) for each of the sample periods.
                     Table 2: Equity Tri-Party Repos Summary Statistics, November 2010 - August 2013
                                                                                         Panel A: All Fund Families
                                                                        Repo Haircut (%)                         Repo Spread (bps)                 Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                       Repo Size ($M)
                 fund family        #repos       amt ($M)        mean     std     Q1     med      Q3     mean      std     Q1     med      Q3     mean      std    Q1    med       Q3   mean       std     Q1   med     Q3
                 Fidelity             2,168           179,650     8.49 0.89      8.01    8.70    8.83     41.1    20.0    23.0    43.0    57.0     27.8    31.7      2    13       49        83   155       5     17     83

                 Morgan Stanley        254             42,643     5.13 0.46      5.00    5.01    5.01     24.1    14.6    15.0    18.0    30.0      3.2     8.4      1        1     1    168      197      30     90    230

                 Charles Schwab        604             25,725     4.99 0.08      4.99    5.00    5.00     42.2    15.8    22.0    46.0    54.0     27.3    25.5      1    21       50        43    41      12     30     65

                 Bank of America       146             13,188     8.02 2.19      6.52    7.26    9.53     24.1     6.4    19.0    24.0    29.0     16.5    19.8      1        2    29        90    74      45     57    120

                 Federated             100             12,363     2.03 0.04      2.01    2.03    2.07     28.2     3.7    26.5    28.5    30.5      4.7     0.5      4        5     5    124      104      40    100    188

                 State Street              20           6,250     7.71 0.92      8.00    8.00    8.00     15.0     1.7    14.0    14.5    16.0      1.0     0.0      1        1     1    313      135     225    300    450

                 Goldman Sachs             58           5,950     8.28 0.70      8.00    8.00    8.01     28.0     9.9    22.0    24.0    39.0      1.2     0.8      1        1     1    103       95      99    100    100


                                                                                          Panel B: Top Five Dealers




39
                                            Dealer CDS (bps)                   Repo Haircut (%)                         Repo Spread (bps)                 Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                       Repo Size ($M)
            dealer #repos amt ($M)          mean                std    mean     std      Q1     med      Q3    mean       std     Q1     med      Q3    mean      std    Q1       med   Q3    mean        std   Q1     med    Q3

            JPM        1,155     122,355        99              24.4    8.56    0.98    8.72    8.79    8.89     48.1    17.4    41.0    53.0    58.0     43.5    34.2   13        38   66        106     180    7      27    132

            CS          733       85,940        123             31.7    6.70    2.14    5.10    8.00    8.06     33.5    21.4    16.0    27.0    43.0     13.4    17.3    1         5   21        117     158   13      54    165

            DB          302       19,470        131             37.7    6.42    2.30    5.00    5.00    8.00     21.5     6.7    17.0    21.0    22.0      1.6     1.7    1         1    1         64     109   15      35     78

            GS          434       18,586        201             84.7    4.99    0.07    4.96    5.00    5.00     51.1     8.2    44.0    52.0    56.0     37.4    23.2   18        34   55         43      42    9      30     65

            MFG         203       10,167                                8.55    1.83    8.00    8.01    8.07     26.0     6.3    22.0    25.0    31.0      3.6     1.6    2         4    5         50     124    4       9     37


     This table reports the distributions of haircut, spread, maturity and size for the sample of equity repos with matched collateral from November
     2010 to August 2013. Panel A reports the summary statistics for each of the seven fund families. Panel B reports the summary statistics
     for the top five dealers, ranked by the total equity repo amount. The top five dealers are JP Morgan (JPM), Credit Suisse (CS), Deutsche
     Bank (DB), Goldman Sachs (GS) and Mizuho (MFG). In addition to the repo statistics, we also report the time-series mean and standard
     deviation of the dealers’ 5-year CDS spreads in Panel B. The CDS spreads data are obtained from Markit. We don’t have Mizuho’s CDS
     spreads since it is not covered by Markit.
Table 3: Top 20 Collateral for Equity Tri-Party Repos, November 2010 - August
2013
    stock                                   amount ($M)   pct (%)   #repos   #months #FFs      #dealers
    Anglogold Ltd                                  7368      2.78      121        30       3         6
    Bank of America Corp                           5772      2.17      296        33       4         9
    Apple Inc                                      5616      2.12      224        33       5        12
    Verisign Inc                                   3407      1.28       69        30       3         5
    Wells Fargo & Co                               3108      1.17      145        31       7        12
    Anadarko Petroleum Corp                        2816      1.06      204        32       6        10
    Citigroup Inc                                  2796      1.05      230        30       7        13
    Transocean Ltd                                 2269      0.85       52        21       4         5
    Hartford Financial Services Group Inc          2119      0.80       49        24       3         6
    QUALCOMM Inc                                   2084      0.78      166        31       5         9
    JPMorgan Chase & Co                            2057      0.77      268        34       7        12
    EMC Corp                                       2014      0.76       78        26       5         7
    Nexen Inc                                      1960      0.74      126        18       3         5
    Alliance Data Systems Corp                     1852      0.70       64        31       2         4
    Ford Motor Corp                                1781      0.67       51        24       4         8
    Microchip Technology Inc                       1594      0.60       81        29       3         5
    MGM Resorts International                      1594      0.60       79        25       4         5
    Pfizer Inc                                     1575      0.59      269        33       6        12
    Cadence Design Systems Inc                     1567      0.59       38        26       2         3
    Google Inc                                     1531      0.58      136        28       5        13

This table reports the top 20 securities in the collateral pool of the equity tri-party repos from November
2010 to August 2013. For each security, we report the total amount (amount), the share of the entire
collateral pool (pct), the number of repos for which the security is used as collateral (#repos), the number
of months the security is used as collateral (#months), the number of fund families that accept the security
as collateral (#FFs) and the number of dealers that post the security as collateral (#dealers).




                                                    40
Table 4: Collateral Characteristics of Equity Tri-Party Repos, November 2010 -
August 2013
                                                     equity collaterals
          Fund Family          matched #cols        #cols (vw)     size     port vol avg vol       fin
                                                             mean
          Fidelity                 99.72    7.17             3.82 9.77        29.61      34.24   0.21
          Morgan Stanley           98.98   71.48            39.83 9.44        20.45      33.22   0.17
          Charles Schwab           99.63   34.34            24.57 9.80        22.05      32.93   0.20
          Bank of America          98.86   39.46            14.36 9.48        19.03      32.01   0.19
          Federated                99.95   39.48            13.02 10.34       20.26      29.41   0.23
          State Street             99.97   21.35             7.19 10.12       28.08      36.23   0.19
          Goldman Sachs            99.36   30.34            16.49 10.97       18.70      27.24   0.23
          All                      99.61   19.81            11.26 9.78        26.61      33.57   0.20
                                                            median
          Fidelity               100.00     2.00             1.57 9.51        27.88      33.12   0.00
          Morgan Stanley         100.00    47.50            37.46 9.45        20.03      33.18   0.17
          Charles Schwab         100.00    22.00            21.67 9.80        22.24      32.99   0.19
          Bank of America        100.00    27.00            12.54 9.13        17.66      31.66   0.17
          Federated              100.00    32.00            12.22 10.41       20.13      29.22   0.23
          State Street           100.00    15.50             5.78 10.07       27.88      36.28   0.18
          Goldman Sachs          100.00    17.50            12.97 11.09       17.15      25.39   0.23
          All                    100.00     9.00             4.06 9.67        24.83      32.67   0.12
                                                    standard deviation
          Fidelity                  1.34   10.16             6.14    1.82     11.07      11.05   0.33
          Morgan Stanley            1.68   69.25            11.46    1.03      5.33       6.05   0.08
          Charles Schwab            1.43   42.31             9.62    0.89      5.49       6.49   0.09
          Bank of America           2.39   45.44             7.14    1.14      6.85       6.75   0.16
          Federated                 0.51   46.31             9.45    0.42      3.18       3.85   0.10
          State Street              0.14   14.71             4.56    1.03      5.94       9.19   0.19
          Goldman Sachs             2.23   31.95             8.83    0.66      6.02       6.39   0.10
          All                       1.47   36.01            13.71    1.58     10.36       9.72   0.27

This table reports the summary statistics of the equity collateral for each of the seven fund families in the
equity repo market, from November 2010 to August 2013. We first calculate, for each equity repo, the
percentage of matched securities (matched), the number of collateral (#cols), the value-weighted number of
collateral (#cols (vw)), the value-weighted log firm size (size), the portfolio volatility (port vol), the value-
weighted volatility (avg vol), and the proportion of financial firms (fin). The weights are individual security’s
collateral value. The value-weighted number of collateral (#cols (vw)) is calculated as the inverse of the
Herfindahl index based on the collateral value of individual securities. We then report the cross-sectional
mean, median and standard-deviation of repos for each fund family and the full sample.




                                                       41
               Table 5: Determinants of Fidelity Money Market Funds’ Equity Tri-Party Repo Haircut
               Parm              (1)      (2)     (3)   (4)     (5)     (6)      (7)    (8)     (9)
               #cols (vw)                                            −.005                                                  −.005
                                                                    [−1.29]                                                [−1.39]
               col size                                                           0.008                                      0.009
                                                                                 [ 0.96]                                    [ 0.79]
               col port vol                                                                 −.002                           −.002
                                                                                           [−0.60]                         [−0.67]
               col avg vol                                                                            −.001
                                                                                                     [−0.62]
               col fin (%)                                                                                       −.004      −.028
                                                                                                                [−0.06]    [−0.29]




42
               dealer CDS                             −.003   −.004   −.003   −.003   −.003                      −.003      −.003
                                                     [−1.40] [−1.43] [−1.40] [−1.42] [−1.41]                    [−1.42]    [−1.46]
               repo size (log)        0.003   −.006   −.006    0.001  −.006   −.009   −.006                      −.006      −.002
                                     [ 0.16] [−0.20] [−0.20] [ 0.05] [−0.19] [−0.34] [−0.20]                    [−0.20]    [−0.08]
               repo mat           0.006***    −.001   −.001   −.001   −.001   −.001   −.001                      −.001      −.001
                                     [ 2.95] [−1.00] [−0.97] [−1.02] [−0.94] [−1.03] [−1.05]                    [−0.97]    [−1.03]
               month                     Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
               dealer                    N          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
               NOBS                   1971       1971       1971       1971       1961       1964       1964       1971       1954
               R2                     10.6       35.1       35.5       35.6       35.4       35.5       35.5       35.5       35.6

     This table reports the OLS regressions on the haircuts of Fidelity money market funds’ equity tri-party repos from November 2010 to August
     2013. The t-statistics reported in squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard errors, clustered by dealer and month.
        Table 6: Determinants of Bank of America Money Market Funds’ Equity Tri-Party Repo Haircut
     Parm               (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)
     #cols (vw)                                                −.079***                                                          −.056***
                                                                 [−2.64]                                                           [−2.79]
     col size                                                                    0.139                                               −.354
                                                                                [ 0.59]                                            [−1.37]
     col port vol                                                                         0.210***                               0.218***
                                                                                             [ 9.53]                                [12.53]
     col avg vol                                                                                           0.101
                                                                                                          [ 1.62]
     col fin (%)                                                                                                   1.819*           −.047
                                                                                                                   [ 1.65]         [−0.06]




43
     dealer CDS                                       0.026        0.014    0.021   −.027                  0.009    0.008           −.024
                                                     [ 0.63]      [ 0.39]  [ 0.53] [−1.23]                [ 0.31]  [ 0.26]         [−1.24]
     repo size (log)      −.532 −.929***          −.896***        −.329 −.857*** −.638***              −.947*** −.792***          −.326**
                         [−0.76]  [−3.65]           [−4.46]      [−1.49]  [−5.80]  [−5.31]               [−7.15]  [−4.08]          [−1.97]
     repo mat          −.044***   −.009*            −.009*       −.008* −.008**    −.010*              −.013***   −.009*            −.011
                         [−3.15]  [−1.78]           [−1.90]      [−1.66]  [−2.41]  [−1.90]               [−3.54]  [−1.65]          [−1.49]
     month                      Y            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
     dealer                     N            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
     NOBS                     146          146           146          146          146          146           146          146          146
     R2                      43.7         79.2          79.4         81.9         79.6         87.4          82.2         80.3         89.0

     This table reports the OLS regressions on the haircuts of Bank of America money market funds’ equity tri-party repos from November 2010
     to August 2013. The t-statistics reported in squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard errors, clustered by dealer and
     month.
         Table 7: Determinants of Equity Tri-Party Repo Haircut, excluding Fidelity and Bank of America
          Parm             (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)    (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)    (9)    (10)
           #col (vw)                                          −.002                                                 −.003* −.003*
                                                             [−1.37]                                                [−1.77] [−1.74]
           col size                                                     −.033*                                       −.047    −.043
                                                                        [−1.78]                                     [−1.62] [−1.33]
           col port vol                                                              0.003                           −.003
                                                                                    [ 0.67]                         [−0.44]
           col avg vol                                                                        0.004**                         −.001
                                                                                               [ 2.37]                       [−0.17]
           col fin (%)                                                                                    −.093      −.014    −.023
                                                                                                         [−0.53]    [−0.09] [−0.15]
           dealer CDS                                      −.001   −.001   −.001               −.001      −.001      −.001    −.001




44
                                                          [−1.42] [−1.48] [−1.44]             [−1.43]    [−1.48]    [−1.63] [−1.64]
           repo size (log)     0.011   −.028       −.017   −.014   −.015   −.017               −.017      −.018      −.009    −.009
                              [ 0.14] [−1.49]     [−1.18] [−1.00] [−1.23] [−1.18]             [−1.17]    [−1.22]    [−0.85] [−0.84]
           repo mat            0.006   −.000       −.000   −.000    0.000  −.000               −.000      −.000       0.000    0.000
                              [ 0.83] [−0.97]     [−0.03] [−0.38] [ 0.04] [−0.31]             [−0.21]    [−0.20]     [ 0.10] [ 0.02]
           month                 Y           Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
           dealer                N           N          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
           Fund Family            N          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
           NOBS                1036       1036       1036       1030       1030       1030       1030       1030       1030       1030
           R2                  22.0       94.6       95.6       95.6       95.6       95.6       95.6       95.6       95.7       95.6

     This table reports the OLS regressions on the haircuts of all equity tri-party repos from November 2010 to August 2013, excluding those by
     Fidelity and Bank of America money market funds. The t-statistics reported in squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard
     errors, clustered by fund family and month.
                Table 8: Determinants of Equity Tri-Party Repo Spread
                                      Morgan Charles
             Parm            Fidelity  Stanley  Schwab     BoA        All
             #cols (vw)            0.093*    −.020    −.040      0.031   −.138*
                                   [ 1.78]  [−0.57]  [−1.61]    [ 0.57]  [−1.76]
             col port vol           −.029    −.497    −.172      0.033     0.008
                                  [−0.35]   [−1.31]  [−1.36]    [ 0.50]   [ 0.13]
             col fin (%)            −1.42     4.045    1.237     3.067    −1.10
                                  [−0.36]    [ 0.61]  [ 0.43]   [ 1.62]  [−0.70]
             dealer CDS             0.055    −.027 0.107***      0.002 0.067***
                                   [ 0.62]  [−0.42]   [ 6.11]   [ 0.05]   [ 3.44]
             repo haircut        −5.67***    −1.11              −.313     −2.02
                                  [−3.12]   [−0.22]            [−1.04]   [−1.15]
             repo size (log)     −1.56***    −.605   −.153*     −3.10 −.862**
                                  [−7.00]   [−1.15]  [−1.72]   [−1.49]   [−2.57]
             repo mat             0.162** 0.745***     0.025 0.114*** 0.169***
                                   [ 2.31]   [ 6.67]  [ 0.66]   [ 2.59]   [ 5.87]
             month                       Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
             dealer                      Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
             Fund Family                 N             N            N             N            Y
             NOBS                     1964           248           604          146         3138
             R2                       37.3          66.6          93.1         72.0         45.9

This table reports the OLS regressions on the spreads of the equity tri-party repos from November 2010 to
August 2013, separately for repos by Fidelity, Morgan Stanley, Charles Schwab, Bank of America money
market funds and also for the full sample of repos. For the regressions of the individual fund families, the
t-statistics reported in squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard errors clustered by dealer
and month. For the regression of the full sample of repos, the t-statistics reported in squared brackets are
based on the double-clustered standard errors clustered by fund family and month.




                                                      45
                                               Table 9: Top Fund Families and Their Counter-Parties
                                                                                                                      top 1 dealer                                      top 2 dealer
                                            repo amt     mkt share(%)   # dealers      # vw dealers   dealer   #mon        value         ratio(%)       dealer   #mon        value         ratio(%)
          rank   fund family       #mon   mean     std   mean     std   mean    std    mean    std                     mean     std      mean   std                      mean     std      mean   std
                                                                                      Panel A: Equity Repos

          1      Fidelity            34   9,517 3,926     69.3    7.4    6.1    1.0      3.4    0.5   CS        34     3,100   1,237       29    9      JPM       34     2,722       680     31    9
          2      Morgan Stanley      34   1,521   601     12.0    5.4    4.3    1.9      3.2    1.3   CS        32       516     260       34   16      JPM       34       469        86     34   13
          3      Federated           30     743   626      5.4    4.1    1.9    0.6      1.4    0.4   CS        18       656     541       53   40      BCS       27       118        52     33   36
          4      Charles Schwab      23     586   556      4.0    3.7    1.8    0.4      1.4    0.4   GS        23       766     354       81   15      DB        19       101        72     19   15
          5      Bank of America     18     406   473      3.7    4.2    2.9    1.2      2.2    0.9   CS        16       468     326       56   29      DB        12       111       181     14   16
                                                                               Panel B: Corporate Bond Repos

          1      Fidelity            34   5,394 2,472     39.8   11.1    9.8    1.2      5.7    1.0   JPM       27     1,157       683     16   10      BCS       25       829       444     13    8
          2      Bank of America     34   1,524   442     12.4    4.8    6.8    1.3      4.7    1.2   JPM       33       373       151     25    9      RY        32       329       160     22   11
          3      Morgan Stanley      34   1,266   436     10.4    4.4    5.7    2.2      3.3    1.0   WFC       30       489       180     35   11      JPM       18       214       112     16    9
          4      Blackrock           34   1,194   590      9.0    3.8    3.8    1.1      3.0    1.0   UBS       32       402       126     38   15      JPM       34       293       169     25   12
          5      Federated           31     913   605      7.0    3.8    3.8    1.3      3.2    1.1   BNP       23       303       244     27   19      C         26       186       107     22   13




46
                                                                                    Panel C: Treasury Repos

          1      Fidelity            34   22,348 5,432    11.6    2.5   12.4    2.5      7.5    2.1 BCS         34     3,520 1,846         16       7   ACA       24     2,751 1,229         13       6
          2      Federated           34   21,983 7,083    11.4    3.2   14.0    1.7      7.7    1.8 BCS         34     5,102 2,380         22       6   ACA       34     2,762 1,116         13       6
          3      Dreyfus             32   19,411 7,395     9.9    3.3   16.4    1.2      7.8    1.4 AMA         25     4,814 1,977         21       8   HBC       32     2,241   938         11       3
          4      Blackrock           34   12,462 3,558     6.4    1.5   11.5    0.6      7.9    0.8 DB          34     2,206   743         18       4   BCS       34     1,634   679         14       5
          5      J.P. Morgan         34   10,037 3,103     5.1    1.1    8.9    1.7      6.1    1.2 BCS         34     1,832   684         19       7   RBS       34     1,747   661         18       6


     This table summarizes, for each asset class, the top five fund families and their counter-parties. The summary statistics are based on the full
     sample of repos from November 2010 to August 2013. The repos are classified into diﬀerent asset classes according to the reported collateral
     type and collateral subtype. The fund families are ranked by the total amount of repo transactions during the sample period. For each fund
     family at each month-end, we calculate its total repo amount, market share (%), the number of counter-parties (#dealers), the value-weighted
     number of counter-parties (# vw dealers). The time-series mean and standard deviations are then reported in the table. We select the top
     two dealers for each fund family, based on the total amount of repo transactions during the sample period. For each fund family - dealer pair,
     we report the time-series mean and standard deviation of the repo amount (value) and the ratio out of the fund family’s total repos (ratio).
     The dealers in the table are Credit Suisse (CS), JP Morgan (JPM), Barclays (BCS), Deutsche Bank (DB), Goldman Sachs (GS), Royal Bank
     of Canada (RY), Wells Fargo (WFC), UBS (UBS), BNP Paribas (BNP), Citi Group (C), Credit Agricole (ACA), HSBC Holdings (HBC),
     ABN AMRO (AMA) and Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS).
                                                       Table 10: Top Dealers and Their Counter-Parties
                                                                                                      top 1 fund family                                       top2 fund family
                                repo amt       mkt share(%)     # FFs       # vw FFs       MMF       #mon      value         ratio(%)            MMF          #mon        value         ratio(%)
         rank   dealer #mon   mean       std   mean     std    mean   std   mean   std                      mean    std      mean   std                               mean       std    mean   std
                                                                                     Panel A: Equity Repos

         1      CS       34    4,636 1,782      32.0     8.4    3.4   0.9    2.2   0.6   Fidelity     34    3,100 1,237        62   10      Federated           18      578       565     10   11
         2      JPM      34    3,215   729      24.7     6.1    2.1   0.4    1.4   0.1   Fidelity     34    2,722   680        84    5      Morgan Stanley      34      469        86     15    5
         3      BCS      34    1,265   563       8.4     3.5    2.7   1.1    1.7   0.6   Fidelity     23      886   475        43   20      UBS                 22      230       278     20   27
         4      MER      12    1,085 1,587       8.5    11.4    2.3   0.5    1.1   0.1   Fidelity     12    3,004 1,798        97    3      Morgan Stanley      3        36        76      1    3
         5      BAC      22      948   842       7.3     6.9    1.9   0.6    1.2   0.3   Fidelity     22    1,353   925        90   10      Morgan Stanley      5        96        92      8    8
                                                                               Panel B: Corporate Bond Repos

         1      JPM      34    2,484    757     18.4     5.1    6.8   0.9    3.7   1.5   Fidelity     27    1,123      666     32   17      Bank of America     33      373       151     19   10
         2      BNP      34    1,511    453     11.9     3.1    7.1   2.2    4.4   1.7   Blackrock    29      307      152     23   12      Fidelity            30      294       131     23   15
         3      BCS      34    1,396    752      9.5     4.8    4.1   2.5    2.2   1.1   Fidelity     25      804      426     43   19      Blackrock           16      187       210     13   15
         4      WFC      34    1,360    432     10.6     3.1    2.9   1.1    2.1   0.6   Fidelity     32      710      351     48   19      Morgan Stanley      30      489       180     38   15




47
         5      UBS      34    1,236    416      9.6     2.9    3.3   0.7    2.6   0.5   Fidelity     34      532      216     44   14      Blackrock           32      402       126     33   15
                                                                                    Panel C: Treasury Repos

         1      BCS      34   30,856   7,228    16.3     3.5   34.8   2.3   11.7   1.8   Federated    34    5,102 2,380        16       6   Fidelity            34     3,520 1,846        12       6
         2      DB       34   17,320   4,950     8.8     1.9   32.6   4.1   11.9   2.7   Blackrock    34    2,206   743        13       4   Federated           34     1,751 1,096        10       5
         3      RBS      34   16,077   3,508     8.4     1.5   21.0   2.4   10.0   1.6   Federated    34    2,270 1,375        14       7   Fidelity            29     1,861 1,387        11       9
         4      CS       34   13,208   4,515     6.7     2.0   25.5   2.8    9.2   1.7   Fidelity     27    2,181 1,648        14       8   Federated           31     1,619 1,332        11       7
         5      BNP      34   12,953   3,911     6.8     1.9   17.0   2.5    8.4   1.5   Fidelity     34    2,092 1,398        15       7   Federated           34     1,915   961        15       6


     This table summarizes, for each asset class, the top five dealers and their counter-parties. The summary statistics are based on the full sample
     of repos from November 2010 to August 2013. The repos are classified into diﬀerent asset classes according to the reported collateral type and
     collateral subtype. For each dealer at each month-end, we calculate its total repo amount, market share (%), the number of counter-parties
     (# FFs), the value-weighted number of counter-parties (# vw FFs). The time-series mean and standard deviations are then reported in the
     table. We select the top two fund families for each dealer, based on the total amount of repo transactions during the sample period. For
     each fund family - dealer pair, we report the time-series mean and standard deviation of the repo amount (value) and the ratio out of the
     dealer’s total repos (ratio). The dealers in the table are Credit Suisse (CS), JP Morgan (JPM), Barclays (BCS), Merill Lynch (MER), Bank
     of America (BAC), Deutsche Bank (DB), Wells Fargo (WFC), UBS (UBS), BNP Paribas (BNP), and Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS).
                      Table 11: Corporate Bond Repo Summary Statistics, November 2010 - August 2013
                                                                               Panel A: Top Ten Fund Families
                                                                        Repo Haircut (%)                 Repo Spread (bps)              Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                 Repo Size ($M)
                  fund family           #repos      amt ($M)    mean      std     Q1    med     Q3    mean    std     Q1    med   Q3   mean     std   Q1   med       Q3   mean       std    Q1    med    Q3
                  Bank of America             415     35,607     4.63    0.82    4.95   5.00   5.00     18     11 9.0        15   25     9.6     15    1     1       11        86 70        36      63   121
                  Morgan Stanley              250     23,909     5.34    0.69    5.00   5.01   5.93     24     14 12         21   34     8.2     25    1     1        4        96 149       10      45    90
                  Blackrock                   162     13,349     6.70    0.71    7.00   7.00   7.01     25     14 13         21   40     4.7     11    1     1        1        82 88        25      50   100
                  Federated                    92      9,606     2.04    0.16    2.00   2.00   2.01     32     12 22         31   40     3.3    6.2    1     1        5       104 95        27     100   135
                  Barclay                      55      7,509     4.16    1.01    3.00   5.00   5.00     19     12 9.0        13   35     2.1    4.4    1     1        1       137 104       50     100   220
                  Dreyfus                      44      4,489     3.69    0.86    3.00   3.23   4.88     12    1.8 11         12   13     1.0    0.0    1     1        1       102 76        50      98   133
                  U.S. Bancorp                 42      4,295     5.00    0.00    5.00   5.00   5.00     13    4.3 10         13   16     4.9    7.7    1     1        3       102 41        75     100   120
                  Putman                      128      2,919     5.02    0.32    4.99   5.00   5.01     14    4.7 11         12   18     7.2    8.5    1     1       16        23 17         6      18    38
                  Goldman Sachs                16      1,721     7.44    2.18    5.00   7.48   9.47     20     13 11         14   30     1.3    1.0    1     1        1       108 113        2     100   180
                  Deutsche Investment          36        968     3.84    1.26    3.02   3.27   4.59     13     11 5.0       9.0   22     4.9    7.8    1     1        8        27 54         2      12    25

                                                                                   Panel B: Top Ten Dealers
                                     Dealer CDS (bps)                 Repo Haircut (%)                        Repo Spread (bps)                Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                          Repo Size ($M)




48
       dealer   #repos   amt ($M)    mean             std mean          std      Q1     med     Q3    mean      std        Q1   med     Q3     mean    std   Q1       med      Q3     mean        std    Q1    med   Q3
       JPM         427      26,739      111          25.8      5.37     0.99    5.00    5.00   5.03    25.0    11.6    16.0     22.0   36.0    10.0   13.9       1        2     15          63 58        22     44    87
       WFC         146      20,156       86          20.8      5.10     0.28    5.00    5.00   5.00    17.7     7.0    11.0     16.5   22.0     4.3   10.6       1        1      3         138 178       30     81   160
       BNP         182      19,334      160          61.0      3.73     1.85    2.01    3.00   5.02    26.7    16.0    10.0     29.0   39.0     3.6    7.0       1        1      5         106 105       25     75   160
       HBC         118       9,604      119          26.5      4.92     1.49    3.29    5.00   7.00    11.3     3.1     9.0     11.0   13.0     1.0    0.0       1        1      1          81 59        43     68   108
       CS           72       6,216      134          34.2      5.09     1.17    4.99    5.00   5.01    20.5    13.2     9.0     12.0   33.0    12.2   17.2       1        1     23          86 81        31     68   115
       UBS          44       4,681      123          38.1      5.18     1.99    3.00    5.27   7.00    13.8     6.7     8.0     14.0   19.0     1.7    3.0       1        1      1         106 133       20     50   135
       ING          48       4,215      138          28.0      4.51     1.99    2.46    5.00   5.01    15.5     5.8    12.0     15.0   18.0     1.0    0.3       1        1      1          88 91        20     70   100
       DB           53       3,149      103          20.9      5.17     1.22    4.98    5.00   5.08    12.8     5.7    11.0     12.0   13.0     1.0    0.3       1        1      1          59 52        25     45    75
       RY           38       2,450       60          29.9      5.20     0.35    5.00    5.00   5.22    20.3    18.9     7.0     11.0   22.0    25.5   55.6       1        1      7          64 53        20     51   100
       BCS          43       2,371      164          42.0      4.72     1.66    4.59    5.00   6.00    30.4    17.8    13.0     28.0   49.0    11.8   17.7       1        2     14          55 51        12     26    90

     This table reports the distribution of haircut, spread, maturity and size of the corporate bond tri-party repos, based on the monthly repo
     data with matched collateral from November 2010 to August 2013. Panel A reports the summary statistics for the top ten fund families and
     Panel B reports the summary statistics for the top ten dealers. The top ten dealers are JP Morgan (JPM), Wells Fargo (WFC), BNP Paribas
     (BNP), HSBC (HBC), Credit Suisse (CS), UBS (UBS), ING (ING), Deutsche Bank (DB), Royal Bank of Canada (RY) and Barclays (BCS).
     In addition to the repo statistics, we also report the time-series mean and standard deviation of the dealers’ 5-year CDS spreads in Panel B.
     The CDS spreads data are obtained from Markit.
Table 12: Characteristics of Corporate Bond Collateral, November 2010 - August
2013
                 MMFs Family           matched   #cols   #cols (vw)    rated     IG    rating   age    maturity issu. size
                                                                               mean
                 Bank of America         95.67   29.71        11.12     0.94    0.89    6.85    2.91       4.69      20.61
                 Morgan Stanley          94.39   70.20        36.89     0.92    0.55   10.55    3.32       9.32      20.25
                 Blackrock               91.71   56.72        27.37     0.88    0.51   10.52    3.56       9.46      20.24
                 Federated               94.16   32.70        13.65     0.89    0.31   11.80    3.83       7.87      20.36
                 Barclay                 93.50   40.78        16.09     0.90    0.65    9.10    3.99       8.28      20.29
                 Dreyfus                 95.98   34.09         9.07     0.84    0.53   10.43    4.93       7.61      20.11
                 U.S. Bancorp            95.29   29.26         9.86     0.93    0.90    7.82    3.28      11.80      20.47
                 Putman                  95.63   17.88         7.61     0.94    0.94    8.80    2.80      10.68      20.14
                 Goldman Sachs           92.13   28.19        15.04     0.89    0.65    8.70    3.56       7.98      20.65
                 Deutsche Investment     97.51    6.42         3.08     0.96    0.71    7.74    4.47      11.16      20.51
                 All                     94.69   40.34        18.19     0.92    0.70    8.95    3.32       7.84      20.38
                                                                           median
                 Bank of America         97.85   16.00         6.64     0.97    0.95    8.00    2.77       5.16      20.44
                 Morgan Stanley          94.88   17.50         9.59     0.92    0.86    9.00    3.17       8.44      20.23
                 Blackrock               90.65   36.00        24.17     0.88    0.68    9.14    3.49       8.73      20.23
                 Federated               93.71   31.00        12.45     0.89    0.11   13.17    3.69       6.28      20.36
                 Barclay                 94.30   19.00         8.46     0.94    0.82    9.13    3.51       6.93      20.30
                 Dreyfus                 97.65   25.00         7.57     0.90    0.53   10.39    4.94       7.27      20.03
                 U.S. Bancorp            97.86   24.00         7.38     0.97    0.95    8.05    3.08      11.07      20.46
                 Putman                  96.91   15.50         4.51     0.96    0.96    9.90    2.51       9.46      20.00
                 Goldman Sachs           91.84   22.50        15.65     0.90    0.87    7.17    3.44       6.78      20.74
                 Deutsche Investment    100.00    4.00         1.60     1.00    0.97    6.92    3.99       8.95      20.37
                 All                     95.72   21.00         8.39     0.93    0.89    8.83    3.05       6.83      20.29
                                                                      standard deviation
                 Bank of America          4.85 43.83          18.85     0.09    0.17    3.22    1.23       2.34       0.67
                 Morgan Stanley           5.19 132.27         76.66     0.10    0.44    3.63    1.63       5.93       0.54
                 Blackrock                4.73 82.80          22.94     0.10    0.41    3.31    1.54       4.01       0.34
                 Federated                4.76 24.59           8.58     0.08    0.37    3.28    1.48       4.65       0.44
                 Barclay                  5.14 64.06          24.75     0.09    0.37    2.21    1.65       3.96       0.41
                 Dreyfus                  4.25 25.69           7.49     0.20    0.38    3.18    2.28       4.41       0.43
                 U.S. Bancorp             5.23 20.35           7.77     0.09    0.16    2.04    1.27       5.07       0.48
                 Putman                   4.59 15.45           8.25     0.06    0.07    2.35    1.64       5.46       0.50
                 Goldman Sachs            5.54 23.91          11.15     0.09    0.40    4.55    1.10       4.30       0.47
                 Deutsche Investment      4.39   6.92          3.41     0.07    0.42    2.64    3.18       7.46       0.72
                 All                      5.07 75.44          39.20     0.10    0.38    3.62    1.64       5.04       0.58


This table reports the summary statistics of the collateral posted for the corporate bond tri-party repos from
November 2010 to August 2013. For every corporate bond repo, we calculate the percentage of matched
securities (matched), the number of collateral (#cols), the value-weighted number of collateral (#cols (vw)),
the proportion of rated obnds (rated), the proportion of investment-grade bonds (IG), the value-weighted
bond rating (rating), the value-weighted age in years (age), the value-weighted maturity in years (maturity)
and the value-weighted log issuance size (issu. size). All the weights are the collateral value of the individual
securities. The value-weighted number of collateral (#cols (vw)) is the inverse of the Herfindahl index based
on the collateral value of the individual securities. We then report the cross-sectional mean, median and
standard-deviation for repos of each fund family and the full sample.




                                                                49
                 Table 13: Determinants of Corporate Bond Repo Haircut
                               Investment Grade             Non-Investment Grade
       Parm               Baa3 and above     IG% > 85%     below Baa3    IG% < 15%      All        All
       #cols (vw)               −.006**         −.005*          −.006        0.012* 0.014*      0.000
                                  [−2.41]       [−1.96]       [−0.68]        [ 1.81] [ 1.89]   [ 0.15]
       col rating                  0.101*         0.082         0.064        0.166*   0.050 0.104***
                                   [ 1.67]       [ 1.33]       [ 1.63]       [ 1.70] [ 1.03]   [ 3.20]
       col age                      0.008         0.015         0.033        −.038   −.005      0.024
                                   [ 0.64]       [ 1.15]       [ 0.79]      [−1.33] [−0.26]    [ 0.99]
       col maturity (%)             0.005         0.003         −.017         0.005   0.015     0.009
                                   [ 0.38]       [ 0.28]      [−0.66]        [ 0.16] [ 1.41]   [ 0.58]
       dealer CDS                  −.002         −.002          0.003         0.008   0.002    −.001
                                  [−1.09]       [−1.47]        [ 1.51]       [ 1.47] [ 0.69]  [−0.93]
       repo size (log)          0.039***         0.025*         −.016        −.030   −.042     −.017
                                   [ 3.21]       [ 1.86]      [−0.40]       [−0.91] [−0.54]   [−0.53]
       repo mat                     0.000        −.000        0.017**        0.017*   0.001     0.003
                                   [ 0.19]      [−0.34]        [ 2.04]       [ 1.83] [ 0.23]   [ 1.34]
       month                            Y            Y              Y            Y        Y         Y
       dealer                           Y            Y              Y            Y        Y         Y
       Fund Family                      Y            Y              Y            Y        N         Y
       NOBS                           377           406           303          158     1017      1017
       R2                            92.2          92.1          90.5         95.0     38.7      84.1

This table reports the OLS regressions on the haircuts of corporate bond tri-party repos from November
2010 to August 2013. We use two methods to classify investment grade and non-investment grade corporate
bond repos. The first one is by the average ratings of the underlying corporate bonds. The tri-party repos
with average ratings at Baa3 or better are considered as investment-grade repos; tri-party repos with average
ratings below Baa3 are considered as non-investment grade repos. The second method is by the percentage
of investment grade bonds in the collateral pool. The tri-party repos with more than 85% investment-grade
bonds in the collateral pool are considered as investment-grade repos; the tri-party repos with more than
85% non-investment grade bonds are considered as non-investment grade repos. The t-statistics reported in
squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard errors clustered by fund family and month.




                                                      50
                   Table 14: Determinants of Corporate Bond Repo Spread
                             Investment Grade             Non-Investment Grade
      Parm               Baa3 and above IG% > 85% below Baa3            IG% < 15%        All        All
      #cols (vw)                  0.020         0.008         −.009          −.062    −.006 −.011**
                                 [ 0.36]       [ 0.15]       [−0.21]        [−0.94]  [−0.86]   [−2.36]
      col rating                  0.272         0.030          0.915         −.040 1.596*** 1.139***
                                 [ 1.06]       [ 0.13]        [ 1.45]       [−0.08]   [ 3.62]   [ 5.18]
      col age                     0.313      0.380**          −.166          −.295     0.137     0.009
                                 [ 1.52]       [ 2.18]       [−0.85]        [−0.75]   [ 0.33]   [ 0.05]
      col maturity (%)            0.018         0.029       0.123**          0.382*   −.098     −.027
                                 [ 0.22]       [ 0.41]        [ 2.54]        [ 1.69] [−0.63]   [−0.29]
      dealer CDS                 0.032*        0.038*          0.017          0.020    0.010    0.025*
                                 [ 1.89]       [ 1.87]        [ 1.21]        [ 1.45]  [ 0.69]   [ 1.93]
      repo haircut            2.280***      2.460***       1.101***           0.607    0.981 1.835***
                                 [ 5.68]       [ 3.86]        [ 2.64]        [ 1.45]  [ 0.87]   [ 3.46]
      repo size (log)         −1.09***        −1.01*       0.794***       1.050***     0.186   −.620*
                                [−2.70]       [−1.70]         [ 3.12]        [ 3.68]  [ 0.41]  [−1.81]
      repo mat                0.286***      0.293***       0.218***       0.188*** 0.274*** 0.251***
                                 [ 4.89]       [ 5.84]        [ 4.61]        [ 4.15]  [ 6.64]   [ 6.54]
      month                           Y             Y              Y             Y         Y         Y
      dealer                          Y             Y              Y             Y         Y         Y
      Fund Family                     Y             Y              Y             Y         N         Y
      NOBS                          441           466            410           244      1258      1258
      R2                           68.3          68.0           74.0          60.1      57.6      69.4

This table reports the OLS regressions on the spread of corporate bond tri-party repos from November 2010
to August 2013. We use two methods to classify investment grade and non-investment grade corporate bond
repos. The first one is by the average ratings of the underlying corporate bonds. The tri-party repos with
average ratings at Baa3 or better are considered as investment-grade repos; tri-party repos with average
ratings below Baa3 are considered as non-investment grade repos. The second method is by the percentage
of investment grade bonds in the collateral pool. The tri-party repos with more than 85% investment-grade
bonds in the collateral pool are considered as investment-grade repos; the tri-party repos with more than
85% non-investment grade bonds are considered as non-investment grade repos. The t-statistics reported in
squared brackets are based on the double-clustered standard errors clustered by fund family and month.




                                                     51
Table 15: Characteristics of Treasury Collateral, November 2010 - August 2013
          fund family       #cols #cols (vw)   bill   note   bond   coupon    age    mat    duratn   outamt    vol     otr
                                                                      mean
          Dreyfus            2.67       1.91   0.08   0.77   0.14     2.07    2.16   6.33     4.99    42.56   4.96   10.49
          Federated         12.68       6.45   0.04   0.80   0.15     2.10    2.62   6.16     4.91    38.64   4.45   11.52
          Blackrock          2.29       1.77   0.06   0.79   0.15     2.08    2.42   6.28     4.94    40.15   4.40   10.57
          Morgan Stanley     2.27       1.70   0.05   0.82   0.13     1.99    2.80   5.31     4.32    38.25   3.74   11.81
          U.S. Bancorp       6.35       3.59   0.10   0.68   0.22     2.20    2.55   7.72     5.76    42.96   5.40    9.85
          J.P.Morgan         3.68       2.60   0.04   0.77   0.19     2.46    3.27   6.55     5.14    39.08   4.90   10.89
          Northern Trust     2.18       1.69   0.02   0.87   0.10     2.05    2.14   6.15     5.05    40.67   4.69   10.75
          Wells Fargo        3.18       2.54   0.06   0.81   0.13     2.05    2.38   5.69     4.63    40.24   4.10   10.43
          Goldman Sachs      4.69       3.21   0.05   0.83   0.12     2.06    1.89   6.14     4.89    40.43   4.49   10.61
          Bank of America    4.48       2.58   0.05   0.83   0.12     2.19    2.55   5.66     4.57    38.35   4.18   11.30
          All                3.43       2.23   0.06   0.79   0.15     2.05    2.39   6.21     4.91    40.36   4.43   10.83
                                                                     median
          Dreyfus            1.00       1.00   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.75    1.04   4.12     3.81    36.20   3.16    8.75
          Federated          4.00       2.99   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.89    1.97   4.34     3.98    35.87   3.34   10.83
          Blackrock          1.00       1.00   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.75    1.41   3.72     3.52    35.66   2.31    9.00
          Morgan Stanley     1.00       1.00   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.53    1.51   3.28     3.11    35.27   2.08   10.56
          U.S. Bancorp       2.00       1.92   0.00   0.90   0.00     1.86    1.45   4.34     4.06    36.54   3.34    9.13
          J.P.Morgan         2.00       1.68   0.00   1.00   0.00     2.28    1.87   4.42     4.03    35.54   3.40    9.60
          Northern Trust     2.00       1.10   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.88    1.60   4.25     4.09    35.17   2.70    9.00
          Wells Fargo        2.00       1.82   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.84    1.54   4.11     3.91    36.07   2.59   10.43
          Goldman Sachs      2.00       1.72   0.00   1.00   0.00     2.02    1.25   4.02     3.75    36.31   2.97    9.44
          Bank of America    2.00       1.35   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.90    1.60   4.07     3.76    35.25   2.81   10.60
          All                1.00       1.00   0.00   1.00   0.00     1.75    1.38   3.78     3.58    35.72   2.51    9.56
                                                               standard deviation
          Dreyfus            9.50       3.91   0.25   0.38   0.32     1.67    3.42   7.08     4.44    22.31   5.06    8.67
          Federated         28.57      11.54   0.14   0.29   0.27     1.28    2.68   5.50     3.51    13.11   3.88    6.88
          Blackrock          5.98       3.32   0.22   0.37   0.33     1.62    3.29   7.29     4.56    19.38   4.87    8.49
          Morgan Stanley     3.28       1.59   0.19   0.34   0.30     1.68    4.01   6.08     3.90    17.13   4.34    8.51
          U.S. Bancorp      15.75       5.41   0.25   0.40   0.36     1.65    3.32   8.08     4.94    20.57   5.50    7.19
          J.P.Morgan         5.53       3.24   0.18   0.36   0.33     1.77    4.29   6.51     4.09    17.80   4.54    7.72
          Northern Trust     1.67       1.36   0.14   0.30   0.27     1.30    2.50   6.34     4.04    16.11   4.80    8.11
          Wells Fargo        2.83       2.47   0.19   0.32   0.27     1.41    3.07   5.78     3.61    16.26   4.22    6.93
          Goldman Sachs      9.81       4.84   0.19   0.33   0.28     1.23    2.14   6.80     4.25    15.72   4.47    7.87
          Bank of America   16.42       5.40   0.18   0.32   0.28     1.52    3.30   5.88     3.73    16.59   4.07    7.76
          All               11.82       4.80   0.21   0.37   0.32     1.61    3.40   7.04     4.42    19.30   4.82    8.36

This table reports the summary statistics for the collateral posted for the Treasury tri-party repos from
November 2010 to August 2013. For each Treasury repo, we calculate the number of collateral (#cols),
the value-weighted number of collateral (#cols (vw)), the proportion of Treasury Bills (bill), the proportion
of Treasury Notes (note), the proportion of Treasury Bonds (bond), the value-weighted coupon in per-
centages (coupon), the value-weighted age in years (age), the value-weighted maturity in years (mat), the
value-weighted duration (duratn), and the value-weighted outstanding amount in billions (outamt) and the
percentage of on-the-run Treasuries. All the weights are the collateral value of the individual securities. The
value-weighted number of collateral (#cols (vw)) is the inverse of the Herfindahl index based on the collateral
value of the individual securities. We then report the cross-sectional mean, median and standard-deviation
for repos of each fund family and the full sample.




                                                              52
                               Table 16: Treasury Repo Summary Statistics, November 2010 - August 2013
                                                                                  Panel A: Top Ten MMFs
                                                                Repo Haircut (%)                       Repo Spread (bps)            Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                    Repo Size ($M)
                 fund family         #repos   amt ($B)   mean    std     P10    med    P90    mean      std    P10    med    P90   mean   std     P10    med   P90       mean   std   P10    med   P90
                 Federated            1,135        347   2.02    0.07    2.00   2.00   2.03      1.4    4.4   −4.0     1.0   7.0    1.8    1.7      1      1     5        306   555     8     100 1E3
                 Dreyfus              1,259        300   2.00    0.02    2.00   2.00   2.01      1.9    4.6   −5.0     2.0   8.0    1.0    0.0      1      1     1        239   353    16     100 650
                 Morgan Stanley       1,228        195   2.06    0.39    1.86   2.01   2.25      2.1    4.5   −3.0     2.0   7.0    2.2    5.1      1      1     3        159   163    15     100 385
                 Blackrock            1,214        192   2.00    0.09    2.00   2.00   2.02      1.1    4.6   −5.0     1.0   7.0    1.3    1.9      1      1     2        158   274     8      28 500
                 U.S. Bancorp           359        173   2.00    0.00    2.00   2.00   2.00      1.2    4.2   −4.0     1.0   7.0    1.1    0.6      1      1     1        482   438    97     312 1E3
                 J.P.Morgan             354        150   2.01    0.04    2.00   2.00   2.00      2.6    4.7   −4.0     3.0   8.0    1.6    1.3      1      1     4        423   349   100     300 1E3
                 Northern Trust         661        130   1.92    0.47    1.26   2.00   2.22      2.2    4.5   −3.0     2.0   8.0    1.6    1.8      1      1     4        197   245     9      85 575
                 Wells Fargo            419        130   2.00    0.05    2.00   2.00   2.00      2.5    4.7   −3.9     3.1   9.5    2.3   12.1      1      1     1        311   277    41     250 750
                 Goldman Sachs          326        124   2.07    0.27    2.00   2.00   2.03      1.6    4.8   −6.0     1.0   8.0    2.1    4.9      1      1     2        380   425    21     250 850
                 Bank of America        546        118   2.01    0.14    2.00   2.00   2.00      1.5    4.7   −5.0     2.0   8.0    3.7    9.4      1      1     5        215   187    50     160 460

                                                                                  Panel B: Top Ten Dealers
                                     Dealer CDS (bps)            Repo Haircut (%)                          Repo Spread (bps)               Repo Maturity (#bizdays)                     Repo Size ($M)




53
      dealer   #repos amt ($B) mean                std mean        std     P10    med     P90     mean        std    P10     med   P90    mean     std   P10    med       P90    mean       std   P10    med   P90
      BCS       2,496          534    164         39.3    1.99    0.21     2.00   2.00    2.03      1.8       4.8    −4.0  2.0      8.0     1.4    1.5     1         1      3      214 369         10     98 500
      RBS       1,123          290    240         66.8    2.02    0.15     2.00   2.00    2.02      1.8       4.5    −3.0  1.0      8.0     1.5    2.9     1         1      1      259 378         12    110 725
      DB        1,506          252    138         39.6    1.99    0.24     2.00   2.00    2.00      2.5       4.6    −3.0  4.0      7.4     1.5    3.2     1         1      1      167 250         14     80 456
      CS        1,468          230    125         32.5    2.03    0.16     2.00   2.00    2.04      1.8       4.7    −4.0  2.0      8.0     2.3    6.1     1         1      3      157 210         12     85 400
      BNP         699          215    164         58.2    1.97    0.17     2.00   2.00    2.02      1.5       4.6    −4.0  1.0      8.0     1.4    5.2     1         1      1      308 360         15    200 750
      BAC       1,465          177    190         93.4    2.02    0.40     1.98   2.00    2.06     −0.1       4.2    −5.0 −0.9      5.0     1.9    4.0     1         1      3      121 168          9     59 300
      HBC         873          175    118         25.2    2.02    0.14     2.00   2.00    2.04      1.8       4.7    −4.0  2.0      7.0     1.2    0.7     1         1      1      201 256         12    100 500
      ACA         377          141    218         63.2    2.04    0.39     1.93   2.00    2.14      2.7       3.9    −2.0  3.0      8.0     1.3    3.3     1         1      1      374 592         15    150 1200
      GLE         254           92    224         76.5    2.00    0.14     2.00   2.00    2.06      2.4       4.3    −3.0  2.0      8.0     1.2    0.8     1         1      1      363 361         29    223 1000
      C           517           87    130         49.2    2.10    0.52     2.00   2.00    2.11      2.1       4.5    −4.0  2.0      8.0     1.1    0.6     1         1      1      169 193         11    100 450

     This table reports the distribution of haircut, spread, maturity and size of the Treasury tri-party repos, based on the monthly repo data with
     matched collateral from November 2010 to August 2013. Panel A reports the summary statistics for the top ten fund families and Panel B
     reports the summary statistics for the top ten dealers. The top ten dealers are Barclays (BCS), Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), Deutsche
     Bank (DB), Credit Suisse (CS), BNP Paribas (BNP), Bank of America (BAC), HBSC (HBC), Credit Agricole (ACA), Societe Generale
     (GLE) and Citi Group (C), respectively. In addition to repo statistics, we also report the mean and standard deviation of the dealers’ 5-year
     CDS spreads in the Panel B. The CDS spreads data are obtained from Markit.
           Table 17: Determinants of Treasury Repo Haircut and Spread
                                     haircuts                                spreads
        Parm                (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)     (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
        #cols (vw)                                      −.000                                 −.007
                                                       [−0.96]                               [−1.07]
        col coupon                                      −.009                                  0.025
                                                       [−1.37]                                [ 0.30]
        col age                                          0.001                                −.024
                                                        [ 0.28]                              [−0.63]
        col outamt                                      −.000                                  0.002
                                                       [−0.01]                                [ 0.30]
        col duratn                                       0.002                                 0.045
                                                        [ 0.62]                               [ 1.02]
        col volatility                                  −.001                                 −.032
                                                       [−0.28]                               [−1.22]
        col bill                                        −.025                                  0.055
                                                       [−0.48]                                [ 0.06]
        col note                                        −.032                                  0.301
                                                       [−1.01]                                [ 0.52]
        col ontherun                                    −.000                                 −.001
                                                       [−0.96]                               [−0.13]
        dealer CDS                  0.000     0.000      0.000             −.002    −.001     −.001
                                   [ 0.58]   [ 0.86]    [ 0.88]           [−1.14] [−0.41]    [−0.60]
        repo haircut                                           −.174        0.378   −.021     −.001
                                                              [−0.51]      [ 1.56] [−0.15]   [−0.01]
        repo size (log) −.014** −.009**       −.002   −.001 0.350***       −.068    −.013     −.000
                         [−2.50] [−2.06]     [−0.60] [−0.38]   [ 3.51]    [−1.23] [−0.31]    [−0.01]
        repo mat          −.000   −.000       −.000   −.000     0.116       0.117    0.116     0.112
                         [−1.31] [−0.98]     [−0.73] [−0.56]   [ 1.35]     [ 1.35] [ 1.30]    [ 1.26]
        month                 Y        Y          Y         Y         Y        Y        Y         Y
        dealer                N        Y          Y         Y         N        Y        Y         Y
        Fund Family           N        N          Y         Y         N        N        Y         Y
        NOBS              15421    14841      14841     14017     15421    14841    14841     14017
        R2                  1.6      5.3       16.6      17.0      48.0     58.3     62.1      63.2

This table reports the OLS regressions on the haircuts and spreads of the Treasury tri-party repos from
November 2010 to August 2013. The t-statistics reported in squared brackets are based on the double-
clustered standard errors clustered by fund family and month.




                                                       54
References
 Brunnermeier, M. K. and L. H. Pedersen (2009). Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity.
    Review of Financial Studies 22 (6), 2201–2238.

 Chernenko, S. and A. Sunderam (2012). Frictions in Shadow Banking: Evidence from the
    Lending Behavior of Money Market Funds. Working Paper.

 Copeland, A., D. Duﬃe, A. Martin, and S. McLaughlin (2012). Key Mechanics of The
    U.S. Tri-Party Repo Market. FRBNY Economic Policy Review .

 Copeland, A., A. Martin, and M. Walker (2014). Repo Runs: Evidence from the Tri-Party
    Repo Market. The Journal of Finance 69 (6), 2343–2380.

 FRBNY (2010). Task Force on Triparty Repo Infrastructure.

 Gorton, G. and A. Metrick (2010). Haircuts. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Re-
    view 92 (6), 507–519.

 Gorton, G. and A. Metrick (2012). Securitized banking and the run on repo. Journal of
    Financial Economics 104 (3), 425–451.

 He, Z. and W. Xiong (2012). Dynamic Debt Runs. Review of Financial Studies 25 (6),
    1799–1843.

 Kacperczyk, M. and P. Schnabl (2013). How Safe are Money Market Funds? The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics.

 Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov (2014). Sizing Up Repo. The Journal of Fi-
    nance 69 (6), 2381–2417.

 Lee, J. (2015). Collateral Circulation and Repo Spreads. Working Paper.

 Martin, A., D. Skeie, and E.-L. v. Thadden (2014). Repo Runs. Review of Financial
    Studies 27 (4), 957–989.

 McCabe, P. E. (2010). The Cross Section of Money Market Fund Risks and Financial
    Crises. Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System.

 Strahan, P. and B. Tanyeri (2012). Once Burned, Twice Shy: Money Market Fund Re-
    sponses to A Systemic Liquidity Shock. Working Paper.

 Zhang, S. (2014). Collateral Risk, Repo Rollover and Shadow Banking. Working Paper.


                                            55
                                         Appendix

A      Repo Pricing Before November 2010
Since our monthly data starts only from November 2010, we complement it with the tri-party
repo transactions obtained from the annual (N-CSR), semi-annual (N-CSRS) and quarterly
(N-Q) filings of money market funds from January 2005 to September 2010. For these repo
transaction, we have basic repo information including the counter-parties, amount, haircut,
interest rate, maturity dates and the collateral asset class. However, the details of the
securities in the collateral pool are not reported. Without the collateral information, it is
impossible to perform the same analysis as we did for the monthly repo data with matched
collateral securities. Nevertheless, this data does provide some useful insights of the opaque
tri-party repo market before November 2010, especially during the financial crisis period.
Given the strong role played by fund families in repo pricing, we summarize these repos’
characteristics by each fund family for three diﬀerent time intervals: the pre-crisis period
from January 2005 to June 2008, the crisis period from June 2008 to June 2009, and the
post-crisis period from June 2009 to September 2010. The equity and corporate bond repos
are reported in Table AI. The Treasury repos are reported in Table AII. The distributions of
haircut, spread, size and maturity before November 2010 are also plotted in the time-series
of Figure 2.

    Equity Repos
    The tri-party equity repo market went through several diﬀerent phases from 2005 to 2010.
The median haircut is at 5% before September 2008, jumps sharply to 10% after Lehman’s
default, stays at the 10% level for approximately one year, and then decreases to 8% at the
end of 2009. Fidelity, which is the largest lender in our monthly data from November 2010
to August 2013, remains the largest lender for the period before November 2010.
    Before the financial crisis, only two fund families, Fidelity and State Street, accept equity
as collateral for tri-party repos. Both fund families ask for more or less similar haircuts at
around 5%. The Fidelity funds account for approximately 60% of the total lending, and
the State Street funds account for the remaining 40%. During the financial crisis from
September 2008 and June 2009, Fidelity continues to accept equity collateral but asks for
higher haircuts. In contrast, State Street funds retreat completely from the equity tri-party
repo market during the crisis. When the repo market bounces back after the financial crisis,

                                               56
Charles Schwab and Morgan Stanley funds start to accept equity collateral for repo lending.
But in contrast to the high haircuts, at approximately 9%, demanded by Fidelity, both
Charles Schwab and Morgan Stanley funds ask for only 5%.
   In other words, fund families also play the key role in setting haircuts before November
2010. Moreover, there is substantial variations in the haircuts demanded by diﬀerent fund
families. This is similar to our observations for the period after November 2010. For repo
spread, the overall time-series trend suggests that spread on equity repos run up during the
financial crisis period, and has returned to its normal level since late 2009.

   Corporate Bond Repos
   It is diﬃcult to draw any concrete conclusions on corporate bond repos, as money market
funds often don’t disclose whether the collateral are investment grade or non-investment
grade. Nevertheless, the haircut distribution across fund families suggests that diﬀerent
families use diﬀerent policies on haircuts. Interestingly, we do find some fund families that
assign a fixed haircut for all of its repos. For example, Invesco funds charge a constant 5%
haircut, irrespective of the market condition, the counter-parties and the collateral. This
uniform haircut scheme is consistent with our findings based on the monthly data after
November 2010.

   Treasury Repos
   Consistent with the previous literature, Treasury repo haircut stays stable at approxi-
mately 2%, even during the 2008 financial crisis when the credit market is in turmoil. Repo
spread, on the other hand, shows an interesting time-series trend. Before the financial crisis,
the Treasury repo spread is usually slightly below zero, probably because lenders view repo
loans backed by high-quality Treasuries safer than the uncollateralized loans in the fed fund
market. At the first quarter of 2008, right after the collapse of Bear Stearns, the interest
rates on Treasury tri-party repos drop significantly below the fed fund rates, resulting in a
huge negative basis at around -120 bps. The repo spread then bounces back quickly in the
next quarter and has since fluctuated within a small range around zero.




                                              57
                            Table AI: Equity and Corporate Bond Repo Summary Statistics, 2005 Q1 - 2010 Q3
                                                                                       Panel A: Equity Repos
                                                                                       Repo Haircut (%)                     Repo Spread (bps)            Repo Maturity (#bizdays)             Repo Size ($M)
      period            fund family      #repos   amt ($M)    pct   #dealers    mean     std    Q1    med     Q3    mean      std    Q1    med     Q3    mean   std    Q1   med   Q3   mean    std   Q1    med   Q3
                        Fidelity            143      50,592 60.3           8    5.08 0.80 5.00        5.00 5.02      32.0 31.8 12.0        22.0 50.0     11.4 22.1      1     1    1    354 415 60         200 500
      Jan05 - June08
                        State Street         59      33,262 39.7           8    5.00 0.82 5.00        5.01 5.03      22.4 28.9 9.0         22.0 33.0     34.9 39.1      1    21   67    564 324 345        500 800
      Sep08 - June09    Fidelity            183      57,894   100          9    9.10    2.00   10.0   10.0   10.0    77.4    99.1   33.0   40.0   82.0   15.9   19.9    1     1   25    316   459    27     94   483
                        Fidelity            248      53,829 94.1           9    9.08 1.29 8.02        8.46 10.0      29.8     7.3 25.5     29.5 33.0     21.9 28.0      1     5   59    217 373      17     63 225
      Sep09 - Sep10     Charles Schwab       36       2,201 3.8            2    4.98 0.13 5.00        5.00 5.00      44.7    14.2 30.0     43.5 59.0     67.0 11.6     63    72   73     61 53       13     56 92
                        Morgan Stanley        8       1,190 2.1            4    5.01 0.01 5.01        5.01 5.01      21.6     9.0 17.0     18.0 22.0      1.0 0.0       1     1    1    149 198      40     98 135

                                                                               Panel B: Corporate Bond Repos
                                                                                       Repo Haircut (%)                     Repo Spread (bps)            Repo Maturity (#bizdays)             Repo Size ($M)
     period            fund family       #repos   amt ($M)    pct   #dealers   mean     std     Q1    med     Q3    mean      std   Q1     med     Q3 mean      std    Q1   med   Q3   mean    std   Q1    med    Q3
                       Fidelity             734    208,495 52.6          16     3.68   1.59    2.00   3.86   5.01   30.8     32.3 11.0     20.0   49.0   27.2 32.8      1     1 62.0    284    393    40   143    396
                       State Street         264     89,265 22.5          18     3.67   1.46    2.00   3.96   5.00   27.2     47.7 8.5      18.0   29.5   23.9 55.1      1     1 18.5    338    280   103   250    500
                       Dreyfus              134     39,210 9.9           15     3.58   0.91    3.00   3.00   4.90   31.0     32.7 12.0     18.0   49.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     293    250   100   205    375




58
                       J.P.Morgan            48     30,771 7.8           10     2.99   0.45    3.00   3.00   3.00   20.8     22.4 4.0       9.5   49.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     641    498   200   613   1100
     Jan05 - June08
                       Invesco               23     11,931 3.0            4     4.99   0.07    5.00   5.00   5.00   19.1     20.6 6.0      10.0   24.0    1.4 1.9       1     1 1.0     519    266   250   557    691
                       Goldman Sachs         33      7,945 2.0            2     3.65   0.86    3.00   3.58   4.26   22.3     32.1 11.0     16.0   26.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     241    124   175   225    310
                       Morgan Stanley        17      6,560 1.7            7     2.66   1.34    2.00   2.00   3.13   21.5     17.8 6.0      19.0   27.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     386    301   115   300    700
                       Blackrock             10      2,020 0.5            4     2.89   0.97    2.00   2.45   4.00    7.4      2.4 5.0       7.0   10.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     202     97   175   175    185
                       Fidelity             171     35,897 75.8          16     5.11 0.37 5.00        5.03 5.12     91.9     128 37.0      50.0 74.0     12.7 14.3      1     1 22.0    210 332 20          90    266
                       Morgan Stanley        22      6,925 14.6           8     4.86 0.64 5.00        5.00 5.00     25.2     5.0 20.0      25.0 28.0      1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     315 282 100        250    450
     Sep08 - June09
                       J.P.Morgan             5      3,900 8.2            4     2.80 0.45 3.00        3.00 3.00     30.4     8.0 34.0      34.0 34.0      1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     780 311 600        700    800
                       Invesco                4        649 1.4            3     5.00 0.00 5.00        5.00 5.00     35.0     8.2 30.0      38.0 40.0      1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     162 190 52          85    273
                       Fidelity             842     76,918 73.0          14     7.10   1.94    5.08   7.86   8.08   32.8 13.6 25.0         28.0   39.0   46.8 32.0     21    62 63.0     91    221   5      20     87
                       Blackrock             65     12,050 11.4           9     6.73   0.70    7.00   7.00   7.00   19.4 10.1 13.0         16.0   19.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     185    293 50      100    175
                       Bank of America       59      8,416 8.0            8     4.91   0.50    5.00   5.00   5.01   18.5 6.6 14.0          17.0   25.0   22.2 24.3      1    10 43.0    143    102 67      134    175
     Sep09 - Sep10     HSBC                   7      4,414 4.2            2     2.00   0.00    2.00   2.00   2.00    1.4 2.2 0.0            1.0    4.0    1.6 1.5       1     1 1.0     631    345 250     615    879
                       Dreyfus               13      2,555 2.4            5     3.12   0.70    3.00   3.00   3.04   15.0 2.8 15.0          16.0   16.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     197    124 100     150    250
                       Invesco                3        598 0.6            1     5.00   0.00    5.00   5.00   5.00   12.0 1.0 11.0          12.0   13.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0     199     90 109     199    290
                       Goldman Sachs          5        349 0.3            3     6.71   3.09    5.00   5.00   10.0   31.4 15.5 15.0         41.0   42.0    1.0 0.0       1     1 1.0      70    106   4       4     94


        This table reports the distributions of haircut, spread, maturity and size of the equity and corporate bond tri-party repos, based on the
        quarterly filings of 102 U.S. money market funds from January 2005 to September 2010. We divide the sample period into three sub-periods,
        January 2005 to June 2008, September 2008 to June 2009 and September 2009 to September 2010. Within each sub-period, we report the
        repo statistics by each fund family.
                                Table AII: Quarterly Treasury Repo Summary Statistics, 2005 Q1 - 2010 Q3
                                                                                                  Repo Haircut (%)                   Repo Spread (bps)          Repo Maturity (#bizdays)              Repo Size ($M)
          period           fund family               #repos   amt ($M)   pct    #dealers   mean    std   P10    med    P90    mean    std    P10   med   P90   mean   std P10    med    P90    mean    std P10     med    P90
                           Fidelity                     267    271,576   18.0        19    2.01   0.13   2.00   2.00   2.00   −20    52.7   −114   −8.0 14.0    2.9   17.6   1    1.0   1.0    1017   908    150    750   2450
                           Federated                    423    243,759   16.2        26    2.37   1.02   2.00   2.00   3.12   −19    37.0    −40   −10   1.0   18.3   54.5   1    1.0 56.0      576   596     90    352   1398
                           Wells Fargo                  271    218,127   14.5        14    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −14    47.4    −79   −2.0 24.0    1.6    2.3   1    1.0   3.0     805   875     70    500   2000
                           Charles Schwab               413    156,016   10.4         9    2.06   0.24   2.00   2.00   2.16   14.7   33.5   −7.0    9.0 49.0   10.0   21.5   1    1.0 38.0      378   434      8    200    935
                           J.P.Morgan                   119    127,664    8.5        13    2.10   0.33   2.00   2.00   2.99   −40    58.8   −126   −15 14.0     1.0    0.3   1    1.0   1.0    1073   937    200   1000   2000
                           Dreyfus                      230    113,965    7.6        18    2.01   0.19   2.00   2.00   2.06   −38    51.0   −147   −17 −7.0     1.0    0.0   1    1.0   1.0     495   427    150    455    800
                           Invesco                      440    110,750    7.4        24    2.13   0.59   2.00   2.00   2.01   −15    42.6    −42   −4.0 14.0    1.7    5.7   1    1.0   1.0     252   220     55    224    500
          Jan05 - June08
                           Blackrock                    332    102,574    6.8        14    2.20   0.52   2.00   2.00   3.00   −0.4   51.5    −42   −5.0 27.0    8.2   21.7   1    1.0 28.0      309   314     40    200    700
                           State Street                 251     58,686    3.9        19    2.05   0.26   2.00   2.00   2.01   −12    50.9    −96   −7.0 22.0    5.2   22.1   1    1.0   1.0     234   305     37    100    600
                           Morgan Stanley               224     41,150    2.7        13    2.02   0.08   2.00   2.00   2.06   −19    35.7    −66   −6.0  3.0   25.9   41.9   1    1.0 104.0     184   293      5     40    565
                           Fidelity                     150     24,478    1.6        13    4.11   2.03   2.03   3.00   7.34   11.7   30.2    −22    2.5 69.5    117   92.8   1   85.0 250.0     163   183     28     95    386
                           Passport Research Ltd         56     24,100    1.6        16    2.45   0.62   2.00   2.09   3.35   −1.6   38.8    −14    1.0 39.0    9.4   17.4   1    1.0 34.0      430   268    170    397    850
                           Goldman Sachs                 81     13,585    0.9         9    2.01   0.16   1.97   2.00   2.04   −38    52.2   −110   −39 10.0    47.8   70.9   1    1.0 165.0     168   253     25     74    450
                           Deutsche Investment           14        324    0.0         7    2.07   0.12   2.00   2.01   2.23   −60    42.1    −87   −54 −15      1.0    0.0   1    1.0   1.0      23    25      1     19     55
                           Federated                    107    116,015 17.2          17    2.03   0.13   2.00   2.00   2.07   −8.0   33.3 −12 −3.0    5.0       8.8   23.5   1    1.0   22.0   1084 1146      96 700 2739
                           Wells Fargo                  114    111,459 16.5          12    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −2.0   14.3 −25    1.0 16.0       1.3    1.1   1    1.0    2.0    978 1029      75 750 2063
                           J.P. Morgan                   45     93,449 13.9          11    2.00   0.01   2.00   2.00   2.00   −7.8   15.7 −32 −3.0    8.0       1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0   2077 2287     219 1000 5639
                           Dreyfus                       87     67,049 9.9           16    2.03   0.22   2.00   2.00   2.00   −3.8    6.5 −12 −4.0    3.0       1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    771 647      200 588 1600
                           U.S. Bancorp                  57     59,617 8.8           15    2.02   0.16   2.00   2.00   2.00   −4.9   16.1 −32    2.0  9.0      11.3   46.7   1    1.0   12.0   1046 890      270 700 2400
                           Invesco                       65     52,145 7.7           16    2.03   0.13   2.00   2.00   2.00   −4.0   13.2 −30 −1.0    8.0       2.3    5.0   1    1.0    1.0    802 708      100 750 2000
                           Blackrock                    131     45,065 6.7           14    2.06   0.21   2.00   2.00   2.00   −7.7   67.0 −28 −0.0 12.0         4.7   13.4   1    1.0    1.0    344 295       90 250 775
                           Charles Schwab               126     34,244 5.1            7    2.16   0.61   2.00   2.00   2.06   −5.2   17.2 −21 −6.0 12.0         1.1    0.7   1    1.0    1.0    272 377       25 120 795
          Sep08 - June09
                           Morgan Stanley                50     31,215 4.6           12    2.06   0.24   2.00   2.00   2.00   −1.0    6.3 −10 −2.0    9.0       7.6   25.3   1    1.0    5.5    624 583       95 480 1550
                           Fidelity                      94     27,491 4.1           11    2.59   0.66   2.01   2.34   3.12   46.7   88.7  11.0 30.0 86.0      24.9   22.2   1   22.0   62.0    292 314        9 196 796
                           UBS                           28     21,897 3.2            7    2.07   0.28   2.00   2.00   2.10   −11    15.6 −22 −6.0    2.0       1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    782 555        0 825 1480
                           Goldman Sachs                 21      5,270 0.8            6    2.01   0.02   2.00   2.00   2.03   −61    84.9 −190 −5.0   1.0       2.8    6.1   1    1.0    2.0    251 300       14 100 596




59
                           Deutsche Investment            7      3,185 0.5            3    2.02   0.05   2.00   2.00   2.14   −63    87.1 −193 −14 −1.0         1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    455 372       93 331 1026
                           Passport Research Ltd          5      2,800 0.4            3    2.01   0.01   2.00   2.00   2.02   −17    21.1 −32 −32     8.0       1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    560 288      200 500 900
                           UBS                            3      2,615 0.4            2    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −70     111 −198 −12 −1.0         1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    872 374      440 1075 1100
                           T.Rowe Price Associates       21      1,063 0.2            9    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −0.8    3.8 −4.0 −2.0   3.0       1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0     51   34      20   50   60
                           Federated                    153    116,471 18.1          18    2.02   0.09   2.00   2.00   2.02   −0.1 3.5      −4.0    0.0  4.0    7.2   15.3   1    1.0   22.0    761    905    10   444    1850
                           Wells Fargo                  142     96,464 15.0          14    2.26   0.45   2.00   2.00   3.00    1.4 3.4      −3.0    2.0  5.0    1.2    0.8   1    1.0    2.0    679    470   100   672    1250
                           Charles Schwab               237     62,189 9.7            7    3.46   1.17   2.00   4.00   5.00   −0.4 6.5      −6.0   −2.0 10.0    4.5    6.3   1    1.0   16.0    262    256    27   165     600
                           Fidelity                     264     60,280 9.4           15    2.60   0.78   2.01   2.42   3.05    8.8 10.5      1.0    6.0 21.0   50.1   35.1   1   58.5   88.0    228    267    10   107     646
                           Dreyfus                      108     58,452 9.1           16    2.02   0.14   2.00   2.00   2.00   −1.3 3.2      −6.0   −1.0  2.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    541    412   100   450    1100
                           U.S. Bancorp                  64     54,196 8.4           13    2.01   0.02   2.00   2.00   2.00    0.5 3.1      −3.0    1.0  5.0    2.4    4.9   1    1.0    1.0    847    679   200   500    1950
                           Invesco                      104     46,274 7.2           17    2.00   0.02   2.00   2.00   2.00    0.9 2.9      −3.0    1.0  5.0   11.4   17.4   1    1.0   43.0    445    309   200   390     850
                           Blackrock                    161     37,646 5.9           11    2.19   0.66   2.00   2.00   3.00    4.8 14.5     −5.0   −1.0 23.0    5.9   15.6   1    1.0    5.0    234    184    50   181     493
                           State Street                  69     25,048 3.9           12    2.00   0.02   2.00   2.00   2.00    0.9 7.5      −8.0    0.0 12.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    363    366    76   200     890
          Sep09 - Sep10
                           UBS                           33     25,047 3.9            6    2.39   1.16   2.00   2.00   2.83   −5.8 6.8      −17    −2.0  0.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    759    608     0   903    1400
                           Passport Research Ltd         18     21,427 3.3            8    2.04   0.15   2.00   2.00   2.03    2.9 3.1      −3.0    4.0  7.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0   1190    766   451   800    2455
                           Legg Mason                    17     17,325 2.7            1    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00    2.5 2.2       1.0    2.0  6.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0   1019   1162   136   500    3500
                           Goldman Sachs                 29      8,068 1.3            5    2.00   0.01   2.00   2.00   2.01    1.2 2.6      −3.0    2.0  5.0    4.4   10.4   1    1.0   27.0    278    232    40   250     500
                           Bank of America               29      7,607 1.2           13    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00    1.7 3.0      −3.0    1.0  6.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    262    263    40   142     716
                           T.Rowe Price Associates       34      2,771 0.4            8    1.97   0.10   1.83   2.00   2.01    1.8 2.9      −3.0    2.0  5.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0     82     38    45    83     110
                           HSBC                           5      2,375 0.4            3    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −0.0 1.6      −2.0    0.0  2.0    2.8    4.0   1    1.0   10.0    475    307   200   450     975
                           Deutsche Investment            5        584 0.1            3    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −1.6 8.3      −8.0   −7.0  8.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0    117     72    13   116     200
                           UBS                            6        351 0.1            2    2.00   0.00   2.00   2.00   2.00   −8.5 3.1      −14    −8.5 −5.0    1.0    0.0   1    1.0    1.0     58    143     0     0     350
                           Prudential                     1        101 0.0            1    2.00      .   2.00   2.00   2.00    2.0    .      2.0    2.0  2.0    1.0      .   1    1.0    1.0    101      .   101   101     101


     This table reports the distributions of haircut, spread, maturity and size of the Treasury tri-party repos, based on the quarterly filings of 102
     US money market funds from January 2005 to September 2010. We divide the sample period into three sub-periods, January 2005 to June
     2008, September 2008 to June 2009 and September 2009 to September 2010. Within each sub-period, we report the repo statistics by each
     fund family.
