NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL CHOICE OF MONETARY
POLICY INSTRUMENTS IN A
MACROECONOMETRIC MODEL

Ray C. Fair

Working Paper No. 2150

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2150
February 1987

Optimal Choices of Monetary Policy Instruments
in a Macroeconometric Model

ABSTRACT

This paper uses stochastic simulation and my U.S. econometric model to

examine the optimal choice of monetary policy instruments. Are the
variances, covariances, and parameters in the model such as to favor one
instrument over the other, in particular the interest rate over the money

supply? The results show that the interest rate and the money supply are
about equally good as policy instruments in terms of minimizing the variance

of real GNP. The variances of some of the components of GNP are, however,
much larger when the money supply is the policy instrument, as is the

variance of the change in stock prices. Therefore, if one's loss function
is expanded beyond simply the variance of real CNP to variances of other

variables, the interest rate policy does better. The results thus provide
some support for what seems to be the Fed's current choice of using the
interest rate as its primary instrument.
Stochastic simulation is also used to estimate how much of the variance
of real GNP is due to the error terms in the demand for money equations.

The results show that the contribution is not very great even when the money
supply is the policy instrument.

Ray C. Fair
Cowles Foundation
Box 2125, Yale Station
New Haven, CT 06520

January 1987
OPTIMAL CHOICE OF MONETARY POLICY INSTRUMENTS IN A MACROECONOMETRIC MODEL1
by
Ray C. Fair

I.

Introduction
It has been nearly twenty years since Poole (1970) wrote his classic

article on the optimal choice of monetary policy instruments in a stochastic

IS-LM model. Poole assumed that the monetary authority (henceforth called
the Fed) can control the interest rate or the money supply exactly. These
are the two "instruments" of monetary policy. If the aim is to minimize the
squared deviation of real output from its target value, Poole showed that
the choice of the optimal instrument depends on the variance of the error
term in the IS function, the variance of the error term in the LM function,
the covariance of the two error terms, and the size of the parameters in the
two functions.

Most people would probably agree that between about October 1979 and

October 1982 the Fed tried to use the money supply as its primary

instrument. This attempt does not appear to have been successful in the
sense that since about October 1982 the Fed seems to have gone back to using

the interest rate as its primary instrument. If the interest rate has won
out, it is interesting to ask if this decision can be justified on the basis

of the Poole analysis. Is the economy one in which the relevant variances,
covariances, and parameters are such as to lead, a la the Poole analysis, to
the optimal instrument being the interest rate?

1The research described in this paper was financed by a grant from the
National Science Foundation. I am indebted to Lewis Alexander for helpful
discussions regarding the subject matter of this paper.

2

The purpose of this paper is to examine this question using my U.S.

econometric model. Are the variances, covariances, and parameters in the
model such as to favor one instrument over the other, in particular the

interest rate over the money supply? This question can be examined in an
econometric model by the use of stochastic simulation. Interestingly
enough, Poole's analysis has never been tried on an actual econometric

model. The closest study in this respect is that of Tinsley and von zur
Muehlen (1983), although they did not analyze the same question that Poole

did.2 Other studies that have extended Poole's work, such as those of
Turnovsky (1975) and Yoshikawa (1981), have been primarily theoretical.

The results show that the interest rate and the money supply are about
equally good as policy instruments in terms of minimizing the variance of

real GNP. It does not matter very much which of the two variables is used.
Concentrating on the variance of GNP does, however, mask some important

differences between the two policies. The variances of some of the
components of GNP are much larger when the money supply is the policy

instrument. Likewise, the variance of the change in stock prices is much
larger when the money supply is the instrument. If one's loss function is

21n their stochastic simulation experiments, Tinsley and von zur
Muehlen always used the interest rate (the Federal Funds rate) as the policy
instrument. They used this instrument to target a particular variable,
called an "intermediate" target. The intermediate targets they tried are
the monetary base, three definitions of the money supply, nominal GNP, and
the Federal Funds rate itself. For each of these target choices, they
examined how well the choice did in minimizing the squared deviations of the
unemployment rate and the inflation rate from their target values. The
unemployment rate and the inflation rate are the "ultimate" targets. In the
present study the aim is to see how well the interest rate does when it is
used as the policy instrument in minimizing the squared deviations of real
output from its target value compared to how well the money supply does when
it is used as the policy instrument. This is the question that Poole
examined.

3

expanded beyond simply the variance of GNP to the variances of other

variables, the interest rate does seem to win out. These results are
discussed in Section III.
Stochastic simulation can also be used to answer the following

question. For the case in which the money supply is the policy instrument,
how much of the variance of GNP is due to the error terms in the demand for

money equations? This question is equivalent in Poole's analysis to the
question of how much of the loss is due to shocks to the LM function.
Results that pertain to this question are presented in Section IV.

II. The Model

My model is described in detail in Fair (1984), and it will only be

briefly discussed here. The model has been estimated through 1986 II for
this study. The beginning quarter is 1954 I, and so there are 130 sample
observations. There are 30 structural equations, estimated by two stage
least squares, and 98 identities.
The model accounts for all flows of funds among the sectors and all

balance-sheet constraints. This is done by linking the National Income

Accounts to the Flow of Funds Accounts. This allows one to deal directly
with the three "tools" of the Fed: the discount rate, the reserve
requirement rate, and the amount of government securities in the hands of

the public. This third tool, denoted AG in the model, is the "open-marketoperations" variable. It is the main variable used by the Fed in practice
to manipulate the money supply and interest rates. The discount rate and
the reserve requirement rate are fairly minor tools, and they are always
taken to be exogenous in the model.

4

In the basic version of the model there is an estimated interest rate

reaction function. The reaction function is an equation with the short term
interest rate (the three-month Treasury bill rate) on the left hand side and
variables that are postulated to affect Fed behavior on the right hand side.
According to this equation, the Fed ttleans against the wind" in the sense

that it raises the bill rate as real growth increases, labor markets become
tighter, inflation increases, and the lagged growth rate of the money supply

increases. In this version of the model both the money supply and the
interest rate are endogenous. The money supply is determined by the demand
for money equations and the interest rate is determined by the reaction

function. Monetary policy is thus endogenous in this version. The openmarket-operations variable AG is also endogenous. Its value each quarter is
whatever is needed to have the interest rate be the value predicted from the
interest rate reaction function.

It is possible to drop the interest rate reaction function from the

model and make some other assumption about monetary policy. For purposes of
this paper, two assumptions are considered. One is that the interest rate
is exogenous, and the other is that the money supply is exogenous. In both

of these cases AG is still endogenous. Its value each quarter is whatever
is needed to have either the interest rate target be met or the money supply
target be met.

It will be useful to consider briefly how interest rates enter the

model. There are four interest rates in the model: the discount rate, which
is always exogenous; the bill rate; and two long term rates, the AAA

corporate bond rate and a mortgage rate. The long term rates are determined
by standard term-structure-of-interest-rate equations. Each long rate is a

5

function of current and past values of the short rate.
There are two demand for money equations in the model, one for the

household sector and one for the firm sector. The equations are fairly
standard. The demand for real money balances is a function of the short
term interest rate, a transactions variable, and the lagged dependent

variable. For the household sector the transactions variable is real
disposable income, and for the firm sector the transactions variable is the

real value of sales. "Money" includes both demand deposits and currency.
There is also a separate demand for

currency equation, where the demand for

currency is a function of the short term interest rate, a transactions

variable, and the lagged dependent variable. There is a bank borrowing
equation in the model, where bank borrowing from the Fed is a positive
function of the difference between the bill rate and the discount rate.

These four equations will be referred to as the "money equations." Of the
four, the two demand for money equations are by far the most important; the

other two play a fairly minor role in the model. The money data used in the
model are from the Flow of Funds Accounts and are end-of-quarter data.
The bill rate (as a measure of short term interest rates) appears as an
explanatory variable in the nondurables consumption equation, and the
mortgage rate (as a measure of long term interest rates) appears as an
explanatory variable in the durables consumption equation and the housing

investment equation. In addition, the mortgage rate appears as an
explanatory variable in the demand for imports equation.

(The interest rate

coefficients are all negative.) The change in the bond rate appears as an
explanatory variable in the equation determining the change in stock prices
(with a negative sign).

6

Consider now what happens when the bill rate increases. This increases
the long term rates through the term structure equations. These interest
rate increases have a direct negative effect on nondurable and durable

consumption, housing investment, and imports. The fall in consumption and
housing investment has a negative effect on GNP, but the fall in imports has

a positive effect. The net effect could thus go either way, but it is in
fact negative in the model.

The increase in the bond rate has a negative effect on stock prices,

which lowers household wealth. Household wealth is an explanatory variable
in the consumption and housing investment equations (with a positive sign),

and so the decrease in wealth has a negative effect on consumption and

housing investment. Household demand thus falls when interest rates rise
for two main reasons. One is the direct negative effect of interest rates
on demand, and the other is the indirect effect of interest rates affecting
wealth and then wealth affecting demand.
Offsetting these two negative effects in part (but only in part) is the
fact that net interest payments to the household sector rise when interest

rates rise. Interest payments to the household sector are part of nonlabor
income, and nonlabor income is an explanatory variable in the consumption

and housing investment equations (with a positive sign). Therefore, a rise
in interest payments, other things being equal, leads to an increase in
household demand.
So far no mention has been made of plant and equipment (P&E)

investment. The equation determining P&E investment is an accelerator-like
equation, and the interest rate does not appear in this equation. I have
been unable to find significant interest rate effects in this equation,

7

although this is not from lack of trying. Interest rates do, however, have
a negative effect on P&E investment in the model because they have a

negative effect on output. In other words, interest rates affect P&E
investment by first affecting household demand, which affects the level of
sales, which affects production, which affects investment.
To summarize, interest rates do have important effects on the economy

in the model. They directly and indirectly affect household demand
(consumption and housing investment), which in turn affects sales,
production, and P&E investment.

As a final note about the model, in the stochastic simulation work
account was taken of exogenous-variable uncertainty as well as uncertainty

from the 29 stochastic structural equations. (There are 29 rather than 30
stochastic structural equations in the version of the model used in this
paper because the interest rate reaction function is dropped.)

Autoregressive equations were estimated for 23 exogenous variables in the

model. These variables make up the main exogenous variables in the model.
The autoregressive equations were eighth order and contained a constant and

time trend. These 23 equations were then added to the model, resulting in a
model with 52 stochastic equations. This is the version of the model that
was stochastically simulated.

III. Comparison of the Two Policy Instruments
The Procedure
As noted in the Introduction, stochastic simulation can be used to

estimate variances in econometric models. The Appendix describes the
procedure that was used in this paper. The simulations were run over the

8

eight-quarter period, 1981 III - 1983 II. A path of values of the interest

rate (the bill rate) was chosen for this period, and this path was used for
all the simulations in which the interest rate was the policy instrument.

Similarly, a path of values of the money supply was chosen, and this path
was used for all the simulations in which the money supply was the policy
instrument.

There are two dimensions to the simulations. One is whether the
interest rate or the money supply is the policy instrument.4 The other is

how many of the 52 error terms are drawn for the stochastic simulation. For
the complete simulation all 52 error terms are drawn. This is the

simulation examined in this section. The notation &(r,k) will refer to
the stochastic simulation estimate of the variance of variable i for period
t when the interest rate is the policy instrument and the simulation is

based on draws of k error terms. (As just noted, k is 52 in this section.)

The notation (M,k) will refer to the same thing when the money supply is
the policy instrument. For many of the results in this paper, i refers to
real GNP.

The variance of real GNP for a given quarter corresponds to Poole's
loss function if one takes the target value of GNP for that quarter to be

31t does not matter very much how these paths are chosen. In the
present case they were chosen as follows. A dynamic simulation was first
run over the eight-quarter period with the error terms set to zero. The
predicted values of the bill rate from this simulation were then taken as
the values for the interest rate path. Likewise, the predicted values of
the money supply were taken as the values for the money supply path.
4When the money supply is the policy instrument, there is the further
question of whether it is the nominal or real money supply that is the
instrument. This question does not arise in Poole's analysis because the
price level is exogenous. For purposes of this paper the nominal money
supply is taken to be policy instrument.

9

the mean value from the stochastic simulation. There is no harm in doing
this, and so from now on Poole's loss function will be assumed to be the

same as the variance of GNP. From the results one can compare the variances
of GNP for the two policy instruments. If the variance is smaller when the
interest rate is the policy instrument, this is evidence in favor of the
interest rate, and vice versa if the variance is smaller when the

money

supply is the policy instrument.
It should be noted that variances are computed for each quarter of the

eight-quarter simulation period. The simulations are dynamic, so that, for
example, the computed variance for the fourth quarter is the variance of the

four-quarter-ahead prediction error. Note also that when the interest rate
is the policy instrument, the eight-quarter path for the interest rate is

fixed across all simulation trials. The values in the path vary from one
quarter to the next (they are the predicted values from the simulation with
the error terms set to zero), but for a given quarter the value is the same

across all trials. Similarly, when the money supply is the policy
instrument, the eight-quarter path for the money supply is fixed across all

simulation trials. This treatment means that monetary policy is assumed to
be passive rather than active. The Fed is not assumed to change the
interest rate or the money supply in response to past shocks to the economy

(from the stochastic simulation). In practice the Fed is likely to respond,
at least after a few quarters, and so the present experiment is not

completely realistic. The experiment answers the question of what the
optimal choice of the policy instrument is j the Fed behaves passively.
Because of this, the results are likely to be more trustworthy for the first
few quarters out than they are after that.

10

The Results

The variances of real CNP for the two policy instruments are (the units
of real GNP are billions of 1982 dollars):
Quarters Ahead
Real GNP:
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

406.7

833.3 1310.7 1795.7 2379.0 2872.0 3573.7 3953.8

409.5

878.5 1380.0 1857.3 2430.5 2813.5 3388.4 3702.1

The subscript i in this case refers to real GNP. t always runs from 1981
III through 1983 II. Instead of discussing these results directly, it is
easier to discuss them after they have been presented in terms of the
percentage difference between the two variances:

100.[.(M,S2) 1
Real GNP

.69

(.84)

Quarters Ahead

2

2

2

2

5.42

3

5.29

4
3.44

5

2.16

6

-2.04

8

7

-5.19

(1.90) (2.19) (2.38) (2.40) (2.28) (2.14)

-6.37
(2.11)

The numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the percent differences.5
They are a measure of the accuracy of the stochastic simulation estimates.

The results show that for the first five quarters the interest rate
policy is better, and for the remaining three quarters the money supply

policy is better.6 It is clear, however, that the differences are fairly

5The Appendix discusses the computation of the standard errors. The
numbers in parentheses are actually the standard errors of the absolute

differences (denoted var(.) in the Appendix) divided by (r,52).
6By "interest rate policy" is meant the case in which the interest rate
is the policy instrument, and by "money supply policy" is meant the case in
which the money supply is the policy instrument.

11

small. For the four-quarter-ahead prediction, for example, the variance of
real CNP for the interest rate policy is only 3.44 percent greater than the

variance for the money supply policy. As a practical matter these
differences are close to being negligible.

As mentioned in the Introduction, the results for real CNP mask some

important differences for other variables. The following are percent
differences for some of the other variables in the model:7
2

lOO.[t.(M,52) -

2

1

Consumption
of services
Consunip t

Quarters Ahead

2

2

.52

4

3

5

6

7

8

.94

-1.48

-2.24

-1.90

-1.64

-1.17

2.21

5.03

3.64

3.35

1.50

.11

2.10

16.69

43.84

62.70

62.98

69.18

65.68

57.96

61.68

.00

12.27

28.89

33.68

39.68

39.51

38.52

41.43

.55

.10

.76

.11

-2.45

-3.94

-5.27

.00

-

.89

-

ion

of nondurables

Consumption
of durables

Housing
Investment
Plant & Equip.
Investment

-

Inventory
Investment

-.46

Imports

.00

-

.08

-

.17

.63

.68

.97

.50

-1.13

-1.07

9.47

21.22

33.48

46.94

49.48

50.30

57.43

-

Change in

Stock Prices 225.51 293.01 235.74 287.92 269.30 279.48 278.47 290.64
Inflation
rate

.04

.08

.53

.14

-

.91

-

.12

-1.35

-1.41

7To conserve space, the standard errors of the differences are not
presented. Enough trials were taken (1000) to make the standard errors
small enough to allow meaningful comparisons to be made. See the discussion
in the Appendix.

8Percentage change in the GNP deflator at an annual rate in percentage
points.

12

Unemployment
rate
Profits

1.45

4.71

5.65

3.83

1.56

-

.24

-3.61

24.05

13.69

10.99

7.47

6.86

3.41

-1.12

-5.64
-

.75

The three most interest sensitive components of GNP in the model are
consumption of durables, housing investment, and imports, and it is clear
for these three variables that the variances are much higher when the money

supply is the policy instrument. For example, for the four-quarter-ahead
prediction the variance of consumption of durables is 62.98 percent higher

for the money supply policy. The variance of housing investment is 33.68
percent higher, and the variance of imports is 33.48 percent higher. The
variances of the change in stock prices are considerably higher for the

money supply policy, by a factor of around 2.5. The change in stock prices
is also sensitive to the interest rate in the model.

The variance of the interest rate for a given quarter is obviously
larger for the money supply policy than it is for the interest rate policy.

It is zero for the interest rate policy. For the money supply policy the
standard deviations of the bill rate for the eight quarters (in percentage
points) are respectively: 3.31, 3.29, 3.25, 3.43, 3.38, 3.49, 3.44, and

3.52. These are large deviations.9 It should be noted, however, that a
larger variance of the interest rate does not imply that the variances of

even the interest sensitive variables in the model are larger. It may be
that the parameters, variances of the error terms, and covariances of the

9For sake of completeness, the standard deviations of the money supply
for the interest rate policy should be noted. The standard deviations of
the money supply as a percent of the mean values of the money supply in the
eight quarters in percentage points are respectively: .90, 1.26, 1.51, 1.71,
1.87, 2.02, 2.16, and 2.32.

13

error terms in the model are such as to lead the interest sensitive

variables to have smaller variances even though the interest rate has a

larger variance. This is not the case in my model, however, since it is
clear that the interest sensitive variables have larger variances for the
money supply policy.
Given that the interest sensitive components of real CNP have

considerably larger variances for the money supply policy, it is interesting
and perhaps somewhat surprising that the variances of real GNP are so close
for the two policies. One of the reasons for this is the following.
Consider for the money supply policy a shock to one of the demand for money

equations that leads to an increase in the interest rate. This has a direct
negative effect on consumption, housing investment, and the demand for

imports. The fall in consumption and housing investment has a negative
effect on GNP, but the fall in imports has a positive effect. The
effect on GNP is thus smaller than would be the case if all the components

affected GNP in the same direction. In other words, negative interest rate
effects on consumption and housing investment are in part offset by negative
effects on imports.
In order to get an idea of the size of the offsetting import effect,
the two stochastic simulations were run with the import equation dropped.

In other words, the level of imports was taken to be exogenous. The
percentage differences between the two variances for real GNP for the eight
quarters in this case were respectively: .92, 10.08, 14.05, 15.23, 16.22,

11.73, 5.87, and 4.33. In this case the interest rate policy does

noticeably better. For the four-quarter-ahead prediction, for example, when
the import equation is dropped, the variance of real GNP for the money

14

supply policy is 15.23 percent higher than it is for the interest rate

policy. This compares to only 3.44 percent when the import equation is
included in the model. Dropping the import equation is, of course, not a
realistic thing to do. This experiment is only meant to get an idea of the
size of the offsetting import effect.
Another way of looking at this import experiment is the following.

Dropping the import equation has the effect of making real GNP more

sensitive to the interest rate. This is similar in Poole's analysis to
making the coefficient of the interest rate variable in the IS function

larger in absolute value. Does this help or hurt the interest rate policy
relative to the money supply policy? This depends on the sizes of the
parameters and of the variances and covariances of the error terms. The
effect could go either way. The results of the import experiment suggest
that in my model the interest rate policy is helped relative to the money
supply policy when the sensitivity of GNP to the interest rate is increased.
This means, for example, that if the equation explaining P&E investment in
the model were replaced with one in which the interest rate played an
important role, the interest rate policy would probably improve relative to

the money supply policy. This is, of course, not certain, since the answer
depends on all the parameters, variances, and covariances in the model.

To conclude, the results favor the interest rate policy if one

considers variances of variables other than real GNP. For real GNP alone,
the two policies give similar results.

15

IV. Contribution of the Error Terms in the Demand for Money Equations
to the Variance of Real GNP
It is interesting to consider the case in which the error terms in the

four money equations are zero across all trials. This is meant to
correspond as close as possible to Poole's case of no error term in the LM

function. One can compare the variance of real CNP from the simulation in
which the error terms from all 52 equations are drawn with the simulation in

which the error terms from the 48 non-money equations are drawn. The
percentage difference between these two variances is an estimate of how much
the error terms in the money equations contribute to the variance of CNP.
For the money supply policy the percentage differences are:1°
2

&it(M,48)j/t(M,52):
1

Real GNP

Quarters Ahead

2

2

100.[&.(M,52) -

.78

2

5.74

3

6.77

4
6.13

5

6.00

6

8

7

2.77

0.00

-

.31

These differences are small. The largest difference is only 6.77 percent,
which says that only 6.77 percent of the variance of CNP is due to the error
terms in the money equations.
Because of the correlation of the error terms across equations,

dropping the error terms in, say, four equations and seeing how much the
variance of GNP changes is not the same as computing the variance of CNP by

drawing only the error terms from the four equations. To see how much
difference this makes, a stochastic simulation was performed in which only
the error terms in the four money equations were drawn.

All the other

error terms were fixed at zero. The variances of GNP in this case as a

10For the interest rate policy the differences are negligible, as
expected from Poole's analysis.

16

percent of the variances of GNP when all the error terms are drawn are:

Quarters Ahead

2

2

1OO.[&.(M,4)/&1t(M,52)J

Real CNP

1

2

1.73

8.62

4

3

13.66

12.16

5

6

7

8

13.35

13.36

12.14

11.79

The estimated contribution is greater when computed this way, although the

estimates are still fairly small. For the four-quarter-ahead prediction,
for example, the contribution is 13.66 percent rather than 6.13 percent.

One final experiment is of interest here. In Poole's analysis if the

variance of the error term in the U function is zero and the coefficients
are of the expected sign, then the loss from using the money supply as the

policy instrument is less than the loss from using the interest rate. It is
interesting to see if something like this holds in the present model. This
experiment can be performed by comparing the variance of real GNP for the
money supply policy when the error terms in the money equations are fixed at
zero to the variance of real GNP for the interest rate policy when the error

terms in the money equations are fixed at zero.11 The percentage
differences between the two variances are:
2
100. [&.(M,48) -

2

1

Real GNP

-

.15

(.10)

Quarters Ahead

2

2
-

.62

(.23)

3

-1.83
(.31)

4
-2.91
(.38)

5

-3.96
(.44)

6

-4.75
(.50)

7

8

-5.18 -6.07
(.54) (.60)

The numbers in parentheses are again standard errors of the differences.
The differences are all negative, as expected from the Poole analysis,

noted in the previous footnote, the variance of real GNP for the
interest rate policy is negligibly affected2by fixing the error terms in the
mney equations at zero. In other words, &.(r,S2) is nearly identical to
for i equal to real CNP.

17

although again they are fairly small. One way of putting this is that the
gain for the money supply policy of there being no errors in the money
equations is fairly small.

V. Conclusion
This study has shown that stochastic simulation can be used to consider
the optimal choice of monetary policy instruments in econometric models.

The results for my model provide some support for what seems to be the Fed's

current choice of using the interest rate as its primary instrument. The
results also show that the contribution of the error terms in the demand for
money equations to the variance of real GNP is not very great even when the
money supply is the policy instrument.
The present results obviously depend on the properties of my model, and

it would be of interest to see if similar results hold for other models. If
the present results are biased, there are at least two reasons for thinking

that they may be biased against the interest rate policy. First, as noted
in Section III, if the interest rate directly affected plant and equipment
investment in the model, thus increasing the sensitivity of real GNP to the
interest rate, this would probably favor the interest rate policy over the

money supply policy. Second, the exchange rate is exogenous in the model
used in this paper. If it were endogenous and were influenced by the
interest rate, then its variance is likely to be greater for the money

supply policy. This larger variance may then lead to a larger variance of
real GNP. This, of course, does not necessarily follow, since the net
effect depends on all the parameters, variances, and covariances in the

model. At any rate, the robustness of the results to the use of alternative
models and specifications needs to be examined in future work.

18

APPENDIX

The use of stochastic simulation to estimate variances in nonlinear

econometric models is discussed in this Appendix. Write the model as

x,

(Al)

a.) —

u. i = 1,...
,

,n ,

t

1,.. .,T

where y is an n-dimensional vector of endogenous variables, x is a vector
of predetermined variables, a. is a vector of unknown coefficients, and u.
it
1

is an error term. The first m equations are assumed to be stochastic, with

the remaining u. (i = m+1,

that u =

(u1,

.

.

u)

..

. ,n) identically zero for all t.

It is assumed

is independently and identically distributed as

multivariate normal N(O,E).12 It is also assumed that consistent estimates
of a., denoted a.
I

1

are available for all i. Given these estimates,

consistent estimates of u., denoted i' can be computed as
The covariance matrix

x,

)

can then be estimated as (l/T)IJU' , where U is the m

x T matrix of the values of iI.

it

Let u denote a particular draw of the m error terms for period t from

the N(O,) distribution. Given u and given &.

for

all i, one can solve the

model for period t. This is merely a deterministic simulation for the given
values of the error terms and coefficients. Call this simulation a "trial."

Another trial can be made by drawing a new set of values of u and solving

again. This can be done as many times as desired. From each trial one

obtains a prediction of each endogenous variable. Let y denote the value
on

the

jth trial of variable i for period t. For J trials, the stochastic

12Although the normality assumption is used in this paper, other
assumptions could be used. This would simply change the way the error terms
are drawn.

19

simulation estimate of the expected value of variable i for period

t,

denoted it' is

l

J

(A2)

(1/J) yJ
j

Let

(A3)

2j

j

=

- -

2

The stochastic simulation estimate of the variance of variable i for
period
t, denoted

it

,

is

then
J

(A4)

(1/J)

1

c7Jt
1

j=l

Given the data from the trials, it is also possible to compute the

variances of the stochastic simulation estimates. The variance of .,

The variance of &, denoted

example, is

(A5) var() -

(1/J)2E(

for

var(), is

-

For some work, as in this paper, one is interested in the difference
between two estimated variances. Let (a) be one estimated variance, let
it (b) be another, and let .it be the difference between the two:
(A6)

=
it

o.(a)

-

c7.(b)

a and b correspond to two different experiments --

for

example, one in which

the interest rate is the policy instrument and one in which the money supply
is the policy instrument or one in which all the error terms are drawn and
one in which only some of the error terms are drawn.

It is also possible to compute the variance of the difference, denoted

20

var(.). First, let

(A7) dt

a(a) - ci(b)

From (A4), (A6), and (A7), it can be written

d

J

(A8) it =

(l/J)
j =1

The variance of .

it

(A9) var(.) =

is

then

(l/J)2(d it2

Given y(a) and y(b), j =

-

l,...,J,

all the above values can be computed.

In many applications, as in the present study, one is interested in
predicted values more than one period ahead, i.e. in predicted values from

dynamic simulations. The above discussion can be easily modified to

incorporate this case. One simply draws values for u for each period of
the simulation. Each trial is one dynamic simulation over the period of
interest. For, say, an eight-quarter period, each trial yields eight
predicted values, one per quarter, for each endogenous variable.

Although not done in this paper, it is also possible to draw

coefficients for the trials. Given an estimate of the distribution of the
coefficient estimates, which one has from the estimation of the model,

coefficient values can be drawn. In this case each trial consists of draws
of error terms and coefficients.

Regarding exogenous variables, if the exogenous-variable values are the
same from trial to trial, then the estimated variances are conditional on

fixed values of the exogenous variables. It is also possible, however, to
take into account exogenous-variable uncertainty. There are a number of

21

ways to do this. For purposes of this paper, equations explaining the main
exogenous variables in model were added to the model. An eighth order
autoregressive equation (with a constant term and time trend included) was

estimated for each exogenous variable of interest and these equations were

added to the model. Stochastic simulation can then be done for this
expanded version of the model. By drawing error terms from the equations
explaining the exogenous variables, exogenous-variable uncertainty is taken
into account.

Assume that there are q exogenous-variable equations added to the

model. This means that the covariance matrix E is now (m + q) x (m +
In estimating this matrix one may want to take

q).

to be block diagonal, where

the first block is the original m x m matrix and the second block is the
q x q estimated covariance matrix of the error terms in the exogenous-

variable equations. This procedure is consistent with the assumption upon
which the estimation of the model is based. This procedure was used for the
results in this paper.

Stochastic-simulation error can be large when comparing differences of

variances. In the present case 1000 trials was enough to make var()
acceptably small, but without any tricks, it was not enough to make var(.)
anywhere close to being acceptably small. Fortunately, there is an easy

trick available. The variance of

is equal to the variance of

-2

plus the variance of &(b) minus twice the covariance. The trick is to
make the covariance high, which can be done by using the same draws of the
-2

-2

error terms for the computation of both o.(a) and a.(b). Any one equation
of the model, for example, requires 8000 draws of its error term for 1000

trials for a forecast horizon of 8 quarters. If these same 8000 numbers are

22

used to compute both (a) and (b), the covariance between them will be
increased. When this trick is used, 1000 trials leads to values of var(.)
that are acceptably small. Each eight-quarter simulation of 1000 trials
takes about 5 hours of CPU time on a VAX 730 for my model.

23

REFERENCES

Fair, Ray C., Specification, Estimation, and Analysis of Macroeconometric
Models, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984.
Poole, William, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple
Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (1970),
197-216.
Tinsley, P. A., and P. von zur Muehlen, "Conditional Intermediate
Targeting," mimeo, 1983.
Turnovsky, S., "Optimal Choice of Monetary Instrument in a Linear Economic
Model with Stochastic Coefficients," Journal of Money. Credit, and
Banking, 7 (1975), 51-80.
Yoshikawa, H., "Alternative Monetary Policies and Stability in a
Stochastic Keynesian Model," International Economic Review, 22 (1981),
541-565.

