NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GAINS FROM INPUT TRADE IN FIRM-BASED MODELS OF IMPORTING
Joaquin Blaum
Claire LeLarge
Michael Peters
Working Paper 21504
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21504

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We especially thank Arnaud Costinot for his feedback and discussion at the Cowles conference and
Jonathan Eaton and Pablo Fajgelbaum for very helpful comments. We also thank Pol Antràs, Costas
Arkolakis, Penny Goldberg, Sam Kortum, Jonathan Vogel and Daniel Xu. We are grateful to seminar
participants at Brown, Columbia, Dartmouth, LSE, Penn State, Princeton, Stanford, UCLA and Yale.
A previous version of this paper circulated under the title “Estimating the Productivity Gains from
Importing”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joaquin Blaum, Claire LeLarge, and Michael Peters. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Gains from Input Trade in Firm-Based Models of Importing
Joaquin Blaum, Claire LeLarge, and Michael Peters
NBER Working Paper No. 21504
August 2015
JEL No. D21,D22,F11,F12,F14,F62
ABSTRACT
Trade in intermediate inputs allows firms to lower their costs of production by using better, cheaper,
or novel inputs from abroad. Quantifying the aggregate impact of input trade, however, is challenging.
As importing firms differ markedly in how much they buy in foreign markets, results based on aggregate
models do not apply. We develop a methodology to quantify the gains from input trade for a class
of firm-based models of importing. We derive a sufficiency result: the change in consumer prices induced
by input trade is fully determined from the joint distribution of value added and domestic expenditure
shares in material spending across firms. We provide a simple formula that can be readily evaluated
given the micro-data. In an application to French data, we find that consumer prices of manufacturing
products would be 27% higher in the absence of input trade.

Joaquin Blaum
64 Waterman Street
Box B, Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
joaquin_blaum@brown.edu
Claire LeLarge
National Institute of Statistics
and Economic Studies
Direction des Études et
Synthèses Économiques
15 Boulevard Gabriel Peri
92244 Malakoff Cedex, France
and CREST
claire.lelarge@gmail.com

Michael Peters
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
m.peters@yale.edu

1

Introduction

A large fraction of world trade is accounted for by firms sourcing intermediate inputs from abroad.
Trade theory highlights one particular margin of how domestic consumers benefit from producers
engaging in international sourcing. By providing access to novel, cheaper or higher quality inputs,
input trade reduces firms’ unit costs and lowers domestic prices, therefore increasing consumers’
purchasing power. In this paper, we develop a methodology to quantify this channel and provide an
application to France.
Quantifying the welfare consequences of input trade is not straightforward. Recent quantitative
trade models that allow for trade in inputs feature the convenient property that welfare can be
measured with aggregate data only - e.g. Eaton et al. (2011), Caliendo and Parro (2015) and
Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014). This property, however, relies on the assumption that firms’
import intensities are equalized - a feature that is at odds with the data. In particular, importing
firms differ substantially in the share of material spending they allocate to foreign inputs. In this
paper, we show that accounting for this heterogeneity in import exposure, which requires resorting to
firm-based models of importing, significantly affects the measurement of the gains from input trade.
We provide a sufficiency result that applies to a class of firm-based models of importing where
firms’ demand system between domestic and foreign inputs is CES.1 In particular, we show that
firm-level data on domestic shares of intermediate spending and value added is sufficient to compute
the consumer price gains from input trade, i.e. the change in consumer prices relative to a situation
of “input autarky” where firms can use only domestic inputs. Because this result does not rely
on specific assumptions on firms’ import environment nor on how firms’ determine their trading
partners, a variety of models implies the exact same consumer price gains given the micro data. We
provide a closed-form expression that makes calculating the consumer price gains straightforward.
Our result builds on a simple insight. By inverting the demand system for intermediates, we
can link the firm’s unit cost to its spending pattern on domestic inputs. When such a demand
system is CES, the unit cost reduction from importing, which we refer to as the producer gains, is
fully determined by the domestic expenditure share and two structural parameters.2 In particular,
the producer gains are high when the domestic share is low. In a second step, we then show how
these producer gains can be aggregated to compute the consumer price gains of input trade taking
general equilibrium effects into account. In a multi-sector trade model with intersectoral linkages and
monopolistic competition, such consumer price gains are akin to a value-added weighted average of
the producer gains. In this way, the joint distribution of domestic shares and value added is sufficient
to characterize the effect of input trade on consumer prices. Importantly, a key aspect of the data
is how firm size and domestic shares correlate; if bigger firms feature higher trade shares, then the
consumer gains will turn out to be large.
Our procedure places no restrictions on several components of the theory related to firms’ import
1

This class nests several frameworks used in the literature, e.g. Halpern et al. (2011), Gopinath and Neiman (2014),
Antràs et al. (2014) and Goldberg et al. (2010).
2
These are the elasticity of firm output to intermediate inputs and the elasticity of substitution between domestic
and international varieties.

1

environment. First, we do not require information on the prices and qualities of the foreign inputs,
nor on how these are combined for production.3 While these elements are in principle required to
compute the firm’s unit cost, they are fully summarized by the domestic expenditure share. Consider
next the extensive margin of trade. Because our sufficiency result is derived purely from the cost
minimization problem taking the set of trading partners as given, it holds regardless of how the firm
finds its suppliers, e.g. whether importing is limited by the presence of fixed costs or a process of
network formation. In this way, our approach bypasses data requirements as well as functional form
and behavioral assumptions and therefore holds in a variety of settings.
An important parameter in our methodology is the elasticity of substitution between domestically
sourced and imported inputs. Because firm-based models of importing do not generate a standard
gravity equation, this parameter is not identified from aggregate data. We therefore devise a strategy
to identify it from firm-level variation. By expressing firms’ output in terms of material spending, the
domestic share appears as an additional input in the production function. Because the sensitivity
of firm revenue to domestic spending depends on the elasticity of substitution, we can estimate
this parameter with methods akin to production function estimation. To address the endogeneity
concern that unobserved productivity shocks might lead to both lower domestic spending and higher
revenue, we use changes in the world supply of particular varieties as an instrument for firms’ domestic
spending.
We apply our methodology to the population of manufacturing firms in France. We estimate
the distribution of trade-induced changes in unit costs across firms. We find substantial crosssectional dispersion in these producer gains, which is induced by the observed variation in domestic
expenditure shares. While the median unit cost reduction is 11%, it exceeds 80% for 10% of the
firms. Moreover, bigger firms benefit more from input trade. We then aggregate the producer gains
to compute the consumer price gains by relying on the joint distribution of domestic shares and value
added. We find that input trade reduces consumer prices of manufacturing products by 27%.4 There
are three reasons why the consumer gains exceed the median producer gains, which go back to the
above-mentioned patterns. First, the dispersion in producer gains is valued by consumers given their
elastic demand. Second, the positive relation between the producer gains and firm size is beneficial
because the endogenous productivity gains from importing and firm efficiency are complements.
Finally, there are important linkages between firms whereby non-importers buy intermediates from
importing firms. This structure of round-about production amplifies the gains from input trade in
general equilibrium.
We then consider the effect of input trade on a broader notion of welfare. While the consumer
price gains are an important component of the welfare gains from input trade, they do not take into
account any resources spent by firms to attain their equilibrium sourcing strategies. Because such
3

We consider a production structure where foreign inputs are aggregated into an import bundle. We require that
such an import bundle is combined with a bundle of domestic inputs in a CES fashion, but place no restrictions on the
foreign input aggregator.
4
When we include the non-manufacturing sector, the consumer price gains amount to 9%. Note that manufacturing accounts for a relatively small share in aggregate consumer spending and that production links between the
manufacturing and the non-manufacturing sector, which we assume to be closed to international trade, are limited.

2

resource loss cannot be read off the data, we need to commit to a particular model of the extensive
margin of trade and fully calibrate it. We consider a model where participation in international
markets is limited by fixed costs. We parametrize the distributions of qualities, prices and fixed
costs, and discipline the model with moments of the French data. We target the joint distribution of
domestic expenditure shares and value added, which as argued above contains important information
about the gains from input trade. The main result of this exercise is that the full welfare gains are
about half as large as the consumer price gains.
Because our methodology stresses the importance of micro-data, a natural question is: how do our
estimates change when only aggregate data is used? Relying on aggregate data affects the estimates
of the gains from input trade in two distinct ways. First, there is a bias that arises from ignoring
the heterogeneity in firms’ import shares for given parameters. While this bias can be positive or
negative, we show that the sign depends only on parameters and not on the micro-data. A second
type of bias is related to the estimation of the elasticity of substitution. Approaches that rely on a
standard gravity equation to estimate this parameter may lead to different results than an analysis
based on micro-data. In our application to the French data, the first bias leads to overestimating the
consumer gains by about 10%, while the second one leads to underestimating them by 50%.5 Thus,
the magnitude of the different errors from using aggregate data can be substantial.
Our paper contributes to a recent literature on quantitative models of input trade. On the
one hand, there are aggregate trade models as Eaton et al. (2011), Caliendo and Parro (2015)
and Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014). These models have the convenient implication that the
welfare consequences of input trade are fully determined from readily available aggregate data.6 This
property, however, crucially relies on a theoretical structure where firms’ import shares are equalized
- an implication which is strongly at odds with the data. On the other hand, there is a literature
on firm-based models of importing - see Halpern et al. (2011), Gopinath and Neiman (2014) or
Ramanarayanan (2014). Our approach is different in two aspects. First, the existing contributions
do not rely on firms’ domestic expenditure shares to directly measure the unit cost reductions from
importing at the firm level. Instead, they measure these producer gains indirectly by estimating or
calibrating the entire structural model. Because the firm’s extensive margin problem is tractable only
under particular assumptions and the structure of output markets needs to be fully specified, their
results rely on these restrictions. Secondly, the existing papers do not target the joint distribution of
value added and domestic shares in their estimations, nor exploit the fact that such data is sufficient
to characterize the effect of input trade on consumer prices. Ramanarayanan (2014) and Gopinath
and Neiman (2014) for example consider a model that generates a perfect, and hence counterfactual,
correlation between firm-size and domestic shares. We explicitly show that the consumer price gains
in such type of model are too high.7
5

Using the micro-data to estimate the elasticity of substitution turns out to be important as we obtain a value close
to two. Estimation approaches that rely on aggregate data typically find values closer to four.
6
Specifically, the welfare gains are summarized by the change in the aggregate domestic expenditure share and a
trade elasticity, which can be estimated from aggregate trade flows.
7
Specifically, models where physical efficiency is the single source of firm heterogeneity generate a perfect assignment
between efficiency and the domestic share. As more efficient firms experience larger reductions in their unit cost, the

3

Our paper also builds on a recent literature which stresses that complementarities across inputs of
production make the import problem different from the better known export problem. In particular,
firms’ extensive margin of trade is in general harder to characterize - see Blaum et al. (2013) and
Antràs et al. (2014). On the export side, recent work has been able to quantitatively account for firms’
entry behavior into different markets.8 In contrast, theories that can account for the pattern of entry
into import markets are less developed. A notable exception is the recent contribution by Antràs
et al. (2014), who study a firm-based model of importing and adapt the estimation procedure by Jia
(2008) to match positive aspects of import behavior. In contrast, our paper focuses on normative
aspects of input trade. Our main result stresses that, conditional on the micro-data, the effect of
input trade on consumer prices does not depend on the mechanics of the extensive margin or other
aspects of the import environment.
At a conceptual level, our paper is related to Feenstra (1994) and Arkolakis et al. (2012). As
in Feenstra (1994), we express changes in unobserved unit costs in terms of observed expenditure
shares. Relative to Arkolakis et al. (2012), our sufficient statistic for the firm’s unit cost is related
to their sufficient statistic for aggregate welfare. In particular, we show that, conditional on the
micro-data on firms’ domestic shares and a “trade elasticity”, which in our setup corresponds to the
elasticity of substitution of the firm’s import demand system, a wide class of models will imply the
exact same distribution of producer gains across firms.
Finally, a number of empirically oriented papers study trade liberalization episodes to provide
evidence on the link between imported inputs and firm productivity - see e.g. Amiti and Konings
(2007), Goldberg et al. (2010) or Khandelwal and Topalova (2011).9 Our results are complementary
to this literature as we provide a structural interpretation of this empirical evidence. In particular,
from the point of view of applied researchers, our sufficiency result provides a way to analyze episodes
of trade liberalization, or other changes in firms’ import environment, without having to fully specify
and solve a structural model of importing. The observable change in the domestic expenditure shares
correctly measures the effect of the policy on firms’ unit costs, taking all adjustments into account.
If micro-data on value added is also available, our formula for the consumer gains can be used to
gauge the full effect of the policy on consumer prices in general equilibrium.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present direct evidence
from the population of French firms for why firm-based models of importing are necessary to study
the normative consequences of input trade. Section 3 lays out the class of models we consider and
derives our sufficiency results for the producer and consumer gains from input trade. The empirical
application to France is contained in Section 4. In Section 5, we calibrate a version of our model
with a fully-specified extensive margin of importing to provide a full measure of welfare. Section 6
concludes.
aggregate gains from input trade turn out to be too large.
8
See in particular Eaton et al. (2011), Arkolakis (2010), Arkolakis and Muendler (2011), and Bernard et al. (2012)
for a recent survey.
9
Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008) study the effect of imported intermediates on firm productivity through a production
function estimation exercise. See also the recent survey in De Loecker and Goldberg (2013) for a more general empirical
framework to study firm performance in international markets.

4

2

Why Firm-Based Models of Importing?

In this section, we present data on firms’ heterogeneous import behavior that is informative about the
aggregate consequences of input trade. We rely on data from the population of manufacturing firms
in France.10 In Figure 1, we display the cross-sectional distribution of importers’ domestic shares,
i.e. the share of material spending allocated to domestic inputs. These differ markedly. While the
majority of importers spend less than 10% of their material spending on foreign inputs, some firms
are heavy importers with import shares exceeding 50%. This heterogeneity in import intensities is
at odds with aggregate models which presume that import shares are equalized across importers. To
rationalize the data of Figure 1, we therefore have to resort to firm-based models of importing.
[Figure 1 here]
In this paper, we show that the dispersion in firms’ import exposure documented in Figure 1
has aggregate implications. The intuition is simple. As a firm’s domestic share measures the extent
to which it benefits from foreign input sourcing, Figure 1 shows that the gains from input trade
are heterogeneous at the micro-level. To correctly aggregate these producer gains, we have to know
firms’ relative importance in the economy. In particular, the consumer gains from input trade will be
high whenever intense importers, i.e. firms with low domestic shares, are large. Figure 2 displays the
extent to which this is the case in France. In the left panel, we depict the distribution of value added
by import status. While importers are significantly larger than non-importers, there is ample overlap
in their distribution of value added. In the right panel, we focus on the population of importers and
show the distribution of domestic shares for different value added quantiles. The relationship between
firms’ import intensity and size is essentially flat and there is substantial dispersion in import shares
conditional on size.
[Figure 2 here]
These patterns are important for our understanding of input trade. Holding the marginal distribution of domestic spending displayed in Figure 1 fixed, the gains from input trade would be higher
if import intensity and firm size were more tightly linked. The joint distribution of domestic shares
and value added therefore contains important information about the normative implications of input
trade. In the next section, we make these statements precise and derive a simple formula to quantify
the effect of input trade on consumer prices that only relies on the data displayed in Figures 1 and
2.

3

Theory

In this section, we lay out the theoretical framework of importing that we use to quantify the gains
from input trade. In Section 3.1, we study the firm’s import problem and formally show our unit
10

We describe the dataset in more detail in Section 4.1 below.

5

cost sufficiency result. In Section 3.2, we embed the firm problem into a general equilibrium trade
model with input-output linkages to quantify the effect of input trade on consumer prices.

3.1

The Producer Gains from Input Trade

Consider the problem of a firm, which we label as i, that uses local and foreign inputs according to
the following production structure:
y = ϕi f (l, x) = ϕi l1−γ xγ


x =
xI

βi (qD zD )


ε−1
ε



(1)
ε−1
ε

+ (1 − βi ) xI

= hi [qci zc ]c∈Σi .



ε
ε−1

(2)
(3)

where γ, βi ∈ (0, 1) and ε > 1.11 The firm combines intermediate inputs x with primary factors l,
which we for simplicity refer to as labor, in a Cobb-Douglas fashion with efficiency ϕi .12 Intermediate
inputs are a CES composite of a domestic variety, with quantity zD and quality qD , and a foreign
input bundle xI , with relative efficiency for domestic inputs given by βi . The firm has access to
foreign inputs from multiple countries, whose quantity is denoted by [zc ], which may differ in their
quality [qci ], where c is a country index.13 Foreign inputs are aggregated according a constant returns
to scale production function hi (·).14 An important endogenous object in the production structure is
the set of foreign countries the firm sources from, which we denote by Σi and henceforth refer to as
the sourcing strategy. We do not impose any restrictions on how Σi is determined.
As far as the market structure is concerned, we assume that the firm faces prices of domestic
and foreign inputs (pD , [pci ]) as parametric, i.e. it can buy any quantity at given prices. Similarly,
we assume that labor can be hired frictionlessly at a given wage w. On the output side, we do not
impose any restrictions, i.e. we do not specify whether firms produce a homogeneous or differentiated
final good and how they compete.
The setup above describes a class of firm-based models that have been used in the literature. In
particular, it for example nests the contributions by Gopinath and Neiman (2014), Halpern et al.
(2011), Antràs et al. (2014), Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008), Amiti et al. (2014) and Goldberg et al.
(2010).15 In this class of models, firms engage in input trade because it lowers their unit cost of
11

While the case of ε ≤ 1 can also be accommodated by the theory, it implies that all firms are importers - a feature
that is inconsistent with the data.
12
We consider a single primary factor for notational simplicity. It will be clear below that our results apply to
l = g (l1 , l2 , ..., lT ), where g (·) is a constant returns to scale production function and lj are primary factors of different
types. In the empirical application of Section 4, we consider labor and capital.
13
We discuss below how to generalize the results of this section when the Cobb-Douglas and CES functional forms
in (1)-(2) are not satisfied. We also consider the case where firms can source multiple products from different countries.
14
Note that this setup nests the canonical Armington structure where all countries enter symmetrically in the
production function. Additionally, this setup allows for an interaction between quality flows and the firm’s efficiency,
i.e. a form of non-homothetic import demand that is consistent with the findings in Kugler and Verhoogen (2011) and
Blaum et al. (2013).
15
While Antràs et al. (2014) consider a model of importing in the spirit of Eaton and Kortum (2002) instead of a
variety-type model, the Fréchet assumption implies that these models are isomorphic.

6

production via love of variety and quality channels. Crucially, the assumptions made above, most
importantly parametric prices and constant returns to scale, guarantee that the unit cost is constant
given the sourcing strategy Σ. This property allows us to characterize the unit cost without solving
for the extensive margin. Formally, the unit cost is given by



X



c∈Σi

u (Σi ; ϕi , βi , [qci ] , [pci ] , hi ) ≡ min wl + pD zD +
z,l




pci zc s.t. ϕi l1−γ xγ ≥ 1 ,

(4)



subject to (2)-(3). For simplicity, we refer to the unit cost as ui . Standard calculations imply that
there is an import price index given by
A (Σi , [qci ] , [pci ] , hi ) ≡

mI
,
xI

(5)

where mI denotes import spending and xI is the foreign import bundle defined in (3). Importantly,
conditional on Σi , this price-index is exogenous from the point of view of the firm and we henceforth
denote it by Ai (Σi ). Next, given the CES production structure between domestic and foreign inputs,
the price index for intermediate inputs is given by


Qi (Σi ) = βiε (pD /qD )1−ε + (1 − βi )ε Ai (Σi )1−ε



1
1−ε

,

(6)

so that intermediate inputs x = m/Qi (Σi ) where m denotes total spending in materials. It follows
that the firm’s unit cost is given by16
ui =

1 1−γ
w
Qi (Σi )γ .
ϕi

(7)

We see that input trade affects the unit cost through the price index for intermediate inputs. This
price index, however, depends on a number of unobserved parameters related to the trading environment, e.g. the prices and qualities of the foreign inputs. We use the fact that the unobserved price
index Qi (Σi ) is related to the observed expenditure share on domestic inputs sDi via
ε−1

sDi = Qi (Σi )

βiε



qD
pD

ε−1

.

(8)

Substituting (8) into (7) yields
γ
1
ui =
× (sDi ) ε−1 ×
ϕ̃i



pD
qD

γ

w1−γ ,

(9)

εγ

where ϕ̃i ≡ ϕi βiε−1 . (9) is a sufficiency result: conditional on the firm’s domestic expenditure share
sDi , no aspects of the import environment, including the sourcing strategy Σi , the prices pci , the
qualities qci or the technology hi , affect the firm’s unit cost. With (9) at hand, we can derive the
16

With a slight abuse of notation we suppress the constant

7

1
1−γ

1−γ

1
γ

γ

in the definition of (7).

effect of input trade on the firm’s unit cost, which is sometimes referred to as the productivity gains
from importing.
Proposition 1. Consider the model above. We define the producer gains frominput trade as the
reduction in unit cost relative to autarky holding prices fixed, i.e. Gi ≡ ln
Gi =

uAut
i
ui

. Then
pD ,w

γ
ln (sDi ) .
1−ε

(10)

Proof. Follows directly from (9) and the fact that the domestic share in autarky is unity.
Proposition 1 shows that the effect of participating in international input markets on the firm’s
unit cost is observable given data on its domestic share and values of the elasticities γ and ε.17 More
precisely, the increase in production costs that firm i would experience if it (and only it) was excluded
from international markets can be recovered from the firm’s domestic expenditure share. Intuitively,
input trade benefits the firm by reducing the price index of intermediate inputs Qi . Conditional
on an import demand system, we can invert the change in this price index from the change in the
domestic expenditure share - see (8).18 Because in general pD and w may change when the economy
moves to input autarky, Proposition 1 is a partial equilibrium result. We explicitly allow for general
equilibrium effects in Section 3.2 below. We note, however, that (10) identifies the dispersion of the
producer gains across firms in general equilibrium.19 In this way, we can assess the distributional
effects of input trade and determine whether particular firm characteristics are associated with larger
gains.
The sufficiency result in Proposition 1 allows us to measure the change in the unit cost without
specifying several components of the theory. As equations (5)-(7) show, the firm’s unit cost depends
on the import environment parameters [pci , qci , hi , βi ]. The domestic expenditure share conveniently
encapsulates all the information from these parameters that is relevant for the unit cost - see (9).
Instead, the standard approach in the literature consists of estimating these parameters in the context
of a fully-specified model of importing. This approach requires researchers to specify the entire import
environment, including the structure of output markets, and to solve for firms’ optimal sourcing
strategies which, as discussed below, can be a non-trivial problem. Hence Proposition 1 is useful
because it allows us to bypass the challenges of firm-based models of importing and quantify the
producer gains in a wide class of models.
Finally, we note that Proposition 1 can be used to analyze counterfactuals other than input
autarky. Consider for concreteness an episode of trade liberalization (e.g. Chile in 1980s (Pavcnik,
17

In Section 8.1 of the Appendix, we generalize Proposition 1 in three ways. First, we derive a local version of (9) for
the case where domestic and foreign inputs are not combined in a CES fashion. Second, we consider the case where the
output elasticity of material inputs is not constant. Finally, we allow firms to source multiple products from different
countries. We also discuss what additional information, relative to Proposition 1, is required to perform counterfactual
analysis.
18
Hence, Proposition 1 is akin to a firm-level analogue of Arkolakis et al. (2012). In the same vein as consumers
gain purchasing power by sourcing cheaper or complementary products abroad, firms can lower the effective price of
material services by tapping into foreign input markets.
19
This follows from the fact that the relative unit cost ui /uj does not depend on prices pD , w - see (9).

8

2002), Indonesia in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Amiti and Konings, 2007) or India in the 1990s
(De Loecker et al., 2012)). The associated change in the unit cost holding prices fixed is then given
by
u0i
ln
ui



pD ,w

γ
sDi
=
ln 0
1−ε
sDi

!

,

(11)

where s0Di denotes firm i’s domestic share after the shock. (11) can be used for a structural evaluation
of changes in trade policy, as long as data on firms’ domestic shares before and after is available.20,21
In particular, (11) identifies the dispersion in the policy-induced changes in unit costs across firms,
that is, the distributional effects of the policy. Note that (11) contains both the exogenous change
in foreign prices due to lower trade barriers as well as the endogenous change from adjustments in
the sourcing pattern.
An Example with Fixed Costs. To compare our approach with the existing literature, consider
the following example of a static economy where international sourcing is limited by the presence of
fixed costs. In particular, suppose that sourcing an input from country c entails paying a fixed cost
fci in units of labor. The profit maximization problem is then given by



X



c∈Σ

πi ≡ max (p(y) − ui ) y − w
Σ,y

fci




,

(12)



where the unit cost is
ui =

i γ
1 1−γ h ε
w
βi (pD /qD )1−ε + (1 − βi )ε Ai (Σi )1−ε 1−ε ,
ϕi

(13)

and p(y) denotes the demand function. Firms choose their size y and set of imported varieties Σ to
maximize profits.
Albeit conceptually easy, solving this profit maximization problem presents us with two practical
challenges. First, one has to specify the entire set of structural primitives of the model, including
the distribution of prices, qualities and fixed costs across countries, the demand function and the
structure of output markets. Second, even after making such assumptions, the choice of the optimal
sourcing strategy can be computationally difficult.22 The reason is the interdependence between
20

This methodology is subject to the caveat that the domestic shares may have changed for reasons unrelated to
the policy under study. This concern, however, is equally relevant for any empirical analysis trying to infer the causal
effect of trade liberalization.
21
Opening up to trade might induce firms’ to engage in productivity enhancing activities that directly increase
efficiency ϕ, such as R&D. Such increases in complementary investments are not encapsulated in (11) nor in Proposition
1, which only measure the static gains from trade holding efficiency fixed. To disentangle the dynamic from the static
gains from trade, more structure and data is required - see for example Eslava et al. (2014).
22
Note that the extensive margin problem cannot by sidestepped even in cases where the researcher is interested in
computing unit cost changes between two states where the sourcing sets are known - e.g. the current trade equilibrium
and autarky. The reason is that, to evaluate (13), one needs to know the full set of structural parameters. While these
parameters can be in principle estimated, such estimation would typically entail solving for the optimal sourcing set in
(12).

9

entry decisions in different import markets.23 When imported varieties are imperfect substitutes,
the cost reduction associated with entering a particular foreign market depends on the quantities
sourced from all other markets - see (5). If foreign inputs differ in both quality and fixed costs, the
profit maximization problem in (12) is in general non-convex and the choice of the optimal sourcing
set requires evaluating all possible sourcing strategies, entailing substantial computational burden
- see Antràs et al. (2014) for conditions under which this issue can be sidestepped and a solution
algorithm.
The benefit of Proposition 1 is that these challenges can be bypassed for certain normative
questions. With micro-data on domestic expenditure shares and the two structural parameters γ
and ε, we can directly measure the endogenous reduction in unit cost arising from input trade at
the firm-level. Not only is the calculation straight-forward but it does not rely on any assumptions
made to make the solution to (12) feasible.

3.2

The Consumer Gains from Input Trade

In this section, we embed the model of firm behavior of Section 3.1 in a macroeconomic environment
and study the aggregate effect of input trade. We focus on the change in consumer prices, i.e. how
much more would domestic consumers pay for the locally produced goods if firms were not allowed
to source their inputs from abroad.24 To isolate the effect of input trade, we abstract from trade
in final goods. That is, we consider an environment where domestic consumers solely benefit from
trade openness indirectly through firms’ cost reductions. The micro result in Proposition 1 above is
crucial as it allows us to measure such firm-level unit cost reductions in the data. To aggregate these
producer gains, we need to take a stand on two aspects of the macroeconomic environment: (i) the
nature of input-output linkages across firms and (ii) the degree of pass-through, which depends on
consumers’ demand system and output market structure. While the former determines the effect of
trade on the price of domestic inputs pD , the latter determines how much of the trade-induced cost
reductions actually benefit consumers.
We consider the following multi-sector CES monopolistic competition environment, which is for
example also used in Caliendo and Parro (2015).25 There are S sectors, each comprised of a measure
Ns of firms which we treat as fixed. There is a unit measure of consumers who supply L units of
23
This interdependence of entry decisions makes the extensive margin of imports different from that of exports,
where the sourcing strategy can typically be solved market by market, and has the implication that more productive
firms need not source their inputs from more countries, unless more restrictions are imposed.
24
Note that the change in consumer prices does not capture the full effect of input trade on welfare. For the latter,
we need to take into account the resources spent by firms to attain their sourcing strategies and we do so in Section 5
below.
25
We adopt a model with perfect pass-through because we lack data on firm-specific prices, which would be necessary
to discipline the extent of pass-through in a more general framework.

10

labor inelastically and whose preferences are given by
U

=

S
Y

Csαs

(14)

s=1

ˆ

Ns

Cs =
0

σs −1
σs

cis

!

σs
σs −1

di

,

(15)

where αs ∈ (0, 1), s αs = 1 and σs > 1. Firm i in sector s = 1, ..., S − 1 produces according to the
production technology given by (1)-(3) in Section 3.1 above, where the structural parameters ε and
γ are allowed to be sector-specific. As before, we do not assume any particular mechanism of how
the extensive margin of trade is determined nor impose any restrictions on [pci , qci , hi , βi ]. That is,
the distribution of prices and qualities across countries and the aggregator of foreign inputs can take
any form. Additionally, these parameters can vary across firms in any way. We assume sector S to
be comprised of firms that do not trade inputs and refer to it as the non-manufacturing sector.26
We assume the following structure of roundabout production. Firms use a sector-specific domestic
input that is produced using the output of all other firms in the economy according to
P

zDs =

S
Y

ζjs

Yj

ˆ



and Yj = 
0

j=1

σj −1
σj

Nj



yνjs dν 

σj
σj −1

,

(16)

where zDs denotes the bundle of domestic inputs, ζjs is a matrix of input-output linkages with
P
ζjs ∈ [0, 1] for all s and j and Sj=1 ζjs = 1 for all s, and yνjs is the output of firm ν in sector j
demanded by a firm in sector s. In this setting, the price of the domestic input pDs is endogenous
so that domestic firms are affected by trade policy via their purchases of intermediate inputs from
importers.
Building on our result from Section 3.1, we now show that the consumer price index associated
with (14)-(15) can be expressed in terms of observables. Given the CES demand and monopolistic
competition structure, the consumer price index for sector s is given by
ˆ
Ps = µ s
0

Ns

!
s
u1−σ
di
i

1
1−σs



= µs

pDs
qDs

ˆ

γs

×
0

Ns



1
(sDi )γs /(εs −1)
ϕ̃i

1−σs

!

di

1
1−σs

,

(17)

where µs ≡ σs / (σs − 1) is the mark-up in sector s and we treat labor as the numeraire. The second
equality follows from (9) above which allows us to express firms’ unit costs in terms of their domestic
expenditure shares (sDi ) and efficiency (ϕ̃i ). (17) shows that, holding domestic input prices fixed,
the effect of input trade on consumers’ purchasing power is an efficiency-weighted average of the
26

We introduce this sector for empirical reasons. In the next section, we consider an application to France where
we do not have data on firm-level imports outside of the manufacturing sector. To make aggregate statements about
input trade, we take the non-manufacturing sector into account. See Section 4 for details.

11

firm-level gains. While firm efficiency ϕ̃i is not observed, it can be recovered up so scale from data
on value added and domestic spending as27


vai ∝ ϕ̃i (sDi )γs /(1−εs )

σs −1

.

(18)

Combining (17) and (18), the change in the sectoral consumer price index relative to autarky is given
by




(19)
/p
ln PsAut /Ps = γs ln pAut
Ds + Λs ,
Ds
where
1
Λs =
ln
1 − σs

ˆ

Ns

0

γs
(1−σs )
1−εs

ωi sDi

!

di

(20)

and ωi denotes firm i’s share in value added. (19) shows that input trade affects consumer prices
through two channels. First, there is a direct effect stemming from firms in sector s sourcing inputs
internationally, Λs . Second, there is an indirect effect as the price of domestic inputs changes because
of input-output linkages, pAut
Ds /pDs .
(19) and (20) contain a sufficiency result for the change in consumer prices. Note first that the
direct price reduction Λs can be computed with data on value added and domestic shares. Next,
because of the structure of roundabout production in (16), the change in domestic input prices
pAut
Ds /pDs is a function of the Λs of all sectors. Hence, the consumer price gains from input trade can
be expressed in terms of observables.
Proposition 2. Let P and P Aut be the consumer price indices in the trade equilibrium and autarky.
We define the consumer price gains
from

 input trade as the reduction in the consumer price index
Aut
relative to autarky, i.e. G ≡ ln P /P . Then,




G = α0 Γ (I − Ξ × Γ)−1 Ξ + I × Λ,
h

(21)

i

where Λ = [Λ1 , Λ2 , ..., ΛS ], Ξ = ζjs is the S × S matrix of production interlinkages, α is the S × 1
vector of demand coefficients, I is an identity matrix and Γ = diag (γ), where γ is the S × 1 vector
of input intensities.
Proof. See Section 8.2 in the Appendix.
Proposition 2 is the main result of the paper. It shows that the information contained in the
micro-data on domestic spending and value added is sufficient to characterize the consumer price
gains from input trade relative to autarky in the class of models considered in this section. Thus, the
consumer price gains can essentially be read off the micro-data given the parameters for consumer
demand and production. Information about firms’ import environment or firms’ endogenous choice
of their extensive margin of importing is not required.
27

This assumes that the data on value added does not record firms’ expenses to attain their sourcing strategies. If
it did, one could express (18) in terms of sales or employment.

12

To understand Proposition 2, it is instructive to consider the case of a single sector economy.
Expression (21) then becomes
Λ
G=
,
(22)
1−γ
that is, the consumer price gains are simply given by the direct price reduction Λ, inflated by
1/ (1 − γ) to capture the presence of roundabout production.
Finally, Proposition 2 can be generalized to study counterfactuals beyond input autarky. In
particular, consider a policy that changes firms’ domestic expenditure shares from [sDi ] to [s0Di ]. The
effect of such policy on consumer prices is given by the same expression as in Proposition 2, except
that Λs is now given by

Λ∗s

=

1
ln
1 − σs

ˆ

Ns



0

ωi sDi /sDi



γs
(1−σs )
1−εs

!

di .

(23)

0

In the case of observed policy experiments, the consumer gains can be easily computed as long as
data on domestic shares before and after the change is available. (23) is also useful for unobserved
counterfactuals. In particular, all models within our class will have the exact same normative implications as long as they generate the same counterfactual distribution of domestic shares. While
the underlying import environment matters for the predicted domestic shares, conditional on such
predictions the implied consumer gains are same.
The Bias of Models of Importing
Proposition 2 is a useful organizing tool for the existing models of importing. It shows that, in terms
of their normative implications, existing models differ only in their implied distribution of domestic
shares and value added which translate into different price reductions Λ.
Aggregate Models. Consider first the aggregate models of importing where firms’ domestic expenditure shares are equalized - see Eaton et al. (2011), Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Costinot and
Rodríguez-Clare (2014).28 In these models, the direct price reductions relative to autarky are given
by
!
ˆ Ns


γs
γs
Agg
Agg
ln sDs =
ln
ωi sDi di ,
(24)
Λs =
1 − εs
1 − εs
0
29 While these frameworks have
where sAgg
Ds is the aggregate domestic expenditure share in sector s.
the benefit of only requiring aggregate data, Figure 1 in Section 2 shows that their implication of
equalized domestic shares is rejected in the micro-data, and Proposition 2 shows that such deviation
has aggregate consequences. In particular, (20) and (24) imply that the bias from measuring the
28

In our setup, domestic shares are equalized if for example firms have the same sourcing strategy (e.g. in the
absence of fixed costs) and prices, qualities and technology do not vary across firms.
29
Note that, because of Cobb-Douglas production, firm value added is proportional to material spending, so that
sAgg
Ds is indeed equal to the aggregate share of material spending allocated towards domestic producers.

13

price reduction in sector s through the lens of an aggregate model is given by
 ´

Biass ≡ ΛAgg
− Λs =
s

γs

× ln 
εs − 1

1/χs
Ns
χs
0 ωi sDi di

,
´ Ns
ω
s
di
i Di
0


(25)

s −1)
where χs = γsε(σs −1
. Heterogeneity in import shares induces a bias in the estimates of the gains
from trade of aggregate models, as long as χs 6= 1. The magnitude of the bias depends on the
underlying dispersion in domestic shares and their correlation with firm size - we quantify it in our
empirical application below. The sign of the bias, however, depends only on parameters and not on
the underlying micro-data. In particular, (25) together with Jensen’s inequality directly imply that

Biass > 0 if and only if χs =

γs (σs − 1)
> 1.
εs − 1

(26)

The economic intuition behind (26) is as follows. Because the current trade equilibrium is observed
in the data, quantifying the gains from trade boils down to predicting consumer prices in the counterfactual autarky allocation - see (17) and (18). Such prices are fully determined from producers’
efficiencies, i.e. ϕ̃σ−1
. As these are unobserved, they are inferred from data on value added and doi
is proportional
mestic shares. More specifically, given the data on value added, (18) shows that ϕ̃σ−1
i
χ
to sDi . In the same vain as dispersion in prices is valued by consumers whenever demand is elastic,
dispersion in domestic shares is valued as long as χ > 1. In this case, the autarky price index inferred
by an aggregate model is too high, making the gains from trade upward biased.
To fix ideas, consider an example where firms differ in their domestic shares and value added is
equalized across producers. In this case, an aggregate model would conclude that efficiency is also
equalized across firms - see (18). This, however, cannot be the case as the dispersion in domestic
shares implies that efficiency has to vary given a common level of value added. Whether or not
consumers prefer the autarky allocation with equalized efficiency depends on χ. If χ > 1, such
allocation features higher consumer prices and therefore higher gains from trade.
Firm-based Models. On the other side of the spectrum are firm-based models of importing.
These models generate heterogeneity in firms’ import shares, typically via sorting into different
import markets, thereby inducing a joint distribution of import intensity and size. Gopinath and
Neiman (2014), Amiti et al. (2014) and Ramanarayanan (2014) for example assume that firms differ
only in their efficiency and thus generate a perfect negative correlation between domestic shares and
value added conditional on importing. They also imply that all importers are larger than domestic
firms. By assigning the largest unit cost reductions to the most efficient firms, this tends to magnify
the aggregate gains from trade. Figure 2 in Section 2, however, shows that the correlation between
firm size and domestic spending is negative but far from perfect, and that many importers are
small. Because models with a single source of firm heterogeneity cannot match these features of

14

the data, they will tend to yield biased estimates of the gains from trade.30 Antràs et al. (2014)
and Halpern et al. (2011) allow for heterogeneity in efficiency and fixed costs and thus generate a
non-trivial distribution of value added and domestic spending. Whether or not the model-implied
distribution is quantitatively consistent with the micro-data and hence informative for normative
questions depends on the particular calibration.

4

Quantifying the Producer and Consumer Gains

We now take the framework laid out above to data on French firms to quantify the gains from input
trade both at the firm and aggregate level. Implementing Propositions 1 and 2 empirically requires
a set of parameters. We deal with their estimation in Section 4.1 and compute the producer and
consumer gains in Section 4.2.

4.1

Estimation of Parameters

Our approach relies on both micro and aggregate data. We use the micro-data to estimate the production function parameters, i.e. the material elasticities [γs ] and the elasticities of substitution [εs ],
as well as the sector-specific
demand elasticities [σs ]. We identify the input-output structure on the
h i
s
production side ζj and the aggregate demand parameters [αs ] from the input-output tables. This
allows us also to account for the non-manufacturing sector and doing so is quantitatively important.
Data.
The main source of information we use is a firm-level dataset from France. A detailed
description of how the data is constructed is contained in Section 8.3 of the Appendix. Because
we are interested in trade in inputs, we restrict the analysis to manufacturing firms. We observe
import flows for every manufacturing firm in France from the official custom files. Manufacturing
firms account for 30% of the population of French importing firms and 53% of total import value
in 2004. Import flows are classified at the country-product level, where products are measured at
the 8-digit (NC8) level of aggregation. Using unique firm identifiers, we can match this dataset to
fiscal files which contain detailed information on firm characteristics. The final sample consists of an
unbalanced panel of roughly 170,000 firms which are active between 2002 and 2006, 38,000 of which
are importers. Table 9 in the Appendix contains some basic descriptive statistics. We augment this
data with two additional data sources. First, we employ data on input-output linkages in France
from the STAN database of the OECD. Second, we use global trade flows from the UN Comtrade
Database to measure aggregate export supplies which we use to construct an instrument to estimate
the elasticity of substitution ε below.
Identification of
h α,
i ζ and σ. We compute the demand parameters αs and the matrix of inputs
output linkages ζj using data from the French input-output tables on the distribution of firms’
intermediate spending and consumers’ expenditure by sector.31 Sectors are classified at the 2-digit
30
31

We quantify such bias in Section 5.3 below.
See the Online Appendix for a detailed description of how we construct the input-output matrix.

15

level. Letting Zjs denote total spending on intermediate goods from sector j by firms in sector s and
Es total consumption spending in sector s, our theory implies

ζjs =

Zjs
PS

s
j=1 Zj

Es
and αs = PS

j=1 Ej

.

(27)

We aggregate all non-manufacturing sectors into one residual sector, which we denote by S, and
construct its consumption share αS and input-output matrix ζjS directly from the Input-Output
Tables.
Our dataset does not have information on firm-specific prices but only revenues. We therefore
use industry-specific average mark-ups to get the demand elasticities [σs ]. In the model, mark-ups
in sector s are equal to σs / (σs − 1). As in Oberfield and Raval (2014), we identify mark-ups from
firms’ ratios of revenues to total costs. We calculate total costs as the sum of material spending,
payments to labor and the costs of capital. We compute averages at the sector level to identify σs .
Table 1 below contains the results. Column three reports the consumption share αs for each sector
in France. The non-manufacturing sector is important as it account for a large share of the budget of
consumers. Column four reports the demand elasticities σs which, consistent with the literature, are
estimated at around 3. For brevity, we report the input-output matrix ζjs in the Online Appendix.
[Table 1 here]
Estimation of ε and γ.
Of particular importance are the elasticities of substitution εs and
the intermediate input shares γs , as they directly affect the producer gains. To understand our
identification strategy, note that firm output can be written as32
−

γs

yis = ϕ̃i sDiεs −1 kiφks liφls mγi s × B

(28)

where mi is total material spending by firm i and B collects all general equilibrium variables, which
are constant across firms. By expressing output in terms of spending in materials instead of quantities, (28) shows that we can estimate εs by treating the domestic share as an additional input
in a production function estimation exercise.33,34 We also see that the domestic share is akin to a
productivity shifter.
Because we do not observe firm-specific prices, we rely on the demand structure assumed in
Section 3.2 and express (28) in terms of firm revenue
32

In this section, we augment the production function considered in Section 3 to include capital, i.e. yis =
ϕi kφks lφls xγs , where φks and φls denote the capital and labor output elasticities in sector s.
33
Note that it is common in the literature to rely on material spending as a measure of input use, as quantities are
rarely observed. (28) shows that in this case the domestic expenditure share turns out to be the appropriate deflator
for material spending. Not controlling for the domestic share therefore results in biased estimates (De Loecker and
Goldberg, 2013).
34
Because our data does not contain a reliable measure of quality-adjusted input prices, we do not estimate ε from
the firm’s import demand system (6)-(8).

16

ln (Revis ) = δ + φ̃ks ln (ki ) + φ̃ls ln (li ) + γ̃s ln (mi ) + ln (ϑi ) ,

(29)

where the productivity residual ϑi is given by
ln (ϑi ) =

1
σs − 1
γ˜s ln (sDi ) +
ln (ϕ̃i )
1 − εs
σs

(30)

and γ˜s = σsσ−1
γs and φ˜ks and φ˜ls are defined accordingly.
s
We use equations (29) and (30) to estimate εs and γs following three complementary approaches.
The first two methods estimate (29) and (30) separately. They only differ in the way in which the
output elasticities [φks , φls , γs ] are obtained from (29). We consider both a factor shares approach
and a proxy method. We then use such elasticities to construct productivity residuals ln (ϑi ) and use
(30) together with data on domestic shares to estimate εs . To increase the power of the estimation,
we pool firms from all sectors together and estimate a single ε. The third approach treats the
domestic share as an additional input and estimates all parameters in (29)-(30) simultaneously. In
this approach we allow for sector-specific εs .
Consider first the approach based on observed factor shares, which is a simple and easy-toimplement benchmark. The Cobb-Douglas production structure implies that
γ˜s =

mi
,
pi yi

(31)

so that we can measure γ˜s as the average share of material spending across firms. We can similarly
measure φ̃ks and φ̃ls , and hence construct the productivity residuals ln (ϑi ) from (29) up to an
inconsequential constant. In a second step, we then use the estimated γ˜s , the productivity residuals
and the data on domestic shares to estimate equation (30).
Clearly, we cannot estimate (30) via OLS as the required orthogonality restriction fails: sD is
not orthogonal to efficiency ϕ under most reasonable models of import behavior. In particular, more
efficient firms are likely to sort into more and different sourcing countries and this variation in the
extensive margin of trade may induce variation in firm-specific price indices and hence domestic
shares. Hence, we estimate ε from (30) using an instrumental variable strategy. In particular, we
follow Hummels et al. (2011) and instrument sD with shocks to world export supplies, which we
construct from the Comtrade data. More precisely, we construct the instrument
!

zit = ∆ln

X

W ESckt ×

spre
cki

,

(32)

ck

where W ESckt denotes the total exports of product k from county c in year t to the entire world
excluding France, spre
cki is firm i’s import share on product k from county c prior to our sample, and
∆ denotes the change between year t − 1 and year t. Hence, zit can be viewed as a firm-specific
index of shocks to the supply of the firm’s input bundle. Movements in this index should induce
variation in firms’ domestic shares that are plausibly orthogonal to firm efficiency. Intuitively, if we

17

see China’s exports of product k increasing in year t, French importers that used to source product
k from China will be relatively more affected by this positive supply shock and should increase their
import activities. Using this source of variation in import prices at the firm-level, we can identify
the elasticity of substitution ε. We estimate (30) in first differences using (32) to instrument for the
domestic share according to the following specification




∆ln ϑ̂ist = δs + δt +



1
0
× ∆γ̃s ln sD
ist + oist ξ + uist ,
1−ε

(33)




where δ are sector and year fixed effects, oist is a vector of firm-level controls and ∆ln ϑ̂ist and
∆γ̃s ln (sDist ) are the changes in firm residual productivity and domestic shares respectively, which
are instrumented by (32). We define products at the 6-digit level and take firms’ respective first
year as an importer to calculate the pre-sample expenditure shares spre
cki . As stated above, to increase
statistical power we estimate a unique ε from (33) by pooling firms from all sectors together.
As an alternative to the factor shares approach, we employ a proxy method from the production
function estimation literature, akin to Levinsohn and Petrin (2012), to obtain the output coefficients
in equation (29). We assume labor to be a dynamic input, which seems plausible for the French
labor market, and estimate the obtained equation using GMM as in Wooldridge (2009) to arrive at
estimates of the vector of coefficients [φks , φls , γs ]. We experiment with the standard Cobb-Douglas
specification, as well as a more flexible translog specification where we continue to assume a constant
output elasticity for intermediate inputs but allow for second-order terms in capital and labor. The
second step is as in our previous approach: we construct productivity residuals ln (ϑi ) for each firm
and estimate ε from (33) using the instrumental approach described above. Hence, if the production
function estimation were to give us the same [φks , φls , γs ] as the factor shares approach, the implied
estimate for ε would be numerically identical.
Our third method consists of estimating firms’ production function with an integrated GMM
approach. Instead of treating (29) and (30) as separate estimation equations, we estimate the firms’
production function in a single step with four inputs and again follow Wooldridge (2009) to estimate
the four parameters via GMM. We follow the literature in using lagged values of capital, labor and
materials to proxy for ϕ, and two-years lagged values of intermediate inputs as an instrument for
current intermediate inputs (the only static input). We use the trade instrument discussed above to
account for the endogeneity of firms’ domestic shares.
The results of the three estimation approaches for ε are reported in Table 2 and Figure 3 below.
Table 2 contains the estimates of ε using the factor shares approach and the proxy method based on
Levinsohn and Petrin (2012) and Wooldridge (2009).35 For the latter procedure, we report the results
based on both the Cobb Douglas and the more general translog specifications. In the respective first
column, we show the first stage relationship between changes in world export supply zit and firms’
changes in domestic spending. Reassuringly, there is a negative relationship that is statistically
significant, i.e. firms whose trading partners see an increase in their total world exports reduce
35

For brevity, we report the estimates of the other production function parameters in the Online Appendix.

18

their domestic spending.36 Turning to the results for ε, we see that the different procedures yield
relatively similar results as the estimates lie between 1.7 and 2.4.37 In particular, the point estimates
remain relatively unchanged when we estimate the second stage equation on importing firms only.
Note, however, that the standard errors increase substantially as we lose a large amount of data by
conditioning on import status.38
[Table 2 here]
[Figure 3 here]
The results of the integrated GMM approach are summarized in Figure 3. Because we estimate
firms’ production function for each industry, this procedure gives sector-specific estimates of ε. We
depict both the point estimates and confidence intervals based on two standard deviations. While we
lack precision in some industries, the point estimates are mostly in the same ballpark as the pooled
results from above.39,40
For the remainder of the paper, we take the estimate stemming from the factor shares approach,
i.e. ε = 2.38, as the benchmark. While the two-step approaches estimate (33) in first differences,
the one-step GMM approach treats firms’ domestic shares as an explicit input and estimates the
production function in levels. Conceptually, we prefer the identification strategy in first differences
as we find the underlying exogeneity assumptions more plausible.41 It is nevertheless comforting to see
that all these approaches yield consistent results. While we lock in to the factor shares estimate, we
report confidence intervals for all quantitative results which take into account the sampling variation
in this benchmark estimate. Note additionally that our choice of benchmark ε is conservative as far
as the magnitude of the gains from trade is concerned, since the unit cost reductions are decreasing
in ε.
36

The reason why the first stage results are not numerically equivalent across the different specifications is that the
estimated material elasticity is different. Recall that the independent variable is ∆γ̃s ln sD
ist .
37
Our estimates are close to the ones of Antràs et al. (2014) who rely on cross-country variation.
38
In Section 8.4 in the Appendix, we provide further robustness checks to our estimates of ε, which lead to similar
conclusions. In particular, we keep the year used for the pre-sample weights spre
cki fixed at 2001 for all firms.
39
Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008) find estimates of the elasticity of substitution in the range of 3.1 to 4.4 using a
related approach for Chilean data. However, they do not use an external instrument for firms’ imported intermediates.
Halpern et al. (2011) use Hungarian data and derive a production function equation analog to (29)-(30), as well as an
import demand equation. They find an elasticity of substitution of 7.3. The main difference with our approach is that
they obtain the parameters of their structural model, namely the elasticity of substitution and the quality of foreign
varieties, by simultaneously estimating the production function and import demand equations. Because both of these
equations are derived after solving for the extensive margin of trade, they only hold under restrictive assumptions. In
contrast, we identify ε solely from (29)-(30) by using exogenous variation in input supplies. Hence, we can estimate ε
without taking a stand on how the extensive margin of trade is determined.
40
This suggests that the relatively low value for ε found in the pooled factor shares approach is not a result of
sectoral aggregation. This is in contrast to estimations performed on aggregate data, which find a heterogeneity bias
(Imbs and Mejean, 2015).
41
Another reason why the factor shares or the two-step GMM approaches may be preferable to the one-step GMM
method is that in the latter there are sectors for which we cannot reject εs < 1, a feature that leads to the prediction
that all firms in such sector ought to be importers.

19

4.2

Results

With the structural parameters at hand, we now quantify the gains from input trade in France. We
proceed as in the theory. We follow Proposition 1 and use data on domestic expenditure shares to
measure the producer gains from input trade, i.e. distribution of unit cost reduction across firms. We
then augment this data with information on firm size and use Proposition 2 to measure the consumer
price gains from input trade. There we also exploit our decomposition of the gains from trade in
expression (25) to quantify the importance of using the micro-data by comparing our results to an
analysis based on aggregate data.
Input Trade and Producer Gains.
Given our estimates of ε and γs and the micro-data on
firms’ domestic shares, Proposition 1 states that the unit cost reductions from input trade are given
γs
ln (sD ). We depict these producer gains in Figure 4 and summarize them in Table 3. We see
by 1−ε
that there is substantial dispersion in the gains from trade. While the median firm would see its unit
cost increase by 11.2% if moved to autarky, firms above the 90th percentile of the distribution would
experience losses of 85% or more. According to Proposition 1, any model within the class covered in
Section 3.1 will arrive at exactly the same conclusions about the distribution of the gains from trade
at the micro-level, as long as it matches the micro data on domestic shares and utilizes the same
values for γs and ε.
[Figure 4 here]
[Table 3 here]
We can also use the micro-data to learn about firm characteristics that are correlated with the
producer gains. In particular, consider the following regressions:
γs
ln (sDist ) = δs + δt + o0ist ψ + uist ,
1−ε

(34)

where δs and δt are industry and time fixed effects and oist is a vector of firm characteristics. To
interpret ψ, recall from (8) that the observed domestic shares can reflect firm-variation in exogenous
“import capabilities” (such as prices [pci /qci ] or the import bias βi ) and firms’ endogenous sourcing
strategies Σi . The results are contained in Table 4 and are intuitive. Bigger firms, as measured
by either value added or employment, see higher gains. Being an exporter or a member of an
international group is associated with a reduction in the unit cost of 8.5% and 14.8%, respectively.
When we restrict the analysis to the sample of importers, the positive relation between firm size and
the producer gains becomes substantially weaker. This is consistent with the pattern documented
in Section 2 above which showed a mild correlation between import intensity and value added for
importers. Next, we consider the role of the firm’s sourcing strategy, which we measure by the average
number of countries that the firm sources its products from. According to the theory of Section 3,
firms source their inputs internationally to reduce their unit cost. Consistent with the theory, we
find a strong positive relation between firms’ extensive margin of importing and the producer gains.
20

Note that the importance of other firm characteristics is diminished once the number of varieties is
controlled for.42
[Table 4 here]
Input Trade and the Consumer Price Gains.
We now have all the ingredients required
by Proposition 2 to quantify the effect of input trade on consumer prices. Using firm-level data
on domestic expenditure shares and value added together with the parameters estimated above, we
compute the sector-specific direct price reductions Λs given in (20). We then calculate the consumer
price gains by solving the linear system in (21). Table 5 contains the results. We find that French
consumer prices in the manufacturing sector would be 27.5% higher if French producers were forced
to source their inputs domestically. When the price of the non-manufacturing sector is taken into
account, the consumer price gains amount to 9%.43 The reason why these economy-wide gains are
smaller is that the non-manufacturing sector experiences only a 3% price reduction but accounts for
70% of consumers’ budget - see Table 1.
In Table 5, we also report the consumer price gains predicted by a representative-firm approach
that only uses data on domestic spending at the sector level - see (24). This aggregate approach
implies gains of 31.4% and 9.9% in the manufacturing sector and the entire economy, respectively.
Ignoring the heterogeneity in firms’ import behavior within sectors therefore results in an overestimation of the consumer price gains by 3.4 and 1 percentage points for the manufacturing sector
and the entire economy, respectively. The aggregate approach is upward biased because the estimated
parameters imply that, for most sectors, Λs is a convex aggregator of firms’ domestic shares - see
(25)-(26).
[Table 5 here]
Importantly, there is a second source of bias that arises when using an aggregate approach which
pertains to the “correct” elasticity of substitution ε. While we treat ε as a production function
parameter and estimate it from micro-data, aggregate models often estimate ε from a gravity equation
using aggregate trade flows. While there is a large literature concerning this particular parameter44 ,
most aggregate approaches find estimates that are larger than our preferred estimate of 2.38.45
Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) for example use a trade elasticity of four as their benchmark
value. As the implied gains from trade are decreasing in the elasticity of substitution, such choice
42

In particular, firm size is substantially negatively correlated with import spending holding the number of imported
varieties fixed. This is intuitive. If a small firm decides to source from the same number of sourcing countries as a
large firm, then it is likely that the small firm is a proficient importer, which manifests itself in a low share of domestic
spending.
43
Aut
Formally, the economy-wide gains P Aut /P are related to the gains in the manufacturing sector PM
/PM via
1−αS Aut
αS
Aut
Aut
P
/P = PM /PM
PS /PS
, where αS is the expenditure share in the non-manufacturing sector.
44
See e.g. Simonovska and Waugh (2013, 2014).
45
Recall that our benchmark was chosen conservatively, as all other estimates of ε in Table 2 are smaller. See also
Goldberg et al. (2010) for indirect evidence on the low substitutability between domestic and imported inputs for Indian
manufacturing firms.

21

would lead to substantially smaller gains from trade. In Section 8.5 of the Appendix, we redo the
analysis of Table 5 for a range of values of ε spanning the estimates from the literature. Moving to
ε = 4, for example, tends to reduce the consumer price gains from trade of the aggregate approach
by 50%. This “elasticity bias” can therefore be substantial.
We also use the micro-data to quantify our confidence in the estimates of the gains from input
trade. Table 5 reports the 90-10 confidence intervals of the bootstrap distribution of the point
estimates in italics.46 Note that the uncertainty in the point estimates stem from two sources. First,
because we base our analysis on a large but finite sample, there is uncertainty in our aggregate
statistics for given parameters. Second, the structural parameters ε, γs and σs are estimated with
error. We see that these two forces induce quite a bit of variation in the estimates. With 80%
probability, the consumer price gains in the manufacturing sector lie between 21% and 36% and the
gains for the entire economy lie between 7% and 12%.47 We also find that the aggregate approach
yields more uncertain estimates (second row) and leads to an over-estimation of the gains with 80%
probability (third row). A graphical depiction of this sampling uncertainty is contained in Figure
5. We see that the bootstrap distribution of the consumer price gains using the aggregate approach
features a thicker right tail (upper panels) and the resulting bias has the majority of its mass on
positive numbers (lower panels).
[Table 6 here]
Table 6 reports the gains by sector and provides a decomposition to isolate the importance of
production linkages across sectors. We first report the sectoral consumer price gains, PsAut /Ps , which
measure the change in the price of the output bundle of sector s. We find substantial heterogeneity
in the effect of input trade across sectors: while e.g. prices for textile products would be 56% higher
if producers were not allowed to source their inputs from abroad, this effect is only 18% for metal
products. We then decompose these price changes into the direct price reduction from firms in sector
s sourcing internationally, Λs , and the indirect gains stemming from firms in sector s buying domestic
48 We find that interlinkages are
inputs from other firms who in turn may engage in trade, pAut
Ds /pDs .
important as they account for roughly 50% of the sectoral price gains. Note also that the importance
of interlinkages varies substantially across industries as a result of the underlying heterogeneity in
the input-output matrix: sectors that rely on relatively open sectors more intensively benefit more
from input trade as their upstream suppliers experience larger unit cost reductions.
We also assess the importance of interconnections by considering the case with no cross-industry
input-output linkages, i.e. where each sector uses only its own products as inputs.49 In this case, we
46
We explain the details of the bootstrap procedure in the Online Appendix. A sketch of the procedure is as follows.
For each bootstrap iteration, we construct a new sample of the French manufacturing sector by drawing firms from the
empirical distribution with replacement. We then redo the analysis of Section 4.1 and obtain new estimates for the
structural parameters. Finally, for each iteration, we recalculate the consumer price gains and the other statistics of
interest.
47
Given the large sample size, most of the uncertainty stems from the variation in the structural parameters and
not from the re-sampling of firms. See Figure 8 in the Online Appendix.
48
Formally, pDs is the sector-specific price index of a unit of the bundle of domestic inputs, which is an aggregator
of all the goods produced locally, see (16).
49
In this case, the matrix of input-output linkages is given by ζjs = 0 for j 6= s and ζjj = 1.

22

find a point estimate for the consumer prices gains from trade of
G=

S
X
s=1

αs

Λs
= 12%.
1 − γs

That is, shutting down input trade would increase consumer prices by 12%. Compared to the actual
gains of 9%, the economy without interlinkages over-estimates the aggregate gains by about a third.
The reason is that the non-manufacturing sector is not only important for final consumers but also
as a provider of inputs to other manufacturing firms. As this sector is not a direct beneficiary of
foreign sourcing, such linkages actually dampen the aggregate effect of input trade.
Finally, Table 6 also contains the direct price reductions that arise from a representative firm
model, ΛAgg
s . In line with the results of Table 5, in 12 of the 18 manufacturing sectors the gains
based on aggregate data are upward biased. The reason for this pattern goes back to the condition
in (26) which characterizes the sign of the bias as a function of parameters. It turns out that for
most sectors the estimated σs and γs satisfy the condition for the bias to be positive. Note also that
the bias can be quite substantial. Consider for example the office and computing machinery sector.
While the aggregate approach would imply a direct price reduction of 37%, the exact firm-based
formula tells us that this number should be only 20%.

5

Input Trade and Welfare

So far, we quantified the effect of input trade on consumer prices. By exploiting the sufficiency results
in Propositions 1 and 2, we were able to measure the change in consumer prices directly from the
micro-data. These consumer price gains, however, may not capture the full impact of input trade
on welfare as they do not take into account the resources spent by firms to attain their sourcing
strategies. To measure the welfare consequences of input trade, we therefore need to take a stand on
how firms’ determine their extensive margin of trade and quantify such resource loss in the context
of a calibrated model. To this end, we consider a model where foreign sourcing is limited by the
presence of fixed costs and calibrate it to French micro-data.

5.1

A Model of Fixed Costs

We now go back to the example with fixed costs of Section 3 - see (12). In this environment,
firms choose their sourcing strategy by trading off the import-induced reduction in unit costs vs the
payment of fixed costs. For expositional simplicity, we consider a one-sector version of the model.50
As discussed above, computing firms’ optimal sourcing strategies can be challenging when prices,
qualities and fixed costs vary by country in an arbitrary way. To ensure tractability, we assume
that the fixed cost of sourcing is constant across countries, i.e. fc = f for all c. In this case, the
firm selects its sourcing countries based purely on price-adjusted quality and the sourcing strategy
50

See the Online Appendix for the analysis with multiple sectors.

23

reduces from a set Σ to a scalar, a price-adjusted quality cutoff.51 Furthermore, we assume there is
a continuum of countries so that this cutoff can be characterized by a first order condition. Finally,
we impose the following functional form assumptions that ensure a parsimonious characterization of
the firm’s problem.
Assumption 1. Consider the environment above and assume the following:
1. Imported inputs are combined according to:
ˆ

(qc zc )

xI =

κ−1
κ



dc

κ
κ−1

.

(35)

c∈Σ

2. Country quality is Pareto distributed:
G (q) = Pr (qc ≤ q) = 1 − (qmin /q)θ for q ≥ qmin ,
and θ > 1 and qmin > 0.
3. Foreign prices pc and qualities qc are related by pc = qcν where ν ≤ 1.
4. The following parametric condition is satisfied: (κ − 1) (1 − ν) < θ.
The isoelastic relation between prices and qualities ensures that price-adjusted qualities q/p =
are increasing in country quality so that firms import high quality inputs. This, together with
the Pareto distribution for country quality and the CES aggregator for the foreign bundle, imply
that the import price index, given by equation (5) above, takes a convenient power form:
q 1−ν

ˆ

A (Σ) =



(pc /qc )1−κ dc

1
1−κ

= zn−η ≡ A (n) ,

(36)

c∈Σ

where n is the share of countries the firm sources foreign inputs from52 and z and η are “auxiliary”
parameters which depend on the underlying parameters governing import prices ν, the distribution
of quality (qmin , θ) and the elasticity of substitution across foreign varieties κ.53 Thus, the underlying
structure of the import environment matters for the firm’s problem only through z and η. In this
way, knowledge of the deep parameters (qmin , θ, κ, ν) is irrelevant for all aggregate outcomes as long
as (z, η) are known.54
Under the above assumptions, the firm’s profit maximization problem is given by:
More precisely, if country c with price-adjusted quality qc /pc is an element of Σ so are all countries c0 with
qc0 /pc0 > qc /pc . See Antràs et al. (2014) for a solution method that does not require this assumption.
52
Note that, given the distribution of country quality, the firm’s sourcing strategy can be equivalently described by
the mass of countries sourced n or a quality cutoff q.
53
See Section 8.6 in the Appendix for the derivation of (36) and precise expressions for z and η. Note that the
parametric condition in item 4 of Assumption 1 is required to compute the integral in (36).
54
This, however, does not mean that the degree of quality heterogeneity (θ) or the substitutability of inputs (κ) do
not have a role in shaping firms’ import demand. For example, it can be easily shown that quality diversity and input
substitutability decrease z.
51

24

n

o

π = max u (n)1−σ × B − w (nf + fI I (n > 0)) ,
n

(37)

where fI is a fixed cost to start importing55 , I (·) is an indicator of import status, and the unit cost
function is given by
i γ
h
1
u(n) ≡ w1−γ (pD /qD )1−ε + z 1−ε n−η(1−ε) 1−ε ,
(38)
ϕ


1−σ

σ
P σ−1 S, with P and S denoting the consumer price index and aggregate spendand B ≡ σ1 σ−1
ing, which are determined in general equilibrium.56 (37)-(38) show how the assumption of constant
fixed costs across countries substantially simplifies the extensive margin problem: conditional on
importing, the optimal sourcing strategy n is given by the solution to a first order condition. In the
Appendix, we fully characterize the solution to this problem. There we also show that, conditional
on importing, the optimal mass of sourcing countries n is increasing in ϕ and decreasing in f .57
As argued above, the joint distribution of firm size and import intensity contains crucial information about the gains from input trade. To generate the rich distribution shown in Figure 2 of Section
2, we have to allow for (at least) two sources of firm heterogeneity - we choose efficiency ϕi and fixed
costs fi . As ϕi and the endogenous unit costs reduction through input trade are complements, there
is a fixed-cost-specific efficiency cutoff ϕ (fi ) above which firms select into importing. This generates
overlap in the size distribution of importers and non-importers. Furthermore, because the optimal
sourcing strategy ni depends on both ϕi and fi , the model generates variation in import intensity
conditional on size. In contrast, a model with a single source of heterogeneity would generate a
one-to-one assignment between size and import intensity, as well as size and import status - features
that are counterfactual in the French data.
To close the model, we impose equilibrium in the labor market and balanced input trade between
the domestic economy and the rest of the world.58 We also assume that foreigners demand the
output of local firms with the same CES demand structure as domestic consumers and producers
((14)-(15))59 and that the supply of foreign inputs from country c is perfectly elastic at price pc .
Letting yiROW be the foreign demand for firm i’s production, balanced trade requires that

ˆ

ˆ
pi yiROW di

i

(1 − sDi ) mi di,

=

(39)

i

where mi denotes material spending of firm i, so that (1 − sDi ) mi is firm i’s spending on imported
varieties, and pi is firm i’s price.
55

Given our functional form assumptions, it is necessary to have a fixed cost to start importing fI to guarantee the
existence of non-importers.
56
In this section, we assume that βi is constant across firms.
57
See Section 8.6 of the Appendix.
58
We abstract from trade in final goods. In this single sector economy with roundabout production, domestic inputs
and final goods are equivalent. This is no longer the case with multiple sectors, see the Online Appendix.
59
This simplifies the problem of local producers, which is given by (37)-(38), where the demand of their different
customers (consumers, local firms and foreigners) can be aggregated into a single iso-elastic demand function. The
term B in (37) incorporates the sum of spending across the three types of customers.

25

1. An equilibrium is a set of prices w, [pi ], labor demands for production
hDefinition
i
h and fixedicosts

li , liF , differentiated product quantities, consumption levels and foreign demands yi , ci , yiROW , domestic and international input demands by local firms [yvi ] , [zci ] and sourcing strategies [ni ] such
that:
1. Firms maximize profits given by (37)-(38),
2. Consumers maximize utility given by (14) and (15) subject to their budget constraint
ˆ

ˆ

πi di,

pi ci di = wL +

(40)

i

i

3. Trade is balanced (39),
4. Labor and good markets clear

yi

ˆ 



li + liF di
i
ˆ
= ci + yiROW + yvi dv.

L =

ν

The following proposition characterizes the full gain in consumer welfare relative to autarky.
Proposition 3. Consider the above setup and let W and W Aut denote the total welfare in the trade
equilibrium and autarky respectively. Then
P Aut
W
=
×
W Aut
P

L−

´

F
i li di

L

!

.

(41)

Proof. See Online Appendix.
Proposition 3 shows that the welfare gains from input trade consists of two components. First,
there is the reduction in consumer prices associated with input trade, which is captured by the term
P Aut /P > 1. This was the focus of Sections 3-4 above. Second, there is the resource loss associated
with attaining the equilibrium sourcing strategies, captured by the second term in expression (41).
When foreign sourcing is costly, there are fewer workers left for production.60

5.2

Quantifying the Welfare Gains

We now have all the ingredients in place to estimate the full welfare effects of input trade along the
lines of Proposition 3. A natural requirement for the structural model is to match the consumer price
gains from trade which are a component of welfare, as shown by (41). It follows from Proposition
2 that this is ensured by targeting the joint distribution of value added and domestic expenditure
´
While we calculate i liF di within a model of fixed costs, we note that (41) is consistent with other extensive margin
mechanisms. For example, if importers found
´ their trading partners through a process of network formation, (41) would
still hold but the environment to calculate i liF di would be different.
60

26

shares. Our strategy is as follows. We use the estimates of ε, γ and σ from Section 4.1 above61
and estimate η directly from the micro-data. Recall that η determines the price index of the import
bundle - see (36)- and hence the demand for foreign varieties.62 We identify this parameter from the
cross-sectional relationship between firms’ extensive margin of trade and their domestic shares. Next,
we parametrize the distribution of firm efficiency and fixed costs as a joint log-normal distribution
ln (ϕ)
ln (f )

!

∼N

!

µϕ
µf

,

σϕ2
ρσϕ σf

ρσϕ σf
σf2

!!

,

(42)

where ρ controls the correlation between efficiency and fixed costs. We normalize µϕ and calibrate
the rest of the parameters in (42) to match salient features of the joint distribution of value added
and domestic expenditure shares. Finally, we choose the fixed cost of being an importer fI to match
the share of importers in the French population.
Estimation of η. As seen from (36), η parametrizes the sensitivity of the import bundle priceindex with respect to firms’ extensive margin of trade (n). Because import prices map into import
spending, we rely on the cross-sectional relation between firms’ domestic expenditure shares and the
extensive margin to identify η. More specifically, (36) implies that the domestic expenditure share
is given by


sD (n) =

1+

pD 1 η
n
qD z

ε−1 !−1

.

(43)

(43) predicts a log-linear relation between n and the term (1 − sD ) /sD , with a slope given by η. At
this point, we need to take a stand on what the counterpart of n is in the data. We focus on the
number of countries the firm sources its products from, i.e. the number of foreign varieties.63 We
run the following regression:


ln

1 − sDist
sDist



= δs + δt + δN K + η (ε − 1) ln (nist ) + uist ,

(44)

where nist denotes firm i’s average number of countries per product sourced, δN K contains a set
of fixed effects for the number of products sourced and δs and δt are sector and year fixed effects.
Hence, we identify η from firms sourcing the same number of products from a different number of
supplier countries. We measure products at the 8-digit level. Section 8.7 in the Appendix contains
the results of estimating (44) with a variety of specifications. Our preferred specification yields a
61

Section 4.1 provides estimates of σ and γ by sector. In this section, we use value-added weighted averages of these
sectoral estimates.
62
While the import-price index (36) depends also on z, it turns out that this parameter is not required for the
calibration of the model. See the Online Appendix.
63
This notion of “varieties” is widely used in the literature - see e.g. Broda and Weinstein (2006) and Goldberg et al.
(2010). Moreover, the choice of the number of products sourced may be determined to a large degree by technological
considerations, while the demand for multiple supplier countries within a given product category may plausibly stem
from love-for-variety effects, which are at the heart of the mechanism stressed by our theory. However, we note that
the analysis that follows can be done under alternative interpretations of n.

27

value of η of 0.382 that is precisely estimated.
Calibration. To calibrate the five remaining structural parameters (µf , σf , σϕ , ρ, fI ) we target the
following five moments: (i) the aggregate domestic share of the French manufacturing sector, (ii) the
share of importing firms, (iii) the standard deviation of log value added , (iv) the standard deviation
of log domestic shares and (v) the correlation between log value added and log domestic shares.
While all parameters are calibrated jointly, the average level of fixed costs (µf ) controls mostly the
aggregate domestic share, the fixed cost of importing (fI ) is mostly identified from the share of
importers and the dispersion in fixed costs (σf ) and efficiency (σϕ ) from the dispersion in domestic
shares and value added, respectively. Finally, the correlation between efficiency and fixed costs (ρ) is
disciplined by the correlation between value added and domestic spending.64 Note that, by explicitly
targeting the economy’s aggregate domestic share, we can again compare our results to those of an
aggregate approach where the moments from the micro-data are not used.
Table 7 contains the results of the calibration and shows that the model can be calibrated to
match the moments accurately. In particular, note that the correlation between firm efficiency and
fixed costs turns out to be positive. This helps to match the far from perfectly negative correlation
between value added and domestic shares in the data. We show in Section 8.8 of the Appendix that
the calibrated model is also able to match a number of non-targeted moments relatively well.65
[Table 7 here]
Welfare Gains from Input Trade. With the calibrated model at hand, we now compute the full
welfare gains from input trade. Table 8 contains the results. The first column shows that the modelpredicted consumer price gains are very close to those measured in the data.66 This should not come
as a surprise since such gains are a function of the joint distribution of value added and domestic
shares which is a direct calibration target. Column two contains the main result of this section: the
full welfare gains from input trade between the current trade equilibrium and autarky are predicted
to be 17.54%. Thus, we see that only about half of the consumer price gains translate into welfare
gains once the resources spent in fixed costs are taken into account. The reason is that, as seen in
column three, a move to autarky would free up about 15% of the labor force, which counteracts the
increase in prices.
[Table 8 here]
64

We describe the algorithm used to calibrate the model in the Online Appendix.
While our calibration targeted moments for the full populations of firms, Section 8.8 of the Appendix reports
various moments of the joint distribution of size and import intensity for importers.
66
The number reported in Table 8 for the French data comes from applying the one-sector consumer price gains
formula (22) to the Manufacturing sector pooling all sub-sectors together. Additionally, we leave the non-manufacturing
sectors out of the analysis. For these reasons, the price-index gains reported in Table 8 do not coincide with those
reported for the Manufacturing sector in Table 5 above.
65

28

5.3

The Importance of Domestic Shares

In this subsection, we assess the value of the micro-data on domestic shares for estimating the
gains from input trade. Note that the analysis of Section 4 to measure the producer and consumer
price gains, as well as the calibration exercise of Section 5.2 to quantify the welfare gains, both
relied directly on the domestic share data. When such data is not available, quantifying any type
of gains from input trade - i.e. changes in producer unit costs, consumer prices or full consumer
welfare - requires calibrating a structural model of importing. The role of the model is to generate a
distribution of domestic expenditure shares. A natural question is: how well does a standard model
of fixed costs do in predicting such shares?
To answer this question, we consider the following simple exercise. We calibrate the model of
Section 5.1 without targeting the moments associated with domestic expenditure shares, i.e. the dispersion of domestic shares and their correlation with value added. Accordingly, we set the dispersion
in fixed costs and their correlation with efficiency both to zero, i.e. σf = ρ = 0. We continue to
target the dispersion in value added. Note that firm efficiency is the single source of heterogeneity
in this model.67
We report the results in Table 15 in Section 8.8 of the Appendix, where the baseline calibration
is also displayed for comparison. The calibrated parameters in the model without data on domestic
shares - henceforth NSD - imply aggregate gains from trade that are upward biased relative to those
of the baseline. In particular, the NSD model over-predicts both the consumer price and the welfare
gains from trade relative to the baseline. This is intuitive. By relying on efficiency as the single source
of heterogeneity, the NSD model generates a perfectly negative correlation between firm efficiency
and the domestic share. This means that firms with higher efficiency experience larger reductions in
their unit costs, a feature that tends to make input trade more attractive. This manifests itself as a
counterfactually strong negative correlation between value added and domestic shares. The resulting
biases in the estimates of the gains from trade can be quantitatively meaningful, of about 14% for
the consumer price gains and 24% for welfare.

6

Conclusion

Firms around the world routinely engage in input trade to reduce their costs of production, thereby
benefiting domestic consumers. Quantifying the gains from input trade, however, has been limited
by an inherent difficulty. As firms differ vastly in the intensity with which they participate in
international markets, aggregate trade models are inapplicable. One therefore has to resort to firmbased models of importing to study the normative implications of input trade. In this paper, we
identify the aspects of the data that are crucial to credibly doing so.
We first focus on the effect of input trade on consumer prices. We show that, in a class of models
of importing, the joint distribution of firm size and import intensity fully determines the change
in consumer prices relative a situation of input autarky. Importantly, these data, together with a
67

This exercise is in the spirit of the ones in Gopinath and Neiman (2014) and Ramanarayanan (2014).

29

limited set of parameters, is all that is required. To derive this result, we exploit the dichotomy
between the intensive and extensive margins of importing that is present in a wide class of models.
This allows us to focus on firms’ cost minimization problem and apply a sufficiency statistic approach
at the firm level. In particular, we can measure changes in firms’ unit costs without specifying the
details of the import environment or the extensive margin. We then turn to a broader notion of
welfare that also takes into account the change in consumers’ income due to the change in firms’
sourcing strategies. To quantify such change in income, we need to commit to a particular model of
the extensive margin and fully specify the import environment. In the context of a standard model
with fixed costs, we show that matching the micro data on firm size and import intensity significantly
affects the measurement of the welfare gains from input trade.
In an application to French data, we find substantial variation in the benefits from international
sourcing across firms. While the median importer would see its costs increase by 11% if the French
economy moved to input autarky, these costs would increase by more than 80% for 10% of the firms.
Input trade is also important at the aggregate level as consumers would face 27% higher prices for
manufacturing products under input autarky.

References
Amiti, M., O. Itskhoki, and J. Konings: 2014, ‘Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Disconnect’.
American Economic Review 104(7), 1942–1978.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings: 2007, ‘Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Productivity’. American Economic Review 97(5), 1611–1638.
Antràs, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot: 2014, ‘The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and
Evidence from U.S. Firms’. Working Paper.
Arkolakis, C.: 2010, ‘Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumer Margin in International
Trade’. Journal of Political Economy 118(6), 1151–1199.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare: 2012, ‘New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?’.
American Economic Review 102(1), 94–130.
Arkolakis, C. and M.-A. Muendler: 2011, ‘The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products: A Firm-level
Analysis’. Working Paper.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott: 2012, ‘The Empirics of Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade’. Annual Review of Economics 4, 283–313.
Blaum, J., C. Lelarge, and M. Peters: 2013, ‘Non-Homothetic Import Demand: Firm Productivity
and Quality Bias’. Working Paper.
Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein: 2006, ‘Globalization and the Gains from Varieties’. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 121(2), 541–585.
30

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro: 2015, ‘Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA’. The Review
of Economic Studies 82(1), 1–44.
Costinot, A. and A. Rodríguez-Clare: 2014, ‘Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization’. In: Handbook of International Economics.
De Loecker, J. and P. Goldberg: 2013, ‘Firm Performance in a Global Market’. The Annual Review
of Economics 6, 201–227.
De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik: 2012, ‘Prices, Markups and
Trade Reform’. Working Paper.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum: 2002, ‘Technology, Geography, and Trade’. Econometrica 70(5), 1741–1779.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz: 2011, ‘An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from
French Firms’. Econometrica 79(5), 1453–1498.
Eslava, M., A. C. Fieler, and D. Y. Xu: 2014, ‘Trade, Skills, and Quality Upgrading: A Theory with
Evidence from Colombia’. Working Paper.
Feenstra, R. C.: 1994, ‘New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices’. American Economic Review 84(1), 157–177.
Goldberg, P., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova: 2010, ‘Imported Intermediate Inputs
and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India’. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Gopinath, G. and B. Neiman: 2014, ‘Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises’. American
Economic Review 104(3).
Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl: 2011, ‘Imported Inputs and Productivity’. Working Paper.
Hummels, D., R. Jorgenson, J. R. Munch, and C. Xiang: 2011, ‘The Wage Effect of Offshoring:
Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data’. Working Paper.
Imbs, J. and I. Mejean: 2015, ‘Elasticity Optimism’. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
7(3), 43–83.
Jia, P.: 2008, ‘What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the
Discount Retailing Industry"’. Econometrica 76(6), 1263–1316.
Kasahara, H. and J. Rodrigue: 2008, ‘Does the use of imported intermediates increase productivity?
Plant-level evidence’. Journal of Development Economics 87, 106–118.
Khandelwal, A. and P. Topalova: 2011, ‘Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of
India’. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3), 995–1009.
Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen: 2011, ‘Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality’. Review of Economic
Studies (14418), 1–33.
31

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin: 2012, ‘Measuring aggregate productivity growth using plant-level data’.
The RAND Journal of Economics 43(4), 705–725.
Oberfield, E. and D. Raval: 2014, ‘Micro Data and Macro Technology’. Working Paper.
Pavcnik, N.: 2002, ‘Trade Liberalization, Exit and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants’. Review of Economic Studies 69(1), 245–276.
Ramanarayanan, A.: 2014, ‘Imported Inputs and the Gains from Trade’. Working Paper.
Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh: 2013, ‘The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence’. Journal
of International Economics 92(1), 34–50.
Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh: 2014, ‘Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from Trade’.
Working Paper.
Wooldridge, J.: 2009, ‘On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy variables to control
for unobservables’. Ecomics Letters 104, 112–114.

32

7

Tables and Figures
VA share

sAgg
Ds

0.33

1.28%

0.90

0.73

15.24%

0.80

Industry

ISIC

αs

σs

γs

Mining

10-14

0.02%

2.58

Food, tobacco, beverages

15-16

9.90%

3.85

Textiles and leather

17-19

3.20%

3.35

0.63

3.96%

0.54

Wood and wood products

20

0.13%

4.65

0.60

1.67%

0.81

Paper, printing, publishing

21-22

1.37%

2.77

0.50

7.96%

0.75

Chemicals

24

2.04%

3.29

0.67

12.91%

0.60

Rubber and plastics products

25

0.44%

4.05

0.59

5.88%

0.63

Non-metallic mineral products

26

0.24%

3.48

0.53

4.54%

0.72

Basic metals

27

0.01%

5.95

0.67

2.07%

0.60

Metal products (ex machinery and equipment)

28

0.26%

3.27

0.48

9.27%

0.81

Machinery and equipment

29

0.66%

3.52

0.62

7.00%

0.69

Office and computing machinery

30

0.43%

7.39

0.81

0.35%

0.59

Electrical machinery

31

0.47%

4.49

0.60

3.99%

0.64

Radio and communication

32

0.63%

3.46

0.62

1.92%

0.64

Medical and optical instruments

33

0.35%

2.95

0.49

3.83%

0.66

Motor vehicles, trailers

34

4.31%

6.86

0.76

9.99%

0.82

Transport equipment

35

0.37%

1.87

0.35

4.72%

0.64

1.79%

3.94

0.63

3.42%

0.75

73.39%

na

0.41

Manufacturing, recycling

36-37

Non-manufacturing

1

Notes: σs denotes the demand elasticity, which is measured with industry-specific average markups. Markups are constructed as
the ratio of firm revenues to total costs, which are computed as the sum of material spending, labor payments and the costs of
capital. The costs of capital are measured as Rk where k denotes the firm’s capital stock and R is the gross interest rate, which we
take to be 0.20. αs denotes the sectoral share in consumer expenditure, which is taken from the Input-Output Tables according
to (27). γs denotes the sectoral share of material spending in total costs, which is measured at the firm level and then averaged
at the sector level. “VA share” is the sectoral share of value added in manufacturing, computed from the firm-level data. sAgg
Ds
n
are the sectoral aggregate domestic shares, computed as sAgg
Ds = Σi=1 sDis × ωis , where ωis is the firm share in sectoral value
added. See Appendix for the details.

Table 1: Structural Parameters by Industry

33

Factor shares

2-step GMM
Cobb-Douglas

Full sample

Importers

Translog

First Stage

ε

N

First Stage

ε

N

First Stage

ε

N

-0.019***

2.378***

526,687

-0.017***

1.776***

331,412

-0.016***

1.727***

331,412

(0.003)

(0.523)

(0.003)

(0.288)

(0.003)

(0.235)

-0.010***

2.322**

-0.008**

1.896**

-0.008**

1.802**

(0.004)

(1.014)

(0.003)

(0.850)

(0.003)

(0.735)

65,799

53,349

53,349

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses with ***, **, and * respectively denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
The table contains the results of estimating (33) with the instrument given in (32). We employ estimates of γs based on factor
shares as per (31), or on the proxy method used in Levinsohn and Petrin (2012) and Wooldridge (2009). For the latter, we report
results based on Cobb-Douglas and Translog technology. For the factor share specification, we use data for the years 2002-2006.
For the 2-step GMM procedure, we use data for the years 2004-2006 as two lagged values are required to build the appropriate
instruments for the estimation of the production function. Standard errors in the 2-step GMM procedure are constructed via
bootstrap to take the sampling variation in the generated regressor γs ∆ln (sD ) into account. For non-importers, the instrument
is set to zero in the full sample specifications.

Table 2: Estimating the Elasticity of Substitution ε
Mean
24.87

10
0.64

25
2.79

Quantile
50
70
11.18 33.74

90
85.73


s /(1−ε) − 1 × 100
Notes: The table reports quantiles of the empirical distribution of the producer gains from input trade, i.e. sγDi
- see Proposition 1. The data for the domestic expenditure share corresponds to the cross-section of importing firms in 2004. For
ε and γs , the estimates from the factor shares approach contained in Tables 1 and 2 are used.

Table 3: Moments of the Distribution of Producer Gains in France
Dependent variable: Producer gains
ln(Value Added)

γ
ln (sDi )
1−ε

0.028***

0.013***

0.005***

-0.008***

-0.029***

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.040***

0.024***

ln(Employment)

0.028***

-0.000

(0.000)

(0.001)

Exporter

0.085***
(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

Intl. Group

0.148***

0.138***

0.113***

(0.003)

(0.003)

ln (Num. Varieties)
Sample
Observations

Full sample
633,240

640,610

(0.003)
0.128***

0.144***

(0.002)

(0.002)

Importers Only
633,240

118,799

120,344

118,799

120,344

118,799

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses with ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ respectively denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
The table contains the results of estimating (34). All regressions include year fixed effects and 3-digit industry fixed effects. The
data corresponds to the full sample of firms between 2002 and 2006. The number of varieties is the number of countries the firm
sources from (averaged across products). A firm is a member of an international group if at least one affiliate or the headquarter
is located outside of France.

Table 4: Correlates of the Producer Gains

34

Consumer Price Gains
Aggregate Data
Bias

Manufacturing Sector
27.52
[21.2,35.9]
30.86
[21.5,45.3]
3.34
[0.2,10]

Entire Economy
9.04 [7.1,11.6]
9.92
[7.1,14]
0.88
[0,2.6]

Aut
Notes: The table reports the reduction in consumer prices for the manufacturing sector (PM
/PM − 1) × 100 (left panel) and the
entire economy (P Aut /P − 1) × 100 (right panel) associated with input autarky. The measure in the first row is based on Proposition
2 where the associated Λs are reported in Table 6 and the structural parameters Ξ, γs , σs and αs given in Table 1. The second row
contains results based on an aggregate model with identical input-output structure and parameters. Specifically, they are based
on Proposition 2 where the sectoral gains are measured by ΛAgg
as per (24) instead of Λs . The third row reports the bias, defined
s
as the difference between the first two rows - see (25). 90-10 confidence intervals are reported in brackets for all measures. These
are calculated via a bootstrap procedure which we describe in the Online Appendix. The empirical distributions of all statistics
are estimated using 200 bootstrap iterations.

Table 5: The Consumer Price Gains From Input Trade in France
Estimated
Parameter
σ
ε
γ
η

Value
3.83
2.38
0.61
0.38

Identified from
Revenue/Cost Data, Section 4.1
Prod. Function Estimation, Section 4.1
Prod. Function Estimation, Section 4.1
Dom. Share and Ext. Margin, Section 5.2

Calibrated
µf
fI
σϕ
σf
ρ

2.43
0.12
0.51
2.41
0.73

Moment
Aggregate Dom. Share
Share of Importer
Dispersion in log Value Added
Dispersion in log Dom. Shares
Correlation log Value Added - log Dom. Shares

Data
0.72
0.20
1.52
0.36
-0.31

Model
0.72
0.20
1.52
0.36
-0.31

Notes: The table contains the estimated and calibrated structural parameters that are used in Section 5. The first panel contains
the parameters estimated directly from the micro data. The estimates for ε and γ correspond to the factor shares approach. The
values for γ and σ are value added weighted averages of the corresponding sectoral estimates reported in Table 1. The estimate
for η is taken from Table 13 in the Appendix. The parameters µf , fI , σϕ , σf and ρ are calibrated to match the five moments
listed in column three of the second panel. The dispersion and correlation moments are computed in the full sample of firms,
which includes non-importers. The calibration algorithm is described in the Online Appendix.

Table 7: Structural Parameters for Welfare Analysis

35

36

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Non-metallic mineral products

Basic metals

Metal products (ex machinery and equipment)

Machinery and equipment

Office and computing machinery

Electrical machinery

Radio and communication

Medical and optical instruments

Motor vehicles, trailers

Transport equipment
0.0

12.9

15.3

6.2

17.9

21.5

19.8

20.4

17.6

8.2

21.8

13.4

20.1

27.2

12.2

8.2

31.1

11.1

3.0

[0,0]

[9.7,16.3]

[10.5,22]

[3.2,16.4]

[12.8,23.4]

[13.1,31.1]

[14.6,25.6]

[15.4,25.5]

[12.8,23.2]

[6.2,10.5]

[16.3,27.7]

[9.6,17.9]

[14.3,26.5]

[20.1,36.4]

[9,16]

[6.4,10.5]

[24.2,39.9]

[7.5,14.6]

[1.8,4.2]

Direct Price Reductions

7.5

19.0

19.9

21.7

20.4

23.3

23.9

25.2

20.0

20.5

21.5

12.7

27.3

21.6

14.5

9.6

31.4

8.4

14.9

[5.7,9.4]

[14.5,24]

[14.5,27.2]

[17,29.3]

[15.1,26.2]

[16.6,30.5]

[17.7,30.6]

[18.3,32.1]

[15,25.7]

[15.5,26.2]

[16.4,27.3]

[9.7,16.3]

[20.2,36]

[16.1,28.2]

[10.9,18.7]

[7.4,12.1]

[24.3,40.3]

[6.2,10.6]

[11.1,19.2]

Domestic Inputs

3.0

26.0

22.9

23.3

29.2

38.5

36.1

44.6

31.7

18.3

38.9

20.8

38.4

45.1

20.1

14.4

55.6

17.8

7.8

[2.3,3.8]

[19.2,33.4]

[16,33.2]

[17.4,39]

[21.1,38.3]

[23.5,54.8]

[26.4,46.6]

[31.9,57]

[23,41.6]

[13.8,23.5]

[28.2,50.2]

[15.3,27.4]

[27.5,50.9]

[32.7,60.7]

[14.7,26.5]

[11.1,18.2]

[42.4,74]

[12.4,23.4]

[5.2,10.3]

Sectoral Price Gains

0.0

14.1

11.8

11.2

15.9

22.1

21.6

37.0

18.2

7.7

28.8

13.3

21.5

28.1

11.0

9.6

31.9

12.6

2.5

[0,0]

[9.5,20.4]

[7.9,18.2]

[6.1,24.3]

[10.7,22.5]

[12.5,36.1]

[14.8,30.7]

[22.4,60.3]

[12.2,26.2]

[5.5,10.8]

[19,41.6]

[9,19]

[13.9,31]

[18.7,41.8]

[7.7,15.4]

[6.7,13.7]

[22.4,46.9]

[7.8,18.2]

[1.6,3.6]

Aggregate Data

Table 6: The Gains from Input Trade: Sectoral Variation

Notes: The first column reports the direct price reductions from international sourcing relative to autarky, (exp(Λs ) − 1) × 100, which are calculated according to (20). The second
column reports the reductions in the price of domestically sourced intermediate inputs, (pAut
Ds /pDs − 1) × 100. The third column contains the full change in sectoral prices relative
to autarky, (PsAut /Ps − 1) × 100. Column four reports the direct price reductions predicted by an aggregate approach, (exp(ΛAgg
) − 1) × 100, as per (24). 90-10 confidence intervals
s
are reported in brackets for all measures. These are calculated via a bootstrap procedure which we describe in the Online Appendix. The empirical distributions of all statistics
are estimated using 200 bootstrap iterations.

Non-manufacturing

36-37

25

Rubber and plastics products

Manufacturing, recycling

24

Chemicals

21-22

17-19

Textiles and leather

Paper, printing, publishing

15-16

Food, tobacco, beverages
20

10-14

Mining

Wood and wood products

ISIC

Industry

Model
French Data

Consumer Price Gains
38.07
41.53

Welfare Gains
17.53
-

% of Labor in Fixed Cost Production
14.87
-

Notes: The first row of the table contains the results of Section 5.2. The consumer price gains are given by (P Aut /P − 1) × 100.
The welfare gains are given by (W/W Aut − 1) × 100 and are computed according to (41). The third column reports the percentage
´
of the labor force allocated to fixed costs production, i.e. lF
i di/L × 100. The second row reports the consumer price gains for
the French manufacturing sector, which are computed applying (22) to a sample of firms that pools all manufacturing sectors
together. The parameters used are reported in Table 7. See main text for details.

Table 8: Welfare Gains from Input Trade

.08

Fraction of firms

.06

.04

.02

0
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Domestic shares

Notes: The figure shows the cross-sectional distribution of domestic expenditure shares, i.e. the share of material spending
allocated to domestic inputs, for the population of importing manufacturing firms in France in 2004.

Figure 1: The Dispersion in Domestic Shares

1

.08

.8

Domestic share

.04

.6

Fraction of firms

.06

.4

.02

0
-10

-5

0

5

10

1

log value added
Importers

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Quantiles of value added
Non importers

25th to 75th percentiles

Mean

Notes: The left panel displays the distribution of log value added by import status. The right panel shows the mean and the 25th
and 75h percentiles of domestic shares for twenty quantiles of value added for importers. The data corresponds to the population
of manufacturing firms in France in 2004.

Figure 2: Domestic Shares and Firm Size

37

Mining
Food, tobacco, beverages
Textiles and leather
Wood products
Paper, printing, publishing
Rubber and plastics
Nonmetallic mineral products
Basic metals
Metal products
Machinery and equipment
Computing machinery
Electrical machinery
Radio and communication
Medical instruments
Motor vehicles
Transport equipment
Recycling, nec.
-5

0

2.38

5

e

10

15

Notes: The figure displays the sector-specific estimates for ε from the integrated GMM approach, which estimates (29)-(30) in
a single step following Wooldridge (2009). We display the point estimates and two standard deviations confidence intervals. We
also show the benchmark estimate for the factor shares approach ε = 2.38 as a vertical line. We omit the Chemicals sector from
the figure because its point estimate is negative and imprecisely estimated. The full results are contained in Table 20 in the
Online Appendix.

Figure 3: Estimates of εs from Integrated GMM Approach

.2

Fraction of firms

.15

.1

.05

0
0

50

100

150

s /(1−ε) −1)×100 - see Proposition
Notes: The figure reports the empirical distribution of the producer gains from input trade, i.e. (sγDi
1. The data for the domestic expenditure shares corresponds to the cross-section of French importing firms in 2004. The values
for ε and γs are taken from the factor shares approach contained in Table 2.

Figure 4: The Producer Gains from Input Trade in France

38

0.08

0.25
Micro Data
Aggregate Data

0.07

Micro Data
Aggregate Data
0.2

0.06
0.05

0.15

0.04
0.1

0.03
0.02

0.05
0.01
0

0

20
40
60
80
Consumer Price Gains (Manufacturing)

0

100

0.1

0

5
10
15
20
Consumer Price Gains (Entire Economy)

25

0.4

0.09

0.35

0.08
0.3
0.07
0.25

0.06
0.05

0.2

0.04

0.15

0.03
0.1
0.02
0.05

0.01
0
−10

0

10
20
Bias (Manufacturing)

30

0
−4

40

−2

0
2
4
Bias (Entire Economy)

6

8

Notes: The top panels of the figure depict the bootstrap distribution of the consumer price gains from input trade for the
Aut
manufacturing sector (PM
/PM − 1) × 100 (left panel) and the entire economy (P Aut /P − 1) × 100 (right panel). These are computed
according to Proposition 2. We display the gains based on the micro data, i.e. using Λs , and aggregate data, i.e. using ΛAgg
.
s
The bottom panels depict the bootstrap distribution of the bias from using aggregate data, which is computed according to (25).
The bootstrap procedure is described in the Online Appendix. We use 200 iterations.

Figure 5: Sampling Variation in the Consumer Price Gains and the Bias

39

8

Appendix

8.1

Generalizations of Proposition 1

In this section, we consider three generalizations of equation (9), which states that the firm’s unit
costs is given by
ui =

γ
1
× (sDi ) ε−1 ×
ϕ̃i



pD
qD

γ

w1−γ .

(45)

(45) was derived under the restrictions: (i) the production function has a constant elasticity of materials γ, (ii) domestic and foreign inputs are combined in a CES fashion with elasticity of substitution
ε and (iii) foreign inputs are differentiated at the country, but not at the product level. We now
relax these assumptions and derive expressions akin to (45).
Extension 1: CES Upper Tier. Suppose that the production function between materials x and
primary factors l is CES instead of Cobb-Douglas, i.e.


y = ϕ (1 − γ) l

ζ−1
ζ

+ γx

ζ−1
ζ



ζ
ζ−1

.

The rest of the environment is exactly as in Section 3. Let Q denote again the price index of materials
x and w denote the price of primary factors l. In this case, the firm’s unit cost is given by
u=

 1
1  ζ 1−ζ
γ Q
+ (1 − γ)ζ w1−ζ 1−ζ .
ϕ

Noting that the optimal expenditure share on materials is given by
sM

=

γ ζ Q1−ζ
γ ζ Q1−ζ + (1 − γ)ζ w1−ζ

,

(46)

we can write the firm’s unit cost as
u =

1
1 ζ−1
sM
ϕ

1
γ

 

ζ
ζ−1

1
ε−1

1
β

 

sD

ε
ε−1



pD
qD



1

1

ζ−1 ε−1
∝ sM
sD ,

(47)

where we have substituted for Q using (8). (47), which is a generalization of (9), shows that measuring
the effect of input trade on the unit cost requires knowledge of the counterfactual material share in
68 Because this object is not observed in the data, we can use (6) and
the autarky equilibrium, sAut
M .
68

The Cobb-Douglas assumption in (1) in the main text bypasses this issue because it implies that the material
share is constant and given by γ. In the non-Cobb-Douglas case, the material share endogenously reacts to changes in
the import environment. A move to autarky, for example, makes materials relatively more expensive and should induce
firms to substitute towards primary inputs.

40

(46) to compute it:


sAut
=
M

ζ
γ
1−γ


1+

γ
1−γ

ε

β − ε−1 (1−ζ)

ζ

β

p

D/ qD

1−ζ

w

ε
− ε−1
(1−ζ)

p

D/ qD

1−ζ .

(48)

w

The producer gains from input trade are therefore given by

ln

uAut
u



!

1+

= ln 


pD ,w

γ
1−γ

1+

ζ

γ
1−γ

β

ε (1−ζ)
− ε−1

ζ

β



pD /qD
w

ε (1−ζ)
− ε−1



1−ζ

pD /qD
w

1−ζ
ε−1
sD





1−ζ

1
ζ−1

.

(49)

(49) is the generalization of Proposition 1 for the case where the aggregator between materials and
primary factors is CES. We see that, in this case, quantifying the change in the unit cost relative to
autarky requires knowledge of additional parameters [β, ζ, pD /qD ] to predict the material share in
autarky. Under the additional assumption that there is no variation in β and pD /qD across firms,
we can bypass the estimation of some of these additional parameters. In this case, all firms would
feature the same material share in autarky, which is given by the material share of a domestic firm
in the observed trade equilibrium, sD
M . In this case, (49) reduces to
uAut
ln
u

!



= ln 1 −

sD
M

1−ζ
ε−1

+ sD

×

sD
M

1
 ζ−1

,

(50)

pD ,w

so that only micro-data on domestic expenditure shares sD and the two elasticities of substitution ε
and ζ are required.69
Extension 2: General Production Function for Materials. In Section (3), we assumed that
material services were a CES aggregator of a domestic variety zD and a foreign input bundle xI .
Suppose now that the aggregator for materials is given by a general function
x = g (qD zD , xI ) .

(51)

We continue to assume that materials x and primary factors l are combined with a Cobb-Douglas
production function given in (1). Again let A (Σ) be the price index of the import bundle and Q (Σ)
be the price index of materials. Consider any shock to the trading environment that affects A (Σ).
Then
zI A dA
= γ (1 − sD ) dln (A) .
(52)
dln (u)|pD ,w = γ × dln (Q)|pD = γ
u A
69

Note that, when ζ → 1, (50) reduces to the expression in Proposition 1:


lim ln
ζ→1

uAut
u


=
pD ,w

41

γ
ln (sD )
1−ε

The optimality conditions from the cost-minimization problem imply that


dln (A) = −
where

− ε1L



1
εL

1−

1
dln (sD ) ,
1 − sD



D zD ,xI )/∂xD
∂ln ∂g(q
1
∂g(qD zD ,xI )/∂xI


−
≡
εL
∂ln qDxzID



is the local elasticity of substitution. Substituting this into (52) yields
dln (u)|pD ,w = γ

1
εL

1−

1
εL

dln (sD ) = −

γ
dln (sD ) .
1 − εL

(53)

In case the elasticity of substitution is constant, i.e. εL = ε, (53) can be integrated to yield (9).
Extension 3: Multiple Foreign Products. In the main analysis, we assumed that firms source
a single product from each sourcing country. In the data, firms often import multiple products from
a given country. We now explore how (45) would change in a multi-product environment. Consider
first the case where the product aggregator is nested in the country aggregator, i.e. the production
structure is given by (1)-(3), where




qci zc ≡ ψci [qkci zkc ]k∈Kci ,

(54)

k is a product index, Kci denotes the set of products that firm i sources from country c, ψci is a
constant-returns-to-scale production function and (54) applies also to the domestic variety. As long
as the number of products sourced domestically does not change when firms are forced into inputautarky, the analysis in the main text remains entirely unchanged and the producer gains are still
given by Proposition 1.
Consider next the case where the country aggregator is nested in the product aggregator. Suppose
for example that the production structure for intermediates x is given by

x =

K
X

(ηk xk )

ι−1
ι

ι
! ι−1

(55)

k=1

xk =
xkI

βki (qkD zkD )


εk −1
εk



εk −1
εk

+ (1 − βki ) xkI

= hki [qkci zkc ]c∈Σki .

!

εk
εk −1

(56)
(57)

Note that the sourcing strategy is now a list of countries for each product. Letting Qi and Qki denote
the price indices for materials x and product-specific material services xk respectively, it can be easily

42

shown that
K
X

Qi =

1
! 1−ι

1−ι

(Qki /ηk )

k=1
εk
k −1

−ε

1

Qki = (skDi ) εk −1 βki

pkD /qkD ,

where skDi is firm i’s domestic expenditure share for product k. The producer gains are therefore
given by
Gi =

γ
ι−1

× ln


PK

ι−1



1−εk
k=1 χki (skDi )

where
χki ≡
PK

k=1

pkD /qkD
εk
k −1

−ε

βki

(58)

!1−ι

εk
k −1

−ε

βki

,

!1−ι .

pkD /qkD

We see that the producer gains are akin to a weighted average of the product-specific producer
ι−1
gains (skDi ) 1−εk . In our empirical application, we cannot implement (58) because we do not observe
domestic shares at the product level skDi in the French data. Note that implementing (58) also
requires measuring the weights χki . In the case where (55) takes the Cobb-Douglas form, i.e. ι = 1
as in Halpern et al. (2011), (58) simplifies to
Gi =

K
X
k=1

ηk



γ
ln skDi .
1 − εk

Thus, in the Cobb-Douglas case, the producer gains are a weighted average of the product-specific
producer gains.

8.2

Proof of Proposition 2

The consumer price index associated with (14)-(15) is given by
P =

S
Y

(Ps /αs )αs where Ps =

´

Ns
0



s
p1−σ
di
is

1
1−σs

,

(59)

s=1

and Ps is the price index for sector s. Using (59), the consumer price gains from input trade can be
expressed as
!
!
S
X
P Aut
PsAut
=
αs ln
.
G ≡ ln
P
Ps
s=1
We now express PsAut /Ps in terms of observables. Note that monopolistic competition implies a
constant markup pricing rule, pis = µs uis . Using the expression for the firm’s unit cost in terms of

43

its domestic expenditure share in (9), we find that


Ps = µs

pDs
qDs

 γs

ˆ

Ns



0

γs /(εs −1)
ϕ̃−1
i (sDi )

1−σs

!

1
1−σs

di

,

(60)

which is (17) in the main text. Given the aggregator in (16), the price index of the domestic bundle
is given by
pDs = ζs∗

S
Y

ζs

QS



pAut
Ds
pDs

!γs

Pj j where ζs∗ ≡

j=1

ζjs

−ζ s
j

(61)

j=1

Note that (60) implies


PsAut
=
Ps

pAut
Ds
pDs

!γs

´ Ns



0


 ´ Ns
0



ϕ̃σi s −1 di
γs

1−εs
ϕ̃i sDi

σs −1

di

1
1−σs






=

ˆ
0

Ns

γs (1−σs )
1−εs

ωi sDi

!

1
1−σs

di

,

(62)

where ωi is firm i0 s share in total value added in sector s and the second equality follows from
γs (σs −1)

vai = κs ϕ̃σi s −1 sDi1−εs . With (62) at hand, we can express the consumer price gains as
G=

S
X

γs αs πs +

where πs ≡ ln

pAut
Ds
pDs

αs Λ s

(63)

s=1

s=1



S
X



and Λs is given by (20) in the main text. As Λs are observable from the

micro-data, obtaining G reduces to solving for [πs ]Ss=1 . Note that (61) and (62) jointly imply
πs =

S
X

ζjs γj πj +

S
X

ζjs Λj .

(64)

j=1

j=1

(64) gives an S × S system of equations that characterizes the equilibrium [πs ]Ss=1 . Letting π ≡
[π1 , π2 , ..., πs ] be a column vector, we can express the system in (64) in matrix form as π = ΞΓπ + ΞΛ.
Its solution is given by π = (I − ΞΓ)−1 ΞΛ. Using (63), the consumer price gains G are therefore
given by

G = α0 Γπ + α0 Λ = α0 Γ (I − Ξ × Γ)−1 ΞΛ + α0 Λ.

44

(65)

This proves Proposition 2. For counterfactuals other than autarky, (62) should be replaced by


Ps0
Ps



=


p0Ds γs

pDs

´ Ns





0

ϕ̃i sDi
 0

 ´

 Ns
0

γs /(1−εs ) σs −1
γs /(1−εs )

ϕ̃i (sDi )

σs −1



1
1−σs

di 

di







=


p0Ds γs

pDs

ˆ





Ns

ωi
0

sDi
0
sDi

! γs (1−σs )



1−εs

di


1
1−σs

,

(66)
denote the counterfactual price
where sDi denotes the counterfactual domestic share and
indices. It follows that the consumer price gains associated with the policy, G ≡ ln (P 0 /P ), are given
by (65) where Λs is given by (23).
0

8.3

Ps0 , p0Ds

Data Description

Our main data set stems from the information system of the French custom administration (DGDDI)
and contains the universe of import and export flows by French manufacturing firms.70 The data is
collected at the 8-digit (NC8) level. A firm located within the French metropolitan territory must
report detailed information as long as the following criteria are met. For imports from outside the
EU, reporting is required from each firm and flow if the imported value exceeds 1,000 Euros. For
within EU imports, import flows have to be reported as long as the firm’s annual trade value exceeds
100,000 Euros.71 However, some firms that are below the threshold (ca. 10,000 firm-year observations
out of ca. 130,000) voluntarily report.72
In spite of this limitation, the attractive feature of the French data is the presence of unique
firm identifiers (the SIREN code) that is available in all French administrative files. Hence, various
datasets can be matched to the trade data at the firm level. To learn about the characteristics of
the firms in our sample we employ fiscal files.73 Sales are deflated using price indices of value added
at the 3 digit level obtained from the French national accounts. To measure the expenditure on
domestic inputs, we subtract the total import value from the total expenditure on wares and inputs
reported in the fiscal files. Capital is measured at book value (historical cost).
Finally, we incorporate information on the ownership structure from the LIFI/DIANE (BvDEP)
files. These files are constructed at INSEE using a yearly survey (LIFI) that describes the structure of
ownership of all firms in the private sector whose financial investments in other firms (participation)
are higher than 1.2 million Euros or have sales above 60 million Euros or have more than 500
70

For imports from outside the EU, all shipments must be reported to the custom administration. The conditions
are more stringent for exports since all shipments (even within EU) must be reported to the custom administration.
71
This threshold was in effect between 2001 and 2006, which is period we focus on. Between 1993 and 2001, the
threshold was ca. 40,000 euros. After 2006, it was raised to 150,000 euros and to 460,000 euros after 2011.
72
The existence of this administrative threshold induces a censoring of small EU importers. In results available upon
request, we use the time-variation in the reporting thresholds (see footnote 71) to show that this concern is unlikely to
severely affect our results. The reason is related to weak relation between domestic expenditure shares and firm size
shown in Figure 2.
73
The firm level accounting information is retrieved from two different files: the BRN (“Bénéfices Réels Normaux”)
and the RSI (“Régime Simplifié d’Imposition”). The BRN contains the balance sheet of all firms in the traded sectors
with sales above 730,000 Euros. The RSI is the counterpart of the BRN for firms with sales below 730,000 Euros. Although the details of the reporting differs, for our purposes these two data sets contain essentially the same information.
Their union covers nearly the entire universe of French firms.

45

Full

Importers

sample
Employment
Sales
Sales per worker

Non

Exporters

importers

Non
exporters

25

92

8

81

9

5,455

21,752

1,379

19,171

1,468

126

208

105

196

105

1,515

5,972

400

5,294

416

45

55

43

55

43

2,217

8,728

588

7,661

634

44

64

40

61

40

Inputs

2,600

10,225

693

8,943

756

Domestic share

0.943

0.698

1

0.790

0.986

Share of importers

0.200

1

0

0.677

0.061

Value added
Value added per worker
Capital
Capital per worker

Share of exporters

0.225

0.762

0.091

1

0

Share of firms that are

0.029

0.131

0.004

0.113

0.005

part of an international group
Productivity (factor shares)

39.173

65.450

32.989

63.858

32.359

Number of observations (firm * year)

650,401

130,135

520,266

146,496

503,905

Number of firms

172,244

38,240

148,619

44,648

146,423

Notes: Sales, wages, expenditures on imports or exports are all expressed in 2005 prices using a 3-digit industry level
price deflator. Our capital measure is the book value reported in firms’ balance sheets (“historical cost”). We measure
employees by occupation. Skilled workers are engineers, technicians and managers, workers of intermediate skills are
skilled blue and white collars and low skilled workers are members of unskilled occupations. A firm is member of an
international group if at least one affiliate or the headquarter is located outside of France.

Table 9: Characteristics of importers, exporters and domestic firms
employees. This survey is complemented with the information about ownership structure available in
the DIANE (BvDEP) files, which are constructed using the annual mandatory reports to commercial
courts and the register of firms that are controlled by the State.
Using these datasets, we construct a non-balanced panel dataset spanning the period from 2001 to
2006. Some basic characteristics of importing and non-importing firms are contained in Table 9. For
comparison, we also report the results for exporting firms. As expected, importers are larger, more
capital intensive and have higher revenue productivity - see also Bernard et al. (2012). Furthermore,
import and export status are highly correlated.

8.4

Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution ε: Robustness

In Section 4.1, we constructed the instrument for the estimation of ε using firms’ first year of import
activity as the initial period for the pre-sample weights, spre
cki - see (32). We now redo the analysis
of estimating (33) keeping the year used for the pre-sample weights fixed at 2001 for all firms. Note
that this reduces the size of the sample as all firms that start to import after 2001 are dropped. Table
10 contains the results for the factor shares and the 2-step GMM procedures with Cobb-Douglas and
translog technology. The results of the main text are also reported for comparison - see the “All
weights” rows. As before, we run the regressions on both the entire population and the sample of
importers. Depending on the specification, the estimates of ε range from 1.4 to 2.4.

46

Factor shares

Full sample

γ̃s × ∆ ln (sD )

ε

N

-0.726***

2.378***

526,687

(0.197)

(0.523)

-1.407***

1.711***

(0.356)

(0.166)

All weights

-0.756

2.322**

(0.537)

(1.014)

Pre-sample (2001) weights

-1.121*

1.892***

(0.632)

(0.541)

All weights

-1.288***

1.776***

(0.395)

(0.288)

Pre-sample (2001) weights

-2.152***

1.465***

(0.652)

(0.148)

All weights

(bootstrapped SE)
Sample: 2002-2006

Pre-sample (2001) weights

Importers only
(2 digit dummies)

2-step GMM

Full sample

(bootstrapped SE)
Sample: 2004-2006

Importers only

All weights

(2 digit dummies)
Pre-sample (2001) weights

2-step GMM, translog

Full sample

All weights

(bootstrapped SE)
Sample: 2004-2006

Pre-sample (2001) weights

Importers only

All weights

(2 digit dummies)
Pre-sample (2001) weights

-1.116

1.896**

(1.203)

(0.850)

-1.968

1.508***

(1.910)

(0.402)

-1.376***

1.727***

(0.402)

(0.235)

-2.371***

1.422***

(0.693)

(0.119)

-1.246

1.802**

(1.071)

(0.735)

-2.171

1.461***

(1.835)

(0.332)

443,954

65,799

54,604

331,421

258,957

53,349

43,393

331,421

258,957

53,349

43,393

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses with ***, **, and * respectively denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
The first stage column refers to the estimation of (33) with the instrument given in (32). We estimate γs based on factor shares,
as per (31), or on the proxy method used in Levinsohn and Petrin (2012) and Wooldridge (2009). For the latter, we report results
based on Cobb-Douglas technology (29) and Translog. For the factor share specification, we use data for the years 2002-2006. For
the proxy method we use data for the years 2004-2006, as two lagged values are required to build the appropriate instruments for
the estimation of the production function. For the 2-step GMM procedure, we construct standard errors via bootstrap to take
the sampling variation in the generated regressor γs ∆ln (sD ) into account. See the main text for details regarding the different
subsamples for the respective specifications.

Table 10: Estimating the Elasticity of Substitution ε

47

Micro Data
2.38
9.04
27.52

Entire Economy
Manufacturing Sector

2.38
9.9
30.8

Aggregate Data
ε
3
4
5
6.72
4.43 3.31
20.32 13.12 9.69

6
2.64
7.68

Notes: The table reports the reduction in consumer prices for the entire economy (P Aut /P −1)×100 (first row) and the manufacturing
Aut
/PM − 1) × 100 (second row) for different values of the elasticity of substitution ε. In the first two columns, we report
sector (PM
the baseline results under ε = 2.38 for comparison. Column one is based on Proposition 2 where Λs are computed with micro data
as reported in Table 6. The remaining columns contain results based on an aggregate model, i.e. they are based on Proposition
2 where the sectoral gains are measured by ΛAgg
as per (24) instead of Λs . The values for Ξ, γs , σs and αs employed for all
s
calculations are given in Table 1.

Table 11: The Consumer Price Gains for Different Values of ε

8.5

The Elasticity Bias: Using ε from Aggregate Trade Flows

Tables 11 and 12 report the consumer price gains from input trade for the entire economy and at
the sector level for different values of the elasticity of substitution ε. Columns one and two replicate
the results for our baseline estimate ε = 2.38. While column one reports the results based on the
micro-data, column two reports the gains based on aggregate data, ΛAgg
s . These results correspond
to the ones reported in Tables 5 and 6 above. In the remaining columns, we report the gains for a
range of values of ε from studies that rely on aggregate data to estimate such elasticity. For example,
Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) take ε = 4 as their baseline. The tables show that the gains
are very sensitive to the value of ε. Table 11 shows that the economy-wide gains predicted by an
aggregate approach under ε = 4 are about 50% lower than the gains predicted by the approach that
relies on micro-data.

8.6

Characterizing the Model with Fixed Costs

Consider the setup of Section 5.1 where Assumption 1 holds. Note that, under item 3 of this
assumption, countries can be indexed by their quality q. We first show that the price index of the
import bundle takes the power form in (36). Under items 1 and 3 of Assumption 1, this price index
is given by
ˆ

!

A (Σ) =

(p (q) /q)

1−κ

ˆ

1
1−κ

dG (q)

!

q

=

(1−ν)(κ−1)

dG (q)

1
1−κ

.

(67)

q∈Σ

q∈Σ

As quality is Pareto distributed, (67) becomes
ˆ
A (Σ)

1−κ

=

q (1−ν)(κ−1) q −θ−1 dq.

θ
θqmin
q∈Σ

Because fixed costs are constant across countries and quality-adjusted prices q ν−1 are decreasing in
quality, the sourcing set Σ can be parametrized by a quality cutoff q. In particular, the firm selects

48

Industry

ISIC

Micro Data

Aggregate Data
ε

2.38

2.38

3

4

5

6

Mining

10-14

2.96

2.5

1.72

1.14

0.86

0.68

Food, tobacco, beverages

15-16

11.06

12.62

8.53

5.61

4.18

3.33

Textiles and leather

17-19

31.14

31.87

20.99

13.55

10

7.92

Wood and wood products

20

8.23

9.58

6.51

4.29

3.2

2.55

Paper, printing, publishing

21-22

12.15

10.96

7.43

4.89

3.65

2.91

Chemicals

24

27.23

28.14

18.62

12.06

8.91

7.07

Rubber and plastics products

25

20.12

21.53

14.37

9.37

6.95

5.52

Non-metallic mineral products

26

13.42

13.29

8.98

5.9

4.39

3.5

Basic metals

27

21.8

28.83

19.07

12.34

9.12

7.23

Metal products (ex machinery and equipment)

28

8.17

7.7

5.24

3.47

2.59

2.07

Machinery and equipment

29

17.64

18.23

12.23

7.99

5.94

4.72

Office and computing machinery

30

20.42

37

24.22

15.56

11.45

9.06

Electrical machinery

31

19.77

21.64

14.45

9.41

6.98

5.55

Radio and communication

32

21.55

22.15

14.78

9.62

7.13

5.67

Medical and optical instruments

33

17.9

15.9

10.7

7.01

5.21

4.15

Motor vehicles, trailers

34

6.24

11.23

7.61

5.01

3.73

2.98

Transport equipment

35

15.32

11.83

8.01

5.27

3.93

3.13

Manufacturing, recycling

36-37

12.87

14.06

9.48

6.23

4.63

3.69

0

0

0

0

0

0

Non-manufacturing

Notes: The table reports the reduction in consumer prices at the sectoral level (PsAut /Ps − 1) × 100 for different values of the
elasticity of substitution ε. In the first two columns, we report the baseline results under ε = 2.38 for comparison. Column one is
based on Proposition 2 where Λs are computed with micro data as reported in Table 6. The remaining columns contain results
based on an aggregate model, i.e. they are based on Proposition 2 where the sectoral gains are measured by ΛAgg
as per (24)
s
instead of Λs . The values for Ξ, γs , σs and αs employed for all calculations are given in Table 1.

Table 12: The Sectoral Consumer Price Gains for Different Values of ε

49

countries with high enough quality, i.e. q ∈ Σ as long as q ≥ q . It follows that
θ
A (q)1−κ = qmin

θ
q (1−ν)(κ−1)−θ .
θ − (1 − ν) (κ − 1)

(68)

We can rewrite this expression in terms of the mass of countries sourced, n, which is given by
θ
n = P (q ∈ Σ) = P (q ≥ q) = qmin
q −θ .

(69)

Substituting (69) into (68) yields


−(1−ν)

A (n) = qmin

θ
θ − (1 − ν) (κ − 1)



1
1−κ

1

n−( κ−1 −

1−ν
θ

),

(70)

which is (36) in the main text where
θ
θ − (1 − ν) (κ − 1)
1
1−ν
−
.
κ−1
θ

ν−1
qmin

z ≡
η ≡





1
1−κ

(71)
(72)

Note that η > 0 follows from item 4 of Assumption 1. This completes the characterization of (36).
The following proposition characterizes the solution to the extensive margin problem.
Proposition 4. Consider the setup above and suppose that
η (ε − 1) < 1 and ηγ (σ − 1) < 1.

(73)

Then, the firm’s profit maximization problem (37) has a unique solution for any value of ϕ and f .
The optimal mass of countries sourced is given by a function n (ϕ, f ) and an efficiency cutoff ϕ (f )
such that n (ϕ, f ) = 0 for ϕ ≤ ϕ (f ) with ϕ (·) increasing. Furthermore, n (ϕ, f ) is increasing in
efficiency ϕ and decreasing in the fixed costs of sourcing f .
Proof. Conditional on importing, the optimal mass of countries is characterized by the following first
order condition:

(qD /pD )

ε−1

! γ(σ−1) −1

 ε−1

+

1
z

ε−1

n

η(ε−1)

z 1−ε nη(ε−1)−1 =

1
1 f
,
ηγ (σ − 1) Γ ϕσ−1

(74)

where Γ ≡ Bw(1−σ)(1−γ)−1 . The second order condition is given by


Γγ (σ − 1) ηϕσ−1 z 1−ε (qD /pD )ε−1 + z 1−ε nη(ε−1)

 γ(σ−1) −1
ε−1

nη(ε−1)−2 ×

{(η (ε − 1) − 1) + (γ (σ − 1) − ε + 1) ηl (n)} < 0

50

(75)

where
l (n) ≡

z 1−ε nη(ε−1)
∈ [0, 1).
(qD /pD )ε−1 + z 1−ε nη(ε−1)

It follows that (75) is satisfied if and only if
η (ε − 1) − 1 + (γ (σ − 1) − ε + 1) ηl (n) < 0.

(76)

Because we allow for arbitrary values of ϕ and f , we need to verify that (76) holds for any value of
n. Sufficient conditions for this are given by
η(ε − 1) < 1

(77)

ηγ(σ − 1) < 1.

(78)

and

If (77) is not satisfied, there exists a range of values of n close enough to zero such that (76) is
violated.74 (77) is therefore necessary. If γ (σ − 1) − ε + 1 ≤ 0, then (76) is satisfied for all n. If
γ (σ − 1) − ε + 1 > 0, then (76) holds for all n if and only if
η (ε − 1) − 1 + (γ (σ − 1) − ε + 1) ηl (1) < 0.

(79)

As l (1) < 1, a sufficient condition for (79) is given by (78). This proves that, under (77)-(78), the
optimal mass of countries conditional on importing is uniquely characterized by (74) for any values
of ϕ and f .75,76 The firm becomes an importer whenever πI ≥ πD , where πI are optimal profits
conditional on importing and πD are profits as a non-importer. It can be shown that this condition
is satisfied whenever



 1+

pD −1 η
z n
qD

ε−1 ! γ(σ−1)
ε−1



− 1 (qD /pD )γ(σ−1) Γϕσ−1 − f n − fI > 0,


(80)

where n is the solution to (74). It follows the firm’s profit maximization problem in (37) has a unique
solution for any value of ϕ and f .
Note that, under (77)-(78), the left hand side of (74) is decreasing in n. Therefore, the optimal
mass of countries sourced is weakly increasing in ϕ and weakly decreasing in f . Holding n fixed,
an increase in ϕ tends to increase the left hand side of (80). Additionally, πI is increasing in ϕ. It
follows that πI − πD is increasing in ϕ for a given f . This proves that n = 0 if and only if ϕ ≤ ϕ (f )
where ϕ (·) is implicitly defined as the value of ϕ that makes the left hand side of (80) equal to zero.
The fact that ϕ (f ) is increasing in f follows from the fact that πI − πD is decreasing in f for a given
74

This follows from the fact that l(n) is continuous and strictly increasing.
Note that our calibrated and estimated parameters satisfy (77)-(78) - see Table 7.
76
When the solution to (74) exceeds unity, the solution is given by n = 1. Clearly, n = 0 cannot be a solution as
the firm always prefers to be a non-importer and avoid payment of fI .
75

51

ϕ.77 This proves Proposition 4.

8.7

Estimation of η

Table 13 contains the results of estimating (44). Columns one and two show that it is important to
control for the number of products sourced as import-intensive firms source both more varieties perproduct and more products on international markets - without the product fixed effects, the estimated
η increases substantially.78 Columns three and four show that the estimate of η is virtually unaffected
by additional firm-level controls that can affect firms’ import behavior conditional on the number of
varieties sourced. In column five, we focus on a subsample of firm-product pairs that source their
respective products from at least two supplier countries. In this case, the estimated η decreases as the
single-variety importers have very high domestic shares in the data. For our quantitative analysis,
we take column five as the benchmark.79 The implied value of η is 0.382 and it is precisely estimated.
D
Dep. Variable: ln( 1−s
sD )

ln (Number of Varieties)

1.308***
(0.009)

All Importers
0.707*** 0.733***
(0.010)
(0.010)

No
0.950***
(0.260)
120,344

-0.395***
(0.013)
0.150***
(0.016)
Yes
0.532***
(0.147)
120,344

ln (Capital / Employment)
Exporter Dummy
International Group
Control for Num of products
Implied Eta
Observations

Yes
0.513***
(0.142)
120,344

0.739***
(0.010)
-0.070***
(0.006)
-0.388***
(0.013)
0.174***
(0.016)
Yes
0.536***
(0.148)
120,344

> 1 variety
0.526***
(0.011)

> 2 varieties
0.463***
(0.019)

-0.254***
(0.017)
0.216***
(0.016)
Yes
0.382***
(0.106)
73,651

-0.198***
(0.029)
0.223***
(0.019)
Yes
0.336***
(0.096)
35,751

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses with ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ respectively denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
All regressions include year fixed effects and 3-digit industry fixed effects. The number of varieties is the average number of
countries a firm sources its foreign products from. To back out the value for η, we use our benchmark value for ε = 2.378 from
Section 4.1.

Table 13: Estimating η

8.8

Non-Targeted Moments and Model Comparison

Table 14 and Figures 6 and 7 report how the model fits additional non-targeted moments. Table
77

To see why this is the case, note that the left hand side of (80) is decreasing in f given ϕ and n. Additionally, πI
is decreasing in f .
78
Recall that η is a combination of different structural parameters of the economy. While η is sufficient to characterize
the welfare gains from trade, one might be interested in decomposing the returns to international sourcing into the
the elasticity of substitution across varieties κ, the dispersion in input quality θ, and the elasticity of input prices with
respect to quality ν. To do so, we need two additional pieces of information: import prices (to identify ν) and data on
firms’ expenditure shares across trading partners (to identify θ).
79
We are concerned that the single-variety observations may not help identify the extensive margin channel emphasized by our theory but rather pick-up other variation across firms. Additionally, a non-parametric regression shows
that the log linear relation between n and (1 − sD )/sD in (44) fits the data better in the sample with at least two
varieties than in the full sample (results available upon request).

52

Non-Targeted Moments
Avg Domestic Share (Importers)
Avg Domestic Share (Population)
Agg Domestic Share (Importers)
Dispersion log Value Added (Importers)
Dispersion log Dom Shares (Importers)
Correlation log Value Added - log Dom Shares (Importers)
Share of Value Added by Importers

French Data
0.70
0.94
0.63
1.62
0.69
-0.01
0.79

Baseline
0.67
0.93
0.52
1.02
0.65
-0.06
0.59

Notes: This table reports some non-targeted moments in the micro-data (column 1) and in our baseline calibration (column 2).
The calibrated parameters of the benchmark model are contained in Table 7.

Table 14: Non-Targeted Moments
14 shows that the model performs relatively well. That fact that it under predicts the dispersion of
value added for importers is related to the fact that the log-normal distribution of efficiency has too
thin tails. This also explains why the model under predicts the share of value added by importers there are too few very large firms in our model, the majority of which are importers.
ln(Value added), full sample

.1

.04

0

.02
0

Fraction of firms

.06

.2

Domestic share, importers

0

.5

1

French data (2004)

-10

-5

0

5

10

Model

Notes: The left panel (right panel) shows the distribution of domestic shares (log value added) in the data (solid line) and in the
model (dashed line). The firms are grouped in 50 bins of equal length. The distributions of log value added have been normalized
to have means of unity.

Figure 6: Marginal Distributions: Model and Data
Figure 6 reports the marginal distributions of domestic shares and log value added both in the
model and in the French data. The model captures the marginal distribution of domestic shares quite
well. It under predicts the density for very small importers, which is natural in a model of fixed costs
- it may not be worth it to pay the fixed costs to then import tiny amounts. When we compare the
distribution of value added between the model and the data, we again see that the model generates
too little dispersion, especially on the right tail.

53

1
.8
Average domestic share
.4
.6
.2
0

1

2

3
Quintiles of value added
French data

4

5

Model

Notes: The graph depicts the average domestic expenditure share for different size groups in the French economy. We depict both
the micro-data and the data from the calibrated model.

Figure 7: Correlation Structure: Model and Data
Figure 7 reports the average domestic share by value added quintile for the full population. The
model fits this moment relatively well.
Finally, Table 15 reports the calibrated parameters and targeted moments for the alternative
calibration of Section 5.3 where no information on domestic shares is used (last two columns).

Aggregate Domestic Share
Share of Importers
Dispersion in log Value Added
Dispersion in Domestic Shares
Correlation log Value Added - Dom Shares
Consumer Price Gains
Welfare Gains

Baseline
Model
Parameter
0.72
µf = 2.43
0.20
fI = 0.12
1.52
σϕ = 0.51
0.36
σf = 2.41
-0.31
ρ = 0.73
38.07 %
17.53%

No sD Data
Model
Parameter
0.72
µf = 2.88
0.20
fI = 0.16
1.52
σϕ = 0.51
0.14
σf = 0
-0.72
ρ=0
43.26% Bias:13.65 %
21.69% Bias:23.73 %

Notes: The table contains an alternative calibration which does not use information on domestic expenditure shares. This model
is only calibrated to the moments in the first three rows. We report our baseline calibration of Section 5.2 for comparison.

Table 15: Calibration Without Domestic Shares
Note that the model is calibrated to match the moments contained in the first three rows. The
results in Table 15 show that the model is unsuccessful in predicting a distribution of import shares
that is consistent with the data. Not only is there too strong a negative correlation between import
intensity and firm value added, but the model also under-predicts the cross-sectional dispersion in
domestic shares.

54

