NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTRA FIRM BARGAINING AND SHAPLEY VALUES
Björn Brügemann
Pieter Gautier
Guido Menzio
Working Paper 21508
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21508
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We are grateful to Christian Haefke, John Kennan, Philipp Kircher, Rasmus Lentz, and Randy Wright
for useful comments. Special thanks to William Hawkins for carefully reading the manuscript and
providing us with many valuable suggestions to improve it. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Björn Brügemann, Pieter Gautier, and Guido Menzio. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intra Firm Bargaining and Shapley Values
Björn Brügemann, Pieter Gautier, and Guido Menzio
NBER Working Paper No. 21508
August 2015
JEL No. D21,J30
ABSTRACT
The paper revisits the problem of wage bargaining between a firm and multiple workers. We show
that the Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of the extensive-form game proposed by Stole and Zwiebel
(1996a) does not imply a profile of wages and profits that coincides with the Shapley values as claimed
in their classic paper. We propose an alternative extensive-form bargaining game, the Rolodex Game,
that follows a simple and realistic protocol and that, under some mild restrictions, admits a unique
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium generating a profile of wages and profits that are equal to the Shapley
values. The vast applied literature that refers to the Stole and Zwiebel game to give a game-theoretic
foundation to the use of the Shapley values as the outcome of the bargain between a firm and multiple
workers should instead refer to the Rolodex game.
Björn Brügemann
VU University
Department of Economics
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam
Netherlands
b.a.brugemann@vu.nl
Pieter Gautier
VU Amsterdam
p.a.gautier@vu.nl

Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
467 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

We revisit the problem of wage bargaining between a firm and multiple employees. The
standard axiomatic solution for this type of multilateral bargaining problem is provided by
Shapley (1953), who derives a simple formula for the expected payoﬀs to each agent starting
from some desirable properties of any solution. The classic game-theoretic analysis of the
bargaining problem between a firm and multiple employees is provided by Stole and Zwiebel
(1996a and 1996b), who propose an extensive-form game with a simple and realistic protocol
that admits, as its unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium, a profile of wages and profits that
coincides with the Shapley values. The Stole and Zwiebel bargaining game (henceforth, the
SZ game) has been applied widely in the labor-search literature1 , where wages are not pinned
down by competition because, due to search frictions, a firm and its employees have to spend
time or other resources in order to find alternative trading partners (see, e.g., Cahuc, Marque
and Wasmer 2008, Ebell and Haefke 2009, Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding 2010, Elsby and
Michaels 2013, Acemoglu and Hawkins 2014, Helpman and Itskhoki 2015).
The paper contains two findings. First, we show that the SZ bargaining game does
not support the Shapley values as a Subgame Perfect Equilibrium. Second, we propose
an extensive-form bargaining game between a firm and its employee that follows a simple
and realistic protocol and that, under some mild restrictions, admits as its unique Subgame
Perfect Equilibrium a profile of wages and profits that coincides with the axiomatic solution
by Shapley. We refer to this game as the “Rolodex Game,” after the rotating file device used
to store business contact information.
In the first part of the paper, we characterize the solution to the SZ bargaining game.
The game includes a firm and  workers, who are placed in some arbitrary order from 1 to .
The game proceeds as a finite sequence of pairwise bargaining sessions between the firm and
one of the workers. A bargaining session follows the same protocol as in Binmore, Rubinstein
and Wolinsky (1986), i.e. the firm and the worker alternate in making proposals about the
employee’s wage and, after every rejection, there is some probability of a breakdown. The
bargaining session may either end with an agreement over some wage, or with a breakdown.
In case of agreement, the firm enters a bargaining session with the next worker in line. In
case of breakdown, the employee exits the game and the whole bargaining process starts
over with one less worker. When the firm reaches an agreement with all the workers who are
1

Before the publication of Stole and Zwiebel (1996a,b), the labor search literature had dealt with bargaining between a firm and multiple workers in a reduced form way by simply positing some wage equations
without foundations in either axiomatic or strategic bargaining theory (see, e.g., Bertola and Caballero 1994,
Andolfatto 1996 or Smith 1999).

2

still in the game, the game ends, the agreed-upon wages are paid out and production takes
place. As usual in the game-theoretic literature on bargaining, the focus is on the Subgame
Perfect Equilibrium of the game in the limit as the probability of breakdown goes to zero.
Theorem 2 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), in conjunction with Theorem 4, claims that the
unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of the game is such that every worker earns the same
wage and that this common wage is the worker’s Shapley value. In particular, Theorem
2 claims that the unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium wages are given by what they call
the stable wage profile, and Theorem 4 establishes the equivalence between the stable wage
profile and the worker’s Shapley value. Stole and Zwiebel derive the stable wage profile in
a heuristic way, by informally describing a bargaining environment and then conjecturing
some properties of the solution. This heuristic approach allows them to derive the stable
wage profile in an intuitive and simple way. The SZ game is meant to formalize the heuristic
arguments and provide a rigorous game-theoretic foundation for the stable wage profile and,
thus, for the Shapley values.
We prove that Theorem 2 is wrong, as workers who are in diﬀerent places in the initial
ordering earn diﬀerent wages and, even on average, these wages are diﬀerent from the worker’s
Shapley value. There is a simple intuition for this result. When the firm enters a bargaining
session with the last worker, it takes as given the wage agreements with all the previous
workers. These wages do not aﬀect the payoﬀ to the firm if the negotiation with the last
worker breaks down, as in this case the bargaining process starts over. However, these wages
do aﬀect the payoﬀ to the firm if the firm reaches an agreement with the last worker, as
in this case the wages are actually paid out. For this reason, the wage agreements with
the previous workers aﬀect the gains from trade between the firm and the last worker and,
in turn, the last worker’s wage. For example, if the firm agreed to pay the second-to-last
worker one more dollar, its gains from trade with the last worker are one dollar lower and,
hence, the firm and the last worker settle for a wage that is 50 cents lower. When the firm
and the second-to-last worker bargain, they understand the eﬀect of their agreement on the
wage of the last worker. In particular, they understand that the marginal cost to the firm
from paying the second-to-last worker an extra dollar is only 50 cents. For this reason, the
second-to-last worker is able to extract a higher wage than the last worker. Similarly, when
the firm and the third-to-last worker bargain, they understand that if they agree to a higher
wage, the wage of the last two workers will be lower. For this reason, the third-to-last worker
is able to extract an even higher wage than the second-to-last worker. Since workers who
bargain first can basically hold the firm up and capture some of its gains from trade with
the workers who bargain later, they obtain more than their expected marginal contribution
3

to production (i.e., their Shapley value) and the firm obtains less than its Shapley value.
Formally, we prove that (under a reasonable tie-breaking assumption), there exists a
unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of the SZ game. In this equilibrium, the wage earned
by a worker is strictly decreasing in the worker’s position in the initial ordering. In particular,
the gains from trade accruing to the first worker are one half of the total surplus, where total
surplus is defined as the firm’s output net of the sum of the workers’ outside options and
the firm’s profit with one less worker. The gains from trade accruing to the second worker
are one fourth of the total surplus. The gains from trade accruing to the third worker
are one eight of the total surplus, etc. . . The gains from trade accruing to the firm are a
P
fraction 1 − =1 12 = 12 of the total surplus. In contrast, the Shapley values are such
that the gains from trade accruing to each worker and to the firm are equal to a fraction
1( + 1) of the total surplus. Therefore, the equilibrium wages diﬀer from the Shapley
values for a particular realization of the ordering of workers, as well as in expectation across
any distribution of orderings.
The literature has proposed several extensive-form bargaining games that implement (in
expectation) the Shapley values as a Subgame Perfect Equilibrium. Gul (1986) considers
a game with  agents, each holding an asset that can be fruitfully used in production in
conjunction with the others. Trade occurs through a sequence of bilateral random meetings.
When two agents meet, one of them is randomly selected to make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to
the other. If the oﬀer is accepted, the buyer remains in the market and the seller exits. If the
oﬀer is rejected, both agents remain in the market. The game ends when one agent acquires
all the assets. While this game does implement the Shapley values, it does not conform to
the structure of a typical labor market. Indeed, in the context of a labor market, the game
implies that sometimes a worker sells his labor to another worker, and that at other times a
firm sells its capital to a worker.
Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) consider a game with  agents. At each round, one of the
agents is randomly chosen to propose an allocation. If all the other agents agree to the
proposed allocation, the game ends and the allocation is implemented. If one or more of the
other agents rejects the proposed allocation, the game continues. With some probability, the
agent who proposed the allocation that was rejected leaves the game. With complementary
probability, the agent remains in the game. In either case, another agent is randomly chosen
to propose an allocation. While the Hart Mas-Colell game implements the Shapley values,
it does not represent a realistic description of the bargaining process between a firm and
its employees. Indeed, according to this game, there would be instances in which a worker
4

proposes a wage not only for himself, but also for all of his coworkers.
More recently, De Fontenay and Gans (2014) propose a non-cooperative pairwise bargaining game between agents in a network. The setting is very general, allowing for externalities
and incomplete networks. Each agent bargains bilaterally with every other agent to whom
he is connected via the network. He does not carry out these negotiations by himself, but
rather delegates a diﬀerent negotiator to each pairwise negotiation. These negotiations take
place simultaneously and according to the protocol of Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky
(1986). Delegates are given instructions by their delegator prior to any negotiations. During
negotiations a delegate does not receive any information about the actions taken in other
pairwise negotiations, even those conducted on behalf of their own delegator. However, if
any pairwise negotiation ends in a breakdown, this becomes public knowledge. For some
specification of the oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs, De Fontenay and Gans establish the existence of
a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium of this imperfect information game such that the payoﬀ of
each agent is related to the Myerson-Shapley value. In the absence of externalities and if
the network is complete, it reduces to the Shapley value. The delegated-negotiator model
appears appropriate for negotiations between firms, although even in this setting the absence of any communication between delegates of the same firm has been pointed to as a
weakness (see, e.g., Crawford and Yurukoglu 2012). In the labor market context, however,
the assumption that the firm uses a diﬀerent negotiator for each employee and that these
negotiators do not communicate unless there is a breakdown is less appealing.
The above observations motivate the second part of the paper. There we introduce the
Rolodex game, a novel extensive-form bargaining game between a firm and its workers that
follows a reasonable protocol with perfect information and that, under some mild restrictions,
has a unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium where the workers’ wages and the firm’s profit
coincide with the Shapley values.
The Rolodex game includes a firm and  workers, who are initially placed in some order
from 1 to . The game proceeds as a finite sequence of pairwise bargaining sessions between
the firm and one of the workers. Each bargaining session involves the same protocol. The
worker makes a wage oﬀer. If the firm accepts the oﬀer, it moves onto bargaining with
the worker who, among those who have yet to reach an agreement, is next in the order. If
the firm rejects the oﬀer, the negotiation breaks down with some probability. Otherwise,
the negotiation continues with the firm making a counteroﬀer. If the worker accepts the
counteroﬀer, the firm moves onto bargaining with the next worker. If the worker rejects
the counteroﬀer, the negotiation breaks down with some probability. Otherwise, the worker
5

moves to the end of the line of workers who have yet to reach an agreement. The firm enters
a bargaining session with the worker who is now first among those without an agreement.
Whenever there is a breakdown, the worker exits the game and the whole bargaining process
starts over with one less worker. When the firm reaches an agreement with all the workers
who are still in the game, the bargaining process comes to an end. We refer to this as
the Rolodex game because the firm cycles through the workers without agreement, rather
than bargaining with each one of them until it either reaches an agreement or there is a
breakdown.
We show that, under some mild restrictions, there is a unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium to the Rolodex game. In this equilibrium, each worker earns the same wage and the
common wage is equal to the worker’s Shapley value. There is a simple intuition behind these
results. Whenever a worker rejects the counteroﬀer of the firm, he becomes the last worker
in line. Hence, a worker at any position in the line follows the same acceptance strategy as
the last worker in the line, even though the firm’s marginal cost from paying him a higher
wage is lower than the firm’s marginal cost from paying the last worker a higher wage. For
this reason, all workers earn the same wage as the last one. Moreover, the wage of the last
worker is such that his gains from trade are one half of the total surplus net of the wage of
the other workers. When these two properties are put together, it is immediate to show that
each worker and the firm capture a fraction 1( + 1) of the total surplus. These payoﬀs are
indeed the Shapley values.

2

The Stole and Zwiebel Game

2.1

Environment and Preliminaries

We begin by describing the extensive form of the bargaining game proposed by Stole and
Zwiebel (1996a). We shall refer to it as the SZ game. The players in the SZ game are a
firm and  ≥ 1 workers. If the firm employs  ∈ {0 1 } of the  workers and pays them
wages 1 , 2 , . . .  , its payoﬀ is  − 1 − 2 −  , where  denotes the value of the
output produced by the firm with  employees. We assume that  is strictly increasing and
concave in , i.e.   +1 and +1 −   +2 − +1 for  = 0 1 2  Workers are ex-ante
identical. If a worker is hired by the firm at the wage , his payoﬀ is . If the worker is not
hired by the firm, his payoﬀ is  ≥ 0, where  might represent the value of employment at
some other firm or the value of unemployment.
The workers are placed in some arbitrary, but fixed order from 1 to . The game consists
6

of a finite sequence of bilateral bargaining sessions between the firm and one of the workers.
The game starts with a bargaining session between the firm and the first worker in the order.
The bargaining session may end either with an agreement over the worker’s wage or with a
breakdown. If the bargaining session ends with an agreement, the firm enters a bargaining
session with the next worker in the order. If the bargaining session ends with a breakdown,
the worker permanently exits the game. In this case, the bargaining game starts over, in the
sense that all the previous agreements between the firm and the workers are erased and the
firm enters a bargaining session with the worker who, among those still in the game, is first
in the order. The game ends when the firm reaches an agreement with all the workers who
are still in the game. When this happens, the firm pays the agreed upon wage to each of
these workers and production takes place.
Each bargaining session follows the same alternating-oﬀer protocol as in Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1986, henceforth BRW). The session begins with the worker making
a wage oﬀer to the firm. If the firm accepts the oﬀer, the session ends and the firm goes onto
bargaining with the next worker in the order. If the firm rejects the oﬀer, the negotiation
breaks down with probability  and continues with probability 1 − , with  ∈ (0 1). If the
negotiation continues, the firm makes a counteroﬀer to the worker. If the worker accepts
the counteroﬀer, the bargaining session ends. Otherwise, the negotiation breaks down with
probability  and continues with probability 1 − . If the negotiation does not break down,
the bargaining session continues with the worker and the firm alternating in making wage
oﬀers until there is either an acceptance or a breakdown.
As in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), we shall focus on Subgame Perfect Equilibria (henceforth, SPE). In order to characterize the set of SPE of the SZ game, it is useful to recall the
solution to the BRW game when an increase in the wage transfers utility from the firm to
the worker at a constant rate. When an increase in the wage transfers utility 1 for 1, we are
in the canonical case of perfectly transferable utility. When an increase in the wage transfers
utility at a rate diﬀerent than 1 for 1, we say that utility is non-perfectly transferable. We
are interested in this distinction because, as we shall see in the next subsection, the mistake
in the proof of Theorem 2 of Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) is to apply the solution of the BRW
game with perfectly transferable utility to an environment where utility is not transferred 1
for 1.
Lemma 1: Consider the BRW alternating-oﬀer game between a firm and a worker. The
payoﬀ to the worker in case of agreement at the wage  is , and the payoﬀ to the worker
in case of breakdown is . The payoﬀ to the firm in case of agreement at the wage  is
 −  − (), where () =  −  and  ∈ [0 1], and the payoﬀ to the firm in case of
7

breakdown is . (i) If  −  −  − ()  0, any SPE is such that the firm and the worker do
not reach an agreement; (ii) If  −  −  − () ≥ 0, the unique SPE2 is such that the firm
and the worker immediately reach an agreement over the wage
 =+

1
[ −  −  − ()] 
(2 − )(1 − )

Proof : The result follows immediately from Proposition 4.2 in Muthoo (1999).

(1)

¥

A few comments about Lemma 1 are in order. When  = 0, we are in the perfectly
transferable utility case where a one dollar increase in the wage lowers the payoﬀ of the
firm by 1 and raises the payoﬀ of the worker by 1. When   0, we are in the imperfectly
transferable utility case, where a one dollar increase in the wage lowers the payoﬀ of the firm
by 1 − , and raises the payoﬀ of the worker by 1. For any  ∈ [0 1], any SPE of the game
is such that the firm and the worker do not reach an agreement if there are no gains from
trade, i.e. if  −  −  − ()  0. If the gains from trade are positive, i.e.  −  −  − () ≥ 0,
the unique SPE is such that the firm and the worker immediately agree to the wage in (1).
Given this wage, the gains from trade accruing to the worker and the firm are, respectively,
given by
1
[ −  −  − ()],
− =
(2 − )(1 − )
(2)
1−
 −  − () −  =
[ −  −  − ()].
2−
As the probability of breakdown  goes to zero, the solution to the BRW game coincides
with the axiomatic Nash bargaining solution. In fact, the axiomatic Nash bargaining solution
is given by the wage that maximizes the product of the worker’s gains from trade and the
firm’s gains from trade, i.e.
max[ − ][ −  −  − ()]


(3)

The solution to the maximization problem in (3) is
 =+

1
[ −  −  − ()] 
2(1 − )

2

(4)

To be precise, there are multiple SPE of the BRW game when the gains from trade are zero. All of the
SPEs are payoﬀ equivalent, but some of them involve agreement and some do not. For the remainder of the
Section, we restrict attention to the SPE in which agreement takes place instantaneously when the gains
from trade are zero.

8

Given the above wage, the gains from trade accruing to the worker and the firm are, respectively, given by
1
[ −  −  − ()],
−=
2(1 − )
(5)
1
 −  − () −  = [ −  −  − ()].
2
It is immediate to see that, in the limit for  going to zero, the outcome (1) and the payoﬀs
(2) of the BRW bargaining game coincides with the outcome (4) and the payoﬀs (5) of
axiomatic Nash bargaining.
The above results are all very well known. However, we wanted to repeat them here to
point out the following fact. When utility is perfectly transferable, the limit of the solution
to the BRW game for  → 0 (as well as the axiomatic Nash bargaining solution) is such that
the gains from trade accruing to the firm are equal to the gains from trade accruing to the
worker. When utility is not perfectly transferable, the solution to the BRW game (as well
as the axiomatic Nash bargaining solution) is such that the ratio of the gains accruing to
the worker to those accruing to the firm is equal to 1(1 − ), which is diﬀerent than 1 and
strictly increasing in . Intuitively, the marginal benefit to the worker from being paid an
extra dollar is 1, and the marginal cost to the firm from paying the worker an extra dollar is
1 − . The higher is , the lower is the firm’s marginal cost relative to the worker’s marginal
benefit, the stronger is the worker’s bargaining position and, hence, his relative gains from
trade. Unless the marginal cost and the marginal benefit are equal, i.e.  = 0, the gains
from trade accruing to the worker are diﬀerent than those accruing to the firm.

2.2

SZ Game with Two Workers

Let us begin the analysis by introducing some notation. We shall refer to Γ (0) as the
subgame in which the firm is left with  workers, it has yet to reach an agreement with all
of the workers, and it is about to enter a bargaining session with the first one in line. We
denote with   the payoﬀ to the firm in this game, and with  the payoﬀ to the -th of
 workers. Clearly, the SZ game between the firm and  workers is the subgame Γ (0). We
shall refer to Γ () as the subgame in which there are  workers left in the game,  −  of
them have reached an agreement with the firm for wages summing up to ,  workers have
yet to reach an agreement with the firm, and the firm is about to start a bargaining session

() the equilibrium wage of the -th
with the first of those  workers. We denote with 
of the  workers without agreement, and we denote with  () the sum of wages of the 
workers without agreement.
9

In order to gain some intuition, we study the SZ game with two workers. We solve the
game backwards. First, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ11 (0) in which, after
a breakdown with one of the workers, the firm enters a bargaining session with the other
one. If the bargaining session ends with the firm and the worker agreeing to the wage ,
the payoﬀ to the firm is 1 − , and the payoﬀ to the worker is . If the bargaining session
ends with breakdown, the payoﬀ to the firm is 0 , and the payoﬀ to the worker is . In either
case, when the bargaining session ends so does the subgame. The subgame is the same as
the BRW game and we can characterize its outcome using Lemma 1. In particular, assuming
that the gains from trade 1 − 0 −  are positive, the unique SPE of the subgame is such
that the firm and the worker immediately reach an agreement over the wage
11 =  +

1
[1 − 0 − ] .
2−

(6)

1−
[1 − 0 − ] .
2−

(7)

In turn, this implies that the firm’s equilibrium payoﬀ of the subgame is
 1 = 0 +

When bargaining with the only worker left in the game, the marginal cost to the firm from
paying the worker an extra dollar and the marginal benefit to the worker from being paid
an extra dollar are both equal to 1. Hence, utility is perfectly transferrable and the ratio
between the gains from trade accruing to the worker, 11 − , relative to those accruing to
the firm,  1 − 0 , is equal to 1(1 − ), which as discussed in the comments to Lemma 1,
converges to 1 in the limit for  → 0.
Second, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ21 (1 ) in which, after reaching an
agreement with the first worker over some wage 1 , the firm enters a bargaining session with
the second worker. If the bargaining session terminates with the firm and the second worker
agreeing to the wage 2 , the game comes to an end. In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm
is 2 − 1 − 2 and the payoﬀ to the second worker is 2 . If the bargaining session ends
with breakdown, the second worker exits, all previous agreements are erased and the firm
enters a bargaining session with the one remaining worker. In this case, the payoﬀ to the
firm is given by 1 in (7) and the payoﬀ to the second worker is . Overall, the bargaining
session between the firm and the second worker has the same protocol and payoﬀ structure
as the BWR game and, hence, we can characterize its equilibrium outcome using Lemma 1.
In particular, if 1  2 −  1 − , any SPE involves a breakdown between the firm and the
second worker. If 1 ≤ 2 −  1 − , the unique SPE is such that the firm and the second
worker immediately reach an agreement over the wage
2
(1 ) =  +
11

1
[2 − 1 −  1 − ] .
2−
10

(8)

When the firm has yet to reach an agreement with only one worker, the marginal cost to
the firm from paying the worker an extra dollar and the marginal benefit to the worker
from being paid an extra dollar are both equal to 1. Hence, utility is perfectly transferrable
2
(1 ) − , and those
and the ratio between the gains from trade accruing to the worker, 11
2
accruing to the firm, 2 − 1 − 11 (1 ) −  1 , is equal to 1(1 − ), which again converges to
1 in the limit for  → 0.
Notice that the outcome of the bargaining session between the firm and the second worker
in (8) depends on 1 , i.e. the wage agreed upon by the firm and the first worker. In fact,
while 1 does not aﬀect the firm’s payoﬀ in case of disagreement with the second worker (as
in this case, the firm will renegotiate the wage of the first worker), it does negatively aﬀect
the firm’s payoﬀ in case of agreement with the second worker (as, in this case, the wage 1
will be paid out). For this reason, the equilibrium wage of the second worker depends on
2
(1 ) paid to the second workers–which is also equal to the
1 . In particular, the wage 11
2
sum of wages 1 (1 ) paid by the firm to the workers following the first one–is a function of
1 of the form
(9)
21 (1 ) = 1 −  1 1 ,
where the coeﬃcient  1 is given by
1 =

1
.
2−

Third, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ22 (0) in which the firm has yet to
reach an agreement with both workers. To this aim, consider the bargaining session between
the firm and the first worker. If the firm and the first worker agree to a wage 1 ≤ 2 − 1 −,
2
(1 ) and the game comes
the firm and the second worker immediately agree to the wage 11
2
to an end. In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm is 2 − 1 − 1 (1 ) and the payoﬀ to the first
worker is 1 . If the firm and the first worker agree to a wage 1  2 −  1 − , the firm
and the second worker do not reach an agreement. In this case, the firm and the first worker
renegotiate and achieve payoﬀs of  1 and 1 respectively. Finally, if the firm and the first
worker do not reach an agreement, the firm is left with the second worker only. In this case,
the firm achieves a payoﬀ of  1 and the first worker achieves a payoﬀ of .
The bargaining session between the firm and the first worker does not have the same
payoﬀ structure as the BRW game, because the wage that the firm and the first worker
agree upon does not aﬀect their payoﬀs if it leads to a breakdown between the firm and the
second worker. However, assume that, whenever indiﬀerent, the firm chooses to reject any
wage demand from the first worker that would lead to a breakdown with the second worker
11

and, similarly, the firm chooses not to make any counteroﬀer that would lead to a breakdown
with the second worker. Under this tie-breaking assumption, we show that the outcome of
the bargaining session is the same outcome as in BRW (see Appendix A). In particular, as
long as 2 −  − 21 () −  1 ≥ 0 or equivalently 2 −  1 − 2 ≥ 0, the unique SPE is such that
the firm and the first worker immediately agree to the wage
21 =  +

¤
1 £
2 − 1 −  − 21 () 
1−

(10)

In the bargaining session between the firm and the first of two workers, utility is not
perfectly transferable as  1  0. Indeed, the first worker’s marginal benefit from receiving a
higher wage is 1, while the firm’s marginal cost is (1 − )(2 − ), as paying the first worker
an extra dollar reduces the gains from trade between the firm and the second worker by a
dollar and, in turn, the second worker’s wage by 1(2 − ) dollars. Therefore, the outcome
of the bargaining session is such that the gains from trade accruing to the worker are not
equal to those accruing to the firm. Instead, the ratio between the gains from trade accruing
to the worker, 21 − , and those accruing to the firm, 2 − 21 − 21 (21 ) −  1 , is given by
(2 − )(1 − )2 , which converges to 2 in the limit for  → 0.
Now we can summarize the outcome of the SZ game between the firm and two workers.
If 2 −  1 − 2 ≥ 0, the unique SPE is such that the firm reaches an immediate agreement
with the first worker for the wage 21 in (10). Since 21 ≤ 2 −  1 − , the firm then
2
(21 ). After
reaches an immediate agreement with the second worker for a wage 22 = 11
2
substituting out 1 () in (10), we find that the wage (and payoﬀ) of the first worker is
21 =  +

1
[2 − 1 − 2] .
2−

(11)

In turn, we can solve for the wage (and payoﬀ) of the second worker as
22 =  +

1−
[2 −  1 − 2] .
(2 − )2

(12)

Finally, we can solve for the payoﬀ of the firm as
2

= 2 − 21 − 22
¶2
µ
1−
= 1 +
[2 − 1 − 2]
2−

12

(13)

In the limit for  → 0, the payoﬀs to the workers and the firm are given by
21
22
2

=  + 12 [2 −  1 − 2]
=  + 12 [2 − 1 − ] + 14 [1 − 0 − ],
=  + 14 [2 −  1 − 2]
=  + 14 [2 − 1 − ] + 18 [1 − 0 − ],

(14)

=  1 + 14 [2 −  1 − 2]
= 0 + 14 [2 − 1 − ] + 58 [1 − 0 − ].

Several remarks about the payoﬀs in (14) are in order. First, the equilibrium wage of the
first worker is higher than the equilibrium wage of the second worker. This is intuitive. If
the firm pays the first worker an extra dollar, the gains from trade between the firm and the
second worker will be 1 dollar lower and, hence, the wage of the second worker will be 50
cents lower. Overall, the marginal cost to the firm from paying the worker an extra dollar
is only 50 cents. In contrast, the marginal cost to the firm from paying the second worker
an extra dollar is 1 full dollar. Therefore, the utility between the firm and the first worker
is transferred at the rate of 1 to 2, while the utility between the firm and the second worker
is transferred at the rate of 1 to 1. For this reason, the first worker captures twice as much
total surplus than the second worker, where total surplus is defined as 2 −  1 − 2.
Second, the payoﬀs in (14) are diﬀerent from the Shapley values, which are given by3
2∗
∗2

=  + 13 [2 −  1 − 2]
=  + 13 [2 − 1 − ] + 16 [1 − 0 − ],

= 1 + 13 [2 −  1 − 2]
= 0 + 13 [2 − 1 − ] + 23 [1 − 0 − ].

(15)

The equilibrium payoﬀs are not only diﬀerent from the Shapley values in realization, as
in equilibrium the two workers receive diﬀerent payoﬀs even though their Shapley values
are identical. The equilibrium payoﬀs are also diﬀerent from the Shapley values after taking
expectations over random orderings of workers, as for every realized ordering the equilibrium
payoﬀ to the firm is  2 and diﬀerent from its Shapley value ∗2 . Indeed, the first worker
captures one half of the total surplus and the second worker captures one fourth of the total
surplus and, hence, the firm’s payoﬀ is equal to one fourth of the total surplus. In contrast,
the Shapley value of the firm is such that the firm captures one third of the total surplus.
Finally, Theorem 2 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) states that the unique SPE of the
bargaining game is such that the payoﬀs to the firm and to the workers are given by (15).
However, the theorem is incorrect because we have established that the unique SPE of the SZ
3

Theorem 4 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) proves that the Shapley values can be written as in (15).

13

game features the payoﬀs in (14), which are diﬀerent from the Shapley values in (15).4 The
mistake in the proof of Theorem 2 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) is the failure to recognize
that the wage negotiated by the firm and a worker aﬀects the value to the firm from reaching
an agreement with the following workers and, in turn, it aﬀects the following workers’ wages.
For this reason, the marginal cost to the firm from paying a worker a higher wage is less
than the marginal benefit to the worker from being paid a higher wage. Hence, utility is
not perfectly transferable and the solution to the BRW bargaining session (as well as the
axiomatic Nash bargaining solution) does not equate the gains from trade accruing to the
worker to those accruing to the firm, which is what is incorrectly assumed in the proof of
Theorem 2 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a).

2.3

SZ Game with n Workers

The qualitative properties of the outcome of the SZ game with two workers generalize to
the case of an arbitrary number of workers. The following proposition contains the characterization of the unique SPE of the subgame Γ (0) in which the firm has yet to reach an
agreement with all of the  workers remaining in the game.
Proposition 1: Consider the subgame Γ (0). (i) If  −  −1 −   0, any SPE is such
that the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the  workers. The payoﬀ to the firm
is given by   =  −1 , with 0 = 0 . (ii) If  −  −1 −  ≥ 0, the unique SPE is such that
the firm immediately reaches an agreement with all of the  workers. The payoﬀ to the firm
is given by
¶
µ
1−
[ −  −1 − ] , with  0 = 0 .
(16)
  =  −1 +
2−
The payoﬀ to the -th worker is given by
´
³X−1
i
1 h
 −
 −  −1 − ( + 1 − ) .
 =  +
=1
2−

(17)

For  = 1, Proposition 1 holds as the payoﬀs in (16) and (17) boil down to the equilibrium
payoﬀs of the BRW game. For  = 2, Proposition 1 holds as the payoﬀs in (16) and (17)
are those derived in the previous subsection. In what follows we are going to prove that
Proposition 1 holds for a generic  by induction. That is, we are going to prove that if the
4

To be more precise, we proved that there is a unique SPE in which, when indiﬀerent, the firm rejects
any oﬀer from the first worker (and does not make any counteroﬀer to the first worker) that induces to a
breakdown in negotiations with the second worker. However, it is easy to show that the payoﬀs in Stole and
Zwiebel (1996a) do not constitute an SPE (see Appendix B).

14

proposition holds for the subgame Γ (0), it also holds for the subgame Γ+1
+1 (0) where the
firm has yet to reach an agreement with all of the  + 1 workers left in the game.
Central to the characterization of the equilibrium of Γ+1
+1 (0) is the following lemma.
Lemma 2: Consider the subgame Γ+1
 () in which the firm has  + 1 workers, it has yet
to reach an agreement with  ≤  + 1 workers, and it has agreed to wages summing up to 
with the first  + 1 −  workers. (i) If +1 −  −   −   0, any SPE is such that the firm
does not reach an agreement with all the  remaining workers; (ii) If +1 −  −   −  ≥ 0,
the unique SPE is such that the firm reaches an immediate agreement with each of the 
remaining workers. The sum of the wages paid to the  remaining workers is
"
¶ #
µ
1
−

[+1 −  −  − ] .
(18)
+1
 () =  + 1 −
2−
For  = 1, Lemma 2 holds as the payoﬀs in (18) are the same as those in the BRW game.
We prove that Lemma 2 holds for any  ≤  + 1 by induction. That is, we prove that,
if Lemma 2 holds for some arbitrary  ≤ , then it also holds for  + 1. To this aim, we
consider the subgame Γ+1
+1 (), in which the firm has  + 1 employees, it has yet to reach an
agreement with  +1 of them and it has agreed to wages summing up to  with the first −
workers. As usual, we characterize the solution to this subgame by backward induction.
First, consider the subgame Γ (0) in which, after a breakdown in negotiations between
the firm and the first of the  + 1 workers without agreement, bargaining starts over between
the firm and the  workers left in the game. Since we have conjectured that Proposition 1
holds when the firm has  workers, the SPE payoﬀ of the firm in this subgame is uniquely
determined and given by   .
Second, consider the subgame Γ+1
 ( + 1 ) in which, after the firm has reached an
agreement at some wage 1 with the first worker without an agreement, the firm starts
bargaining with the other  workers without an agreement. Since we conjectured that Lemma
2 holds when the firm has  + 1 workers and has yet to reach an agreement with  of them,
there is a unique SPE to this subgame. In particular, if 1  +1
+1 () ≡ +1 −  −   − ,
the SPE is such that the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the  remaining
workers. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is   . If 1 ≤ +1
+1 (), the SPE is such that the
firm immediately reaches an agreement with all of the  remaining workers. In this case, the
firm’s payoﬀ is +1 −  − 1 − +1
 ( + 1 ).
Third, we characterize the solution to the subgame Γ+1
+1 (). Consider the bargaining
session between the firm and the first of the  + 1 workers without an agreement. If the firm
15

and the worker do not reach an agreement, the worker exits the game and the firm enters
the subgame Γ (0). In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm is   and the payoﬀ to the worker
is . If the firm and the worker agree to a wage 1  +1
+1 (), the firm enters the subgame
+1
Γ ( + 1 ) with negative gains from trade. In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm is   and
the payoﬀ to the worker is the wage earned by the ( − )-th worker in the game with 
workers. Finally, if the firm and the worker agree to a wage 1 ≤ +1
+1 (), the firm enters
+1
the subgame Γ ( + 1 ) with positive gains from trade. In this case, the firm reaches an
agreement with all the other workers, the payoﬀ to the firm is +1 −  − 1 − +1
 ( + 1 )
+1
and the payoﬀ to the worker is 1 . Notice that  ( + 1 ) is of the form
+1
 ( + 1 ) =  −   1 ,

(19)

where the coeﬃcient   is given by
 = 1 −

µ

1−
2−

¶

.

The bargaining session between the firm and the first of the  + 1 workers without
agreement does not have the same payoﬀ structure as the BRW game because, if the firm
and the worker agree to a wage 1  +1
+1 (), their payoﬀs do not depend on 1 . However,
assume that, whenever indiﬀerent, the firm chooses to reject any wage demand from the
first worker that would lead to a breakdown with the second worker and, similarly, the
firm chooses not to make any counteroﬀer that would lead to a breakdown with the second
worker. Under this tie-breaking assumption, we show that the outcome of the bargaining
session is the same outcome as in BRW (see Appendix A). It then follows from Lemma 1
that, if +1 −  −  −  − +1
 ( + )  0 or equivalently +1 −  −   − ( + 1)  0,
any SPE is such that the firm and the worker do not reach an agreement. In contrast, if
+1 −  −   −  − +1
 ( + ) ≥ 0 or equivalently +1 −  −   − ( + 1) ≥ 0, the unique
SPE is such that firm and the first worker immediately reach an agreement over the wage
+1
() =  +
+11

£
¤
1
+1 −  −   −  − +1
 ( + ) 
(2 − )(1 −   )

(20)

In the bargaining session between the firm and the first of  + 1 workers without agreement, utility is not perfectly transferable. Indeed, the first worker’s marginal benefit from
receiving a higher wage is 1, while the firm’s marginal cost from paying him a higher wage
is (1 − ) (2 − ) , as paying the first worker an extra dollar reduces the sum of wages paid
to the  following workers by   = 1 − (1 − ) (2 − ) dollars. Therefore, the outcome of
16

the bargaining session does not equate the gains from trade accruing to the worker to those
accruing to the firm. Instead, as discusses in the comments to Lemma 1, the ratio between
the worker’s gains from trade and the firm’s is (2 − ) (1 − )+1 , which converges to 2 in
the limit for  → 0.
We can now summarize the characterization of the subgame Γ+1
+1 (). If +1 −  −   −
( + 1)  0, any SPE is such that the firm and the first worker do not reach an agreement.
If +1 −−  −( +1) ≥ 0, any SPE is such that the firm and the first worker immediately
+1
() in (20). Substituting +1
reach an agreement over the wage +11
 ( + ) into (20), we
+1
can write the wage +11 () as
+1
() =  +
+11

1
[+1 −  −  − ( + 1)] .
2−

(21)

+1
() ≤ +1
Since +11
+1 (), the firm then reaches an immediate agreement with the remaining
 workers for wages totaling up to
"
µ
¶ #
1
−

1
−

+1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] 
1−
(22)
+1
 ( + +11 ()) =  +
2−
2−
+1
The sum +1
+1 () between the wage paid by the firm to the first worker, +11 (), and the
+1
wages paid to the remaining  workers, +1
 ( + +11 ()), is equal to
"
¶+1 #
µ
1
−

[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] 
(23)
+1
+1 () = ( + 1) + 1 −
2−

These results establish that, if Lemma 2 holds for some  ≤ , it also holds for  + 1. Since
the lemma trivially holds for  = 1, this means that it holds for any generic  ≤  + 1. We
have thus completed the proof of Lemma 2.
Letting  =  + 1 and  = 0 in Lemma 2, we can characterize the payoﬀs of the subgame
In particular, if +1 −   − ( + 1)  0, any SPE is such that the firm does not
reach an agreement with all of its  + 1 workers. In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm is given
by  +1 =   . If +1 −   − ( + 1) ≥ 0, the unique SPE is such that the firm immediately
reaches an agreement with all of its  + 1 workers. In this case, the payoﬀ to the firm is
given by
¶+1
µ
1−
[+1 −   − ( + 1)] .
(24)
 +1 =   +
2−

Γ+1
+1 (0).

The payoﬀ to the -th worker is given by
´
³X−1
i
1 h
+1 −
+1 −   − ( + 2 − ) .
+1 =  +
=1
2−
17

(25)

The above results show that, if Proposition 1 holds for some , it also holds for  + 1. Since
the proposition holds for  = 1, this means that it holds for any generic  = 2 3... We have
thus completed the proof of Proposition 1.
We are now in the position to characterize the solution of the SZ game in the limit as
the probability of breakdown goes to zero.
Theorem 1: (Stole and Zwiebel game). Consider the SZ game between the firm and 
workers. Assume that the total surplus is positive, i.e.  −  −1 −   0. In the limit for
 → 0, the unique SPE of the game is such that the payoﬀ   to the firm is given by the
diﬀerence equation
  =  −1 +

1
[ −  −1 − ] , for  = 1 2 ,
2

(26)

with initial condition 0 = 0 . The payoﬀ  to the -th of  workers is given by
 =  +

1
[ −  −1 − ] .
2

(27)

Proof : It is straightforward to show that if  −  −1 −   0 then  −  −1 −   0 for
 = 1 2  − 1. From this observation and Proposition 1, it follows that   is given by (16)
for  = 1 2  and  is given by (17) for  = 1 2 . Taking the limit of (16) and (17)
for  → 0, we obtain (26) and (27).
¥
Theorem 1 shows that the properties of the solution to the SZ game with 2 workers
generalize nicely to the game with  workers. First, the worker’s payoﬀs are decreasing with
respect to the order in which they bargain with the firm. In general, the -th worker to
bargain with the firm captures a share of the total surplus that is twice as large as the one
captured by the ( + 1)-th worker. This is intuitive. If the firm pays the -th worker an extra
dollar, the gains from trade between the firm and the remaining  −  workers decline and
the wage of all of these workers falls by a total of 1 − 12− dollars. Hence, the firm’s cost
from paying the -th worker an extra dollar is 12− . If the firm pays the ( + 1)-th worker
an extra dollar, the gains from trade between the firm and the remaining  −  − 1 workers
decline and the wage of all of these workers falls by a total of 1 − 12−−1 dollars. Hence,
the firm’s cost from paying the ( + 1)-th worker an extra dollar is 12−−1 . Since the cost
to the firm from paying the -th worker an extra dollar is half of the cost from paying the
( + 1)-th worker an extra dollar, the -th worker captures twice as much of the total surplus
as the ( + 1)-th worker.
18

Second, the payoﬀs in (26)-(27) are diﬀerent from the Shapley values. In fact, the Shapley
value  ∗ of the firm is given by the diﬀerence equation
∗ =  ∗−1 +

¤
1 £
 −  ∗−1 −  , for  = 1 2 ,
+1

(28)

with initial condition  ∗0 = 0 . The Shapley value ∗ of each worker is given by
∗ =  +

¤
1 £
 −  ∗−1 −  .
+1

(29)

For a particular ordering of workers, the payoﬀs in the SZ game are diﬀerent from the Shapley
value, as every worker is paid a diﬀerent wage even though they all have the same Shapley
value. Moreover, in the expectation over any distribution of orderings, the payoﬀs in the SZ
game are diﬀerent from the Shapley values, as   is diﬀerent from ∗ . More precisely, in
the SZ game, the first worker captures half of the total surplus, the second worker captures
one fourth of the total surplus, and so on and so forth. The firm is left with 12 of the
total surplus. In contrast, the Shapley values are such that each worker captures a fraction
1( + 1) of the total surplus and so does the firm.
Finally, the payoﬀs in (26)-(27) are diﬀerent from those reported by Stole and Zwiebel
(1996a). In fact, Theorem 2 in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) states that the unique SPE of
the bargaining game is such that the equilibrium payoﬀs are equal to the Shapley values.
However, Theorem 1 above shows that the unique SPE is such that the equilibrium payoﬀs
are those in (26)-(27), which diﬀer from the Shapley values. Therefore, Theorem 2 in Stole
and Zwiebel is incorrect for every number of workers strictly greater than one.5
Even though the SZ game does not deliver the Shapley values as equilibrium payoﬀs, the
solution of the game is of some interest as the protocol is quite natural. Hence, it is useful
to discuss some of its features. It is easy to verify by induction that, for any number of
workers , the payoﬀ to the firm in the SZ game is strictly smaller than the Shapley value.
This is intuitive because, in the SZ game, the first worker can hold up the firm and capture
some of its gains from trade with the other workers and, hence, obtain a wage that is higher
than his expected marginal contribution (i.e., his Shapley value). Next, notice that, if the
firm chooses how many workers to hire and wages are set according to the SZ game, it will


choose  such that6   −  −1 = 0 or, equivalently, such that  −   −  = 0. In
5

More precisely, we proved that there is a unique SPE in which, when indiﬀerent, the firm rejects any oﬀer
from the first worker (and does not make any counteroﬀer to the first worker) that induces to a breakdown
in negotiations with the second worker. It is easy to show that the payoﬀs in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) do
not constitute an SPE.

6
Following Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), we use the notation  − −1 = 0 as shorthand for  −−1 ≥ 0
and +1 −  ≤ 0.

19

contrast, if wages are given by the worker’s Shapley values, the firm will choose  ∗ such


that ∗ ∗ −  ∗ ∗ −1 = 0 or, equivalently, such that  ∗ −  ∗ ∗ −  ∗  = 0. Since     ∗ , it
follows immediately that the firm will hire more workers if the wages are set according to
the SZ game. In turn, we know from Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), that if the wages are given
by the Shapley values, the firm will hire more workers than it is eﬃcient as hiring an extra
worker not only increases output, but it also lowers the wage of the inframarginal workers.
Thus, there will be even more overhiring when wages are set according to the SZ game than
when they are set given by the workers’ Shapley values.

3

The Rolodex Game

3.1

Environment and Preliminaries

In this section, we propose a novel bargaining game between a firm and multiple workers,
which we refer to as the Rolodex game. The players in the game are a firm and  identical
workers. If the firm employs  workers and pays them wages 1 , 2 , .... , its payoﬀ is
 − 1 − 2 −  , where  denotes the value of the output produced by the firm with
 employees. We assume that  is strictly increasing and concave in , i.e.   +1 and
+1 −   +2 − +1 for  = 0 1 2 . If a worker is hired by the firm at the wage ,
his payoﬀ is . If the worker is not hired by the firm, his payoﬀ is  ≥ 0, where  might
represent the value of employment at some other firm or the value of unemployment.
The workers are initially placed in some arbitrary order from 1 to . The game consists
of a finite sequence of bargaining sessions between the firm and one of the workers. The
game starts with a bargaining session between the firm and the first worker in the order.
The game ends when the firm has reached an agreement with all the workers left in the
game. When this happens, the firm pays the agreed-upon wage to each of the workers and
production takes place.
Each bargaining session involves one round of oﬀer and counteroﬀer. The session starts
with the worker making a wage oﬀer. If the firm accepts the oﬀer, the firm enters a bargaining
session with the worker who, among those that have yet to reach an agreement, is next in the
order. If the firm rejects the oﬀer, negotiations break down with probability  and continue
with probability 1 − . If negotiations break down, the worker exits the game, all past
agreements are erased and the whole bargaining process starts over with the workers who
are still in the game being placed in some random order.7 If negotiations continue, the firm
7

We assume that the remaining workers are placed in some random order only for the sake of concreteness.

20

makes a counteroﬀer. If the worker accepts the counteroﬀer, the firm enters a bargaining
session with the worker who, among those that have yet to reach an agreement, is next in
the order. If the worker rejects the oﬀer, negotiations break down with probability  and
continue with probability 1 − . If the negotiations continue, the worker takes the last place
in the order of workers who have yet to reach an agreement, and the firm enters a bargaining
session with the worker who is now first in the order among those who are still without
agreement.
It is useful to compare the Rolodex game with the SZ game. In the SZ game, a bargaining session between a firm and a worker continues until the firm and the worker reach an
agreement or until the worker exits the game. Under this bargaining protocol, the worker
can reject the firm’s counteroﬀers without consequence on his position in the line of workers.
For this reason, the worker can take advantage of the fact that his wage lowers the wage paid
by the firm to the workers who follow him and, in equilibrium, workers at the front of the line
earn higher wages than workers at the end of the line. In the Rolodex game, a worker moves
to the end of the line if he rejects the firm’s counteroﬀer. Under this bargaining protocol,
any worker is in the same strategic position as the last worker in the line. As we shall see
in the next pages, this implies that every worker ends up earning the same wage and this
common wage is the Shapley value.
It is also useful to compare the Rolodex game with the bargaining games in Gul (1986),
Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) and De Fontenay and Gans (2014). The games in Gul and
Hart and Mas-Colell have equilibrium payoﬀs equal to the Shapley values. However, in the
protocol of both of these games, the firm and each of the workers have a symmetric role. In
the Gul game, each bargaining session involves two randomly selected players, which may be
a worker and the firm–in which case the firm buys the labor of the worker–but also may be
two workers–in which case one worker buys the labor of the other worker. In the Hart and
Mas-Colell game, each player has an equal probability of proposing an entire allocation. This
player may be the firm–in which case, the firm oﬀers a wage to each of the workers–but
it also may be a worker–in which case, the worker demands a wage for himself and for his
coworkers. In contrast, in the protocol of the Rolodex game, the firm and the worker have
diﬀerent roles. In particular, every bilateral bargaining session involves the firm and one of
the workers, and the object of the bargain is the wage of the worker at hand. We believe
that the Rolodex game conforms better to a real-world labor negotiation. The game in De
All the results in this Section continue to hold if the remaining workers are placed in their original order, in
the order at the time of breakdown, or in any other order. Indeed, we do not make use of the assumption
about the workers’ ordering in any of the proofs.

21

Fontenay and Gans assumes that the firm bargains with each worker through a diﬀerent
delegate, and that the outcome of each bargain is observed only by the delegate and the
worker directly involved unless it is a breakdown.8 In contrast, in the Rolodex game, the
firm bargains directly with every worker and all the outcomes are publicly observed.

3.2

Rolodex Game with Two Workers

Let us begin the analysis of the Rolodex game by introducing some notation. We shall refer
to Γ (0) as the subgame in which the firm is left with  workers, it has yet to reach an
agreement with any of the workers, and it is about to enter a bargaining session with the
first one in line. We denote with   the payoﬀ to the firm in this game, and with  the
payoﬀ to the -th of  workers. Clearly, the Rolodex game between the firm and  workers is
the subgame Γ (0). We shall refer to Γ () as the subgame in which there are  workers left
in the game,  −  of them have reached an agreement with the firm for wages summing up
to ,  workers have yet to reach an agreement with the firm, and the firm is about to start a

() the equilibrium
bargaining session with the first of those  workers. We denote with 
wage of the -th of the  workers without agreement, and with  () the sum of wages of the
 workers without agreement.
As we did for the SZ game, we shall focus on Subgame Perfect Equilibria. Here, however,
we restrict attention to SPE with two additional properties. First, we restrict attention to
Markov SPE, i.e. SPE such that the players follow the same strategies whenever they are in
subgames with the same payoﬀ relevant states (  ). Second, we restrict attention to SPE
without delay, i.e. SPE such that, in any subgame where the gains from trade are positive,
the firm reaches an immediate agreement with all the remaining workers. For the sake of
brevity, we shall refer to the SPE with these two properties as Markov SPE.9
In order to build some intuition, it is useful to consider the Rolodex game with 2 workers.
We solve the game backwards. First, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ11 (0) in
which, after a breakdown in negotiations with one worker, the firm starts bargaining with
the other one. The subgame begins with the worker making an oﬀer. If the oﬀer is rejected
the firm makes a counteroﬀer. If the counteroﬀer is rejected, the worker moves to the end of
8

Notice also that the firm would have an incentive to hide the fact that the bargain between a delegate
and a worker ended with a breakdown.
9
The restriction to Markov SPE is common in the literature (see, e.g., Gul 1989 and Hart and Mas-Colell
1996). The restriction to SPE without delay is also common (see, e.g., Muthoo 1999). The second restriction
greatly simplifies the expositions. However, we suspect that there are no Markov SPE with delay when the
gains from trade are strictly positive.

22

the line of workers without agreement. However, since there are no other workers left, the
worker gets to make another oﬀer right away. If the worker and the firm eventually reach an
agreement at the wage , the firm’s payoﬀ is 1 −  and the worker’s payoﬀ is . If the firm
and the worker do not reach an agreement, the firm’s payoﬀ is 0 and the worker’s payoﬀ
is . The protocol described above boils down to the protocol of the BRW game. Hence,
assuming that the gains from trade 1 − 0 −  are positive, the unique (Markov) SPE of
the subgame is such that the firm and the worker immediately reach an agreement over the
wage
1
[1 − 0 − ] .
(30)
11 =  +
2−
In turn, this implies that the firm’s equilibrium payoﬀ in the subgame is
 1 = 0 +

1−
[1 − 0 − ] .
2−

(31)

Second, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ21 (1 ) in which, after the firm
and the first worker have reached an agreement at some arbitrary wage 1 , the firm starts
bargaining with the second worker. The subgame begins with the second worker making an
oﬀer. If the oﬀer is rejected, the firm makes a counteroﬀer. If the counteroﬀer is rejected,
the worker moves to the end of the line of workers who have yet to reach an agreement with
the firm. Since there are no other workers with whom the firm has yet to agree, the worker
gets to make another oﬀer right away. If the firm and the second worker eventually agree on
a wage 2 , the firm’s payoﬀ is 2 − 1 − 2 and the worker’s payoﬀ is 2 . If the firm and the
second worker do not reach an agreement, the worker exits the game and the firm enters a
bargaining session with the first worker. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is  1 and the worker’s
payoﬀ is . Overall, the protocol and the payoﬀ structure of the bargaining session between
the firm and the second worker are the same as in the BRW game. Hence, if the gains from
trade 2 −  1 − 1 −  are negative, any (Markov) SPE is such that the firm and the second
worker do not reach an agreement. If the gains from trade are positive, the unique (Markov)
SPE is such that the firm and the second worker immediately agree to the wage
2
(1 ) =  +
11

1
[2 − 1 −  1 − ] .
2−

(32)

Since the second worker is the only worker without an agreement in the Γ21 (1 ) subgame,
2
(1 ).
21 (1 ) is equal to 11
Third, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ22 (0) in which the firm has yet to
reach an agreement with both workers. To this aim, consider the bargaining session between
23

the firm and the first worker. We analyze this bargaining session backwards. That is, we
first characterize the optimal response of the worker to an arbitrary counteroﬀer of the firm.
Then, we solve for the optimal counteroﬀer of the firm. Next, we characterize the optimal
response of the firm to an arbitrary oﬀer of the worker. Finally, we solve for the optimal
oﬀer of the worker. We carry out the analysis for the case in which there are strictly positive
gains from trade, i.e. 2 −  1 −  − 21 ()  0 or, equivalently, 2 −  1 − 2  0.
As a preliminary step, we establish some properties of the wage 21 that the firm and the
first worker agree upon. First, notice that 21 must be greater than , as the worker never
finds it optimal to accept or oﬀer a wage that is lower than his outside option. Second, notice
that 21 must be smaller than 2 −  1 − . In fact, if 21  2 −  1 − , the firm would not
reach an agreement with the second worker and 21 could not be part of an SPE in which
the firm trades without delay with both employees. Third, notice that 21 must be greater
2
(21 ). To see why this is the case, note that when the firm makes a
than  + (1 − )11
2
(21 ) by rejecting
counteroﬀer, the worker can always attains a payoﬀ of  = +(1−)11
the counteroﬀer, moving to the end of the line of workers who have yet to reach an agreement,
2
(21 ). This implies that, in an SPE without delay, the firm’s
and then agree to the wage 11
payoﬀ when making a counteroﬀer cannot be greater than  = 2 −  − 21 ( ) and that
the firm will always be willing to accept any oﬀer  such that 2 −  − 21 () ≥  . Since
2 −−21 () is decreasing in  and the firm accepts any oﬀer  such that 2 −−21 () ≥  ,
the worker can always attain a payoﬀ of  . In a Markov SPE without delay, this implies
2
(21 ).
that 21 ≥  + (1 − )11
Given the preliminary results above, we can solve for the optimal response of the worker
to some arbitrary counteroﬀer by the firm. Suppose that the firm makes a counteroﬀer
 ≤ 2 −  1 −  to the worker. The worker finds it optimal to accept  if and only if
2
(21 )
 ≥  + (1 − )11

(33)

The condition above is easy to understand. The left-hand side of (33) is the worker’s payoﬀ
if he accepts the counteroﬀer of the firm. The right-hand side of (33) is the worker’s expected
payoﬀ is he rejects the counteroﬀer of the firm. With probability , there is a breakdown and
the worker exits the game. In this case, the worker’s payoﬀ is . With probability 1 − , the
worker remains in the game but moves to the end of the line of workers without agreement.
2
(21 ). In fact, the firm will reach an agreement with
In this case, the worker’s payoﬀ is 11
the next worker for a wage of 21 and, when the firm returns to bargaining with the first
2
(21 ). As we shall see
worker, there will be an immediate agreement over the wage 11
24

below, the firm never finds it optimal to make a counteroﬀer   2 −  1 − , whether the
worker accepts it or not.
The firm chooses its counteroﬀer taking as given the worker’s acceptance strategy. If the
firm makes a counteroﬀer  ≤ 2 − 1 − that satisfies (33), it attains a payoﬀ of 2 −−21 ().
In fact, the worker accepts the counteroﬀer  and the firm immediately reaches an agreement
with the next worker for the wage 21 (). If the firm makes a counteroﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 − 
that violates (33), it attains a payoﬀ of  1 +(1 −) [2 − 21 − 21 (21 )]. In fact, the worker
rejects the counteroﬀer . Then, with probability , the worker exits the game and the firm
is left with only one worker. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is  1 . With probability 1 − , the
worker remains in the game, but moves to the end of the line of workers without agreement.
In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is 2 − 21 − 21 (21 ). Finally, if the firm makes a counteroﬀer
  2 −  1 − , it attains a payoﬀ of  1 if the worker accepts the counteroﬀer, and a payoﬀ
of  1 + (1 − ) [2 − 21 − 21 (21 )] if the worker rejects the counteroﬀer.
The counteroﬀer that maximizes the payoﬀ of the firm is
2
(21 ).
 =  + (1 − )11

(34)

It is easy to show why this is the case. Recall that  ≤ 21 and 21 ≤ 2 − 1 −, and notice
that at least one inequality is strict as  = 21 = 2 −  1 −  contradicts the assumption
of strictly positive gains from trade. Since   2 − 1 −  and satisfies condition (33), the
firm’s payoﬀ from making the counteroﬀer  is
2 −  − 21 ( )

(35)

Now, consider the firm’s payoﬀ from making some alternative counteroﬀer 0 , with 0 ≤
2 − 1 − . If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0   , condition (33) is satisfied and the firm
attains a payoﬀ of
(36)
2 − 0 − 21 (0 )  2 −  − 21 ( )
If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0   , condition (33) is violated and the firm attains a
payoﬀ of
 1 + (1 − ) [2 − 21 − 21 (21 )]
≤ 2 − 21 − 21 (21 )

(37)

≤ 2 −  − 21 ( )

where at least one of the two inequalities in (37) is strict. The first inequality follows from
the fact that 2 −  − 21 () ≥ 1 for all  ≤ 2 −  1 −  and 21 ≤ 2 − 1 − . The
25

second inequality follows from the fact that 2 −  − 21 () is strictly decreasing in  and
 ≤ 21 . At least one of the two inequalities is strict, as they both hold as equalities only
when  = 21 = 2 − 1 −, which is a possibility we have already ruled out. Now, consider
the firm’s payoﬀ from making some alternative counteroﬀer 0 , with 0  2 − 1 − . If the
firm makes a counteroﬀer 0  2 −  1 −  which is accepted, it attains a payoﬀ of
1

≤  1 + (1 − ) [2 − 21 − 21 (21 )]
 2 −  − 21 ( ),

(38)

where the first inequality follows from the fact that 2 − 21 − 21 (21 ) is greater than  1 ,
and the second inequality follows from (37). If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0  2 −  1 − 
which is rejected, it attains a payoﬀ of  1 + (1 − ) [2 − 21 − 21 (21 )], which is strictly
smaller than 2 −  − 21 ( ). We have thus established that  is the counteroﬀer that
maximizes the payoﬀ to the firm.
Given the characterization of the optimal counteroﬀer  , we can find the optimal acceptance strategy of the firm to an arbitrary wage oﬀer by the worker. Suppose that the worker
makes an oﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 − . The firm finds it optimal to accept  if and only if
£
¤
2 −  − 21 () ≥ 1 + (1 − ) 2 −  − 21 ( ) .

(39)

The condition above is easy to understand. The left-hand side of (39) is the payoﬀ to
the firm from accepting the oﬀer . If the firm accepts the oﬀer of the first worker, it
starts bargaining with the second worker and immediately reaches an agreement at the wage
2
(). Hence, the firm’s payoﬀ from accepting the oﬀer  is 2 − −21 (). The right-hand
11
side of (39) is the payoﬀ to the firm from rejecting the oﬀer . If the firm rejects the oﬀer,
the worker exits with probability . In this case, the firm is left with one worker and its
payoﬀ is 1 . With probability 1 − , the worker remains in the game and the firm makes
him a counteroﬀer  . The worker accepts it and the firm and the second worker reach
2
( ). Hence, the firm’s payoﬀ from rejecting the
an immediate agreement at the wage 11
2
oﬀer  is  1 + (1 − ) [2 −  − 1 ( )]. Now, suppose that the worker makes an oﬀer
  2 −  1 − . In this case the firm rejects the oﬀer , as (38) guarantees that the firm’s
payoﬀ from rejecting,  1 +(1−) [2 −  − 21 ( )], is strictly greater than the firm’s payoﬀ
from accepting, 1 .
The worker chooses the oﬀer  taking as given the firm’s acceptance strategy. If the
worker makes an oﬀer  ≤ 2 − 1 −  that satisfies (39), the firm accepts the oﬀer and
reaches an immediate agreement with the other worker. In this case, the worker’s payoﬀ
is . If the worker makes an oﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 −  that violates (39), the firm rejects the
26

oﬀer . Then, with probability , the worker exits the game. With probability 1 − , the
firm makes the counteroﬀer  , which the worker accepts, and then it reaches an immediate
agreement with the other worker. In this case, the worker’s payoﬀ is  + (1 − ) . Finally,
if the worker makes an oﬀer   2 −  1 − , the firm rejects the oﬀer and the worker’s payoﬀ
is  + (1 − ) .
The oﬀer that maximizes the worker’s payoﬀ is  such that
£
¤
2 −  − 21 ( ) =  1 + (1 − ) 2 −  − 21 ( ) .

(40)

It is easy to verify that this is the case. Notice that  is strictly greater than  and strictly
smaller than 2 − 1 − . In fact, since 2 −  − 21 ( )   1 , the right-hand side of (40) is
strictly greater than  1 and strictly smaller than 2 −  − 21 ( ). The left-hand side of (40)
is strictly decreasing in  and takes the value 2 −  − 21 ( ) for  =  , and the value
 1 for  = 2 −  1 − . Hence, the oﬀer  that equates the left and the right-hand sides of
(40) is strictly greater than  and strictly smaller than 2 −  1 − . Since   2 −  1 − 
and it satisfies (39), the worker’s payoﬀ from making the oﬀer  is  . If the worker makes
an oﬀer 0   , condition (39) is satisfied. Hence, the worker’s payoﬀ is 0   . If the
worker makes an oﬀer 0   , either condition (39) is violated or 0  2 −  1 − . In either
case, the firm rejects the oﬀer and the worker’s payoﬀ is  + (1 − )   . Thus we have
established that  is the oﬀer that maximizes the payoﬀ to the worker.
We are now in the position to explicitly solve for the optimal counteroﬀer of the firm,  ,
2
(21 ) in (34), we
and the optimal oﬀer of the worker,  . Using (32) to substitute out 11
find that  is given by
 =  +

1−
1−
[2 −  1 − 2] −
[21 − ] .
2−
2−

(41)

2
Using (32) to substitute out 11
( ) in (40), we find that  is given by

 =  +  [2 −  1 − 2] + (1 − ) [ − ] .

(42)

Using the fact that in a Markov SPE  = 21 , we can use the above equations to find that
21 is given by
1
[2 −  1 − 2] .
(43)
21 =  +
1 + (1 − ) + (1 − )2
This completes the characterization of the Rolodex game Γ22 (0) between the firm and 2
workers. To summarize, if the gains from trade are strictly positive, i.e. 2 − 1 − 2  0,
27

the unique Markov SPE has the following features. The firm and the first worker reach an
immediate agreement at the wage 21 in (43). The firm and the second worker reach an
immediate agreement at the wage 22 = 21 (21 ) given by
22 =  +

1−
[2 −  1 − 2] 
1 + (1 − ) + (1 − )2

(44)

The profit of the firm  2 = 2 − 21 − 22 is given by
2 = 1 +

(1 − )2
[2 − 1 − 2] 
1 + (1 − ) + (1 − )2

(45)

In the limit for  going to zero, the equilibrium payoﬀ to the first worker is
21

=  + 13 [2 −  1 − 2]
=  + 13 [2 − 1 − ] + 16 [1 − 0 − ].

(46)

The equilibrium payoﬀ to the second worker is
22

=  + 13 [2 −  1 − 2]
=  + 13 [2 − 1 − ] + 16 [1 − 0 − ].

(47)

The equilibrium payoﬀ to the firm is
2

=  1 + 13 [2 −  1 − 2]
= 0 + 13 [2 − 1 − ] + 23 [1 − 0 − ].

(48)

The payoﬀs in (46)-(48) are equal to the Shapley values to the workers and the firm. Hence,
the Rolodex game oﬀers a game-theoretic foundation to the standard cooperative solution
to the bargaining problem between a firm and two workers. The Rolodex game follows a
natural protocol, in which the firm participates in every bilateral negotiation and, in any
bilateral negotiation, only the wage of the participating worker is discussed. Moreover, the
Rolodex game is one of perfect information, where there is no need to make assumptions
about oﬀ-equilibium beliefs.
There is a simple intuition behind the equivalence of the equilibrium payoﬀs of the
Rolodex game and the Shapley values. First, notice that every worker earns the same
wage as the last worker in line. Indeed, a worker at any position in the line knows that if
he rejects the firm’s counteroﬀer he will become the last worker in line and, for this reason,
he has the same outside option and earns the same wage as the last worker in line. That
is, 21 = 22 = 2 . Second, notice that the wage of the last worker is such that the gains
from trade accruing to the worker are equal to the gains from trade accruing to the firm, as
the last worker’s wage does not aﬀect the wage agreement with any other worker. Under the
28

assumption that a disagreement causes the bargaining game to start over, the wage of the
last worker is such that 22 −  = 2 − 21 − 22 − 1 . Combining the two observations
above, we find that 2 −  = 2 −  1 − 22 . As explained in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), the
solution to this equation is equal to the worker’s Shapley value.

3.3

Rolodex Game with n Workers

The properties of the solution of the Rolodex game with 2 workers generalize to the case
of an arbitrary number of workers. The following proposition contains the characterization
of the unique Markov SPE of the subgame Γ (0) in which the firm has yet to reach an
agreement with all of the  workers remaining in the game.
Proposition 2: Consider the subgame Γ (0). (i) If  −  −1 −   0, any Markov SPE
is such that the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the  workers. The payoﬀ to
the firm is given by   =  −1 , with  0 = 0 . (ii) If  − −1 −  ≥ 0, the unique Markov
SPE is such that the firm immediately reaches an agreement with all of the  workers. The
payoﬀ to the firm is given by
(1 − )
P
[ −  −1 − ] , with  0 = 0 .
  = −1 + 

=0 (1 − )

The payoﬀ to the -th worker is given by
h
i
P−1
1
 − =1  −  −1 − ( + 1 − ) 
 =  + P+1−

=0 (1 − )

(49)

(50)

For  = 1, Proposition 2 holds as the payoﬀs in (49) and (50) boil down to the equilibrium
payoﬀs of the BRW game. For  = 2, Proposition 2 holds as the payoﬀs in (49) and (50)
coincide with those derived in the previous subsection. In the next pages, we are going to
prove that Proposition 2 holds for a generic  by induction. That is, we are going to prove
that if the proposition holds for the subgame Γ (0), it also holds for the subgame Γ+1
+1 (0) in
which the firm has yet to reach an agreement with all of the  + 1 workers left in the game.
Central to the characterization of the subgame Γ+1
+1 (0) is the following lemma.
Lemma 3: Consider the subgame Γ+1
 () in which the firm has  + 1 workers, it has
yet to reach an agreement with  ≤  + 1 workers, and it has agreed to wages summing
up to  with the other  + 1 −  workers. (i) If +1 −  −   −   0, any Markov
SPE is such that the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the  remaining workers;
(ii) If +1 −  −   −  ≥ 0, the unique Markov SPE is such that the firm reaches an
29

immediate agreement with each of the  remaining workers. The sum of the wages paid to
the  remaining workers is
P−1

=0 (1 − )
+1
[+1 −  −   − ] .
(51)
 () =  + P

=0 (1 − )
The wage paid to the first of the  remaining workers is
+1
1
() =  + P

1


=0 (1 − )

[+1 −  −   − ] .

(52)

The wage paid to the last of the  remaining workers is
(1 − )−1
+1

() =  + P
[+1 −  −   − ] .

(1
−
)
=0

(53)

For  = 1, Lemma 3 holds as the payoﬀs in (51)-(53) are the same as in the BRW game.
We prove that Lemma 3 holds for any  ≤  + 1 by induction. That is, we prove that,
if Lemma 3 holds for some arbitrary  ≤ , then it also holds for  + 1. To this aim, we
consider the subgame Γ+1
+1 (), in which the firm has  + 1 employees, it has yet to reach an
agreement with  + 1 of them and it has agreed to wages summing up to  with the other
 − . As usual, we characterize the solution to this subgame by backward induction.
First, consider the subgame Γ (0) in which, after a breakdown in negotiations between
the firm and the first of the  + 1 workers without agreement, bargaining starts over between
the firm and the  workers left in the game. Since we have conjectured that Proposition 2
holds when the firm has  workers, the SPE payoﬀ of the firm in this subgame is uniquely
determined and given by   .
Second, consider the subgame Γ+1
 ( + 1 ) in which, after the firm has reached an
agreement at some wage 1 with the first worker without an agreement, the firm starts
bargaining with the other  workers without an agreement. Since we conjectured that
Lemma 3 holds when the firm has  + 1 workers and has yet to reach an agreement with 
of them, there is a unique Markov SPE to this subgame. In particular, if 1  +1
+1 () ≡
+1 −  −   − , any SPE is such that the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the
 remaining workers. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is   . If 1 ≤ +1
+1 (), the unique SPE
is such that the firm immediately reaches an agreement with all of the  remaining workers.
In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is +1 −  − 1 − +1
 ( + 1 ).
Third, we characterize the outcome of the subgame Γ+1
+1 (). To this aim, consider the
bargaining session between the firm and the first of the  + 1 workers without an agreement.
30

We analyze this bargaining session backwards. We first characterize the optimal response of
the worker to an arbitrary counteroﬀer of the firm. We then solve for the optimal counteroﬀer
of the firm. Next, we characterize the optimal response of the firm to an arbitrary oﬀer of the
worker. And, finally, we solve for the optimal oﬀer of the worker. We carry out the analysis for
the case in which there are strictly positive gains from trade, i.e. +1 −−  −−+1
 (+) 
0 or equivalently +1 −  −   − ( + 1)  0.
+1
As in the case of two workers, let us establish some basic properties of the wage +11
()
+1
that the firm negotiates with the first of the +1 workers without agreement. First, +11 ()
is greater than , as the worker never finds it optimal to accept or oﬀer a wage lower than his
+1
+1
+1
() is smaller than +1
outside option. Second, +11
+1 (). In fact, if +11 ()  +1 (), the
+1
()
firm would not reach an agreement with all of the remaining workers and, hence, +11
could not be part of an SPE in which the firm trades without delay with all of its  + 1
+1
+1
+1
() is greater than  + (1 − )
( + +11
()). To see why,
employees. Third, +11
notice that when the firm makes a counteroﬀer, the worker can attains a payoﬀ of  =
+1
+1
( + +11
()) by rejecting such oﬀer, moving to the end of the line, and
 + (1 − )
+1
+1
( + +11
()) after the firm reaches an agreement with the other
agreeing to the wage 
workers. This implies that, in an SPE without delay, the firm’s payoﬀ when making a
counteroﬀer cannot be greater than  = +1 −  − +1
 ( +  ) and that the firm will
always be willing to accept any oﬀer  such that +1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) ≥  . Since
+1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) is decreasing in  and the firm accepts any oﬀer  such that
+1
+1 −−− (+) ≥  , the worker can always attain a payoﬀ of  . In a Markov SPE
+1
+1
+1
() is greater than  = +(1−)
(++11
()).
without delay, this implies that +11

Given the preliminary results above, we can solve for the optimal response of the worker
to an arbitrary counteroﬀer by the firm. Suppose that the firm makes a counteroﬀer  ≤
+1
+1 () to the worker. The worker finds it optimal to accept  if and only if
+1
+1
( + +11
()).
 ≥  + (1 − )

(54)

The above condition is easy to understand. The left-hand side of (54) is the worker’s payoﬀ
if he accepts the counteroﬀer of the firm. In fact, if the worker accepts  ≤ +1
+1 (), the
firm immediately reaches an agreement with all the other  workers and the worker is paid
the agreed upon wage . The right-hand side of (54) is the worker’s payoﬀ if he rejects the
counteroﬀer of the firm. In fact, if the worker rejects , he exits the game and attains the
payoﬀ  with probability . With probability 1 − , the worker moves to the end of the line
of workers without an agreement. The firm immediately agrees with the next worker to a
+1
() and, then, it starts bargaining with the  remaining workers. From Lemma
wage +11
31

3, it follows that the last of these  workers (who is the worker who rejected ) agrees to
+1
+1
( + +11
()). Hence, the right-hand side of (54) is the worker’s payoﬀ if he
a wage 
rejects the counteroﬀer of the firm. As we shall see below, the firm never finds it optimal to
make a counteroﬀer   +1
+1 (), whether the worker accepts it or not.
The firm chooses its counteroﬀer taking as given the acceptance strategy of the worker.
If the firm makes a counteroﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 () such that condition (54) is satisfied, its payoﬀ
+1
is +1 −  −  −  ( + ). In fact, the worker accepts  and the firm immediately reaches
an agreement with the  remaining workers for a total wage bill of +1
 ( + ). If the firm
+1
makes a counteroﬀer  ≤ +1 () such that condition (54) is violated, its expected payoﬀ
£
¤
+1
+1
() − +1
is   + (1 − ) +1 −  − +11
 ( + +11 ()) . In fact, the worker rejects .
With probability , the worker exits the game and the bargaining game starts over between
the firm and the surviving  workers. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is   . With probability
1 − , the worker moves to the end of the line of workers without agreement. Then, the firm
+1
() and with the remaining
reaches an agreement with the next worker for a wage of +11
+1
+1
 workers for wages summing up to  ( + +11 ()). In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is
+1
+1
() − +1
+1 −  − +11
 ( + +11 ()).
The counteroﬀer that maximizes the payoﬀ of the firm is
+1
+1
 =  + (1 − )
( + +11
()).

(55)

+1
+1
It is easy to show why this is the case. Recall that  ≤ +11
() and +11
() ≤ +1
+1 (),
+1
+1
and notice that at least one inequality is strict as  = +11 () = +1 () contradicts the
assumption of strictly positive gains from trade. Since   +1
+1 () and satisfies condition
(54), the firm’s payoﬀ from making the counteroﬀer  is

+1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  )

(56)

Now, consider the firm’s payoﬀ from making some alternative counteroﬀer 0 ≤ +1
+1 ().
If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0   , condition (54) is satisfied and the firm attains a
payoﬀ of
0
+1
+1 −  − 0 − +1
(57)
 ( +  )  +1 −  −  −  ( +  )
0
If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0 ≤ +1
+1 () such that    , condition (54) is violated
and the firm attains a payoﬀ of
£
¤
+1
+1
() − +1
  + (1 − ) +1 −  − +11
 ( + +11 ())
+1
+1
≤ +1 −  − +11
() − +1
 ( + +11 ())

≤ +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  )
32

(58)

where at least one of the two inequalities in (58) is strict. The first inequality follows from the
+1
+1
+1
fact that +1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) ≥   for all  ≤  +1 () and +11 () ≤  +1 (). The
second inequality follows from the fact that +1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) is strictly decreasing
+1
in  and  ≤ +11 (). At least one of the two inequalities is strict, as they are both
+1
() = +1
equalities only when  = +11
+1 (), a possibility we have already ruled out.
Now, consider the firm’s payoﬀ from making some alternative counteroﬀer 0  +1
+1 ().
If the firm makes a counteroﬀer 0  +1
+1 () which is accepted, it attains a payoﬀ of
£
¤
+1
+1
  ≤   + (1 − ) +1 −  − +11
() − +1
(
+

())

+11
(59)
+1
 +1 −  −  −  ( +  ),
where the first inequality follows from the fact that +1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) is greater
+1
than   for  = +11 (), and the second inequality follows from (58). If the firm makes a
counteroﬀer 0  +1
+1 () which is rejected, it attains the same payoﬀ as in the first line of
(58), which is strictly smaller than +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ). Thus, we have established
that  is the counteroﬀer that maximizes the payoﬀ to the firm.
Given the characterization of  , we can find the optimal acceptance strategy of the
firm to an arbitrary wage oﬀer by the worker. Suppose that the worker makes an oﬀer
 ≤ +1
+1 (). The firm finds it optimal to accepts  if and only if
£
¤
+1
+1 −  −  − +1
(60)
 ( + ) ≥   + (1 − ) +1 −  −  −  ( +  ) .

The above condition is easy to understand. The left-hand side of (60) is the firm’s payoﬀ
from accepting the oﬀer. If fact, if the firm accepts an oﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 (), it immediately
reaches an agreement with the  remaining workers for wages summing up to +1
 ( + ).
+1
Hence, if the firm accepts the oﬀer  ≤ +1 (), its payoﬀ is given by the left-hand side of
(60). The right-hand side of (60) is the firm’s expected payoﬀ from rejecting the oﬀer. In
fact, if the firm rejects , with probability , the worker exits and the bargaining game starts
over with the  surviving workers. In this case, the firm’s payoﬀ is   . With probability
1 − , the worker remains in the game and the firm makes him the counteroﬀer  . In this
case, the firm’s payoﬀ is +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ). Hence, if the firm rejects the oﬀer
+1
 ≤ +1 (), its expected payoﬀ is given by the right-hand side of (60). Now, suppose
that the worker makes an oﬀer   +1
+1 (). In this case the firm rejects the oﬀer, as (59)
£
¤
guarantees that the firm’s payoﬀ from rejecting,   +(1−) +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ) ,
is strictly greater than the firm’s payoﬀ from accepting,  .
The worker chooses the oﬀer  taking as given the firm’s acceptance strategy. If the
worker makes an oﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 () that satisfies (60), the worker’s payoﬀ is  as the firm
33

accepts the oﬀer and reaches an immediate agreement with all the  remaining workers. If
the worker makes an oﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 () that violates (60), the worker’s expected payoﬀ is
 + (1 − ) . In fact, the firm rejects the oﬀer . Then, with probability , the worker
exits the game and achieves the payoﬀ . With probability 1 − , the worker remains in
the game and the firm makes him the acceptable counteroﬀer  . Similarly, if the worker
makes an oﬀer   +1
+1 (), the firm rejects the oﬀer and the worker’s expected payoﬀ is
 + (1 − ) .
The worker finds it optimal to make to the firm the oﬀer  such that
£
¤
+1
+1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ) =   + (1 − ) +1 −  −  −  ( +  ) .

(61)

It is easy to verify that this is the case. To this aim, notice that  is greater than  and
+1
smaller than +1
+1 (). In fact, since +1 −  −  −  ( +  )    , the right-hand side of
(61) is strictly greater than   and strictly smaller than +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ). The
left-hand side of (61) is strictly decreasing in  , it takes the value +1 −− −+1
 (+ )
+1
for  =  , and it takes the value  for  = +1 (). Hence, the  that equates the left
and the right-hand side of (61) is strictly greater than  and strictly smaller than +1
+1 ().
+1
Now, notice that, since the oﬀer  satisfies (60) and it is smaller than +1 (), the firm
accepts it and the worker’s payoﬀ is  . In contrast, if the worker makes an oﬀer 0   ,
the firm accepts it and the worker’s payoﬀ is 0   . Similarly, if the worker makes an
oﬀer 0   , the firm rejects it, as either 0 violates (60) or 0  +1
+1 (). In this case,
the worker’s payoﬀ is  + (1 − ) , which we argued is smaller than  . Thus, we have
established that  is the oﬀer that maximizes the payoﬀ to the worker.
Now, we are in the position to explicitly solve for the optimal counteroﬀer of the firm,
+1
( + ) in
 , and the optimal oﬀer of the worker,  . Using (53) to substitute out 
(55), we find that  is given by
£ +1
¤ª
(1 − ) ©
() −  
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] − +11
 =  + P

=0 (1 − )

(62)

Using (51) to substitute out +1
 ( + ) in (61), we find that  is given by
 =  +  [+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] + (1 − ) [ − ] .

(63)

+1
(), we can use the above equations to find
Using the fact that in a Markov SPE  = +11
+1
that +11 () is given by
+1
+11
() =  + P+1

1


=0 (1 − )

34

[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] .

(64)

We have completed the characterization of the subgame Γ+1
+1 (). If the gains from trade
are positive, i.e. +1 −  −   − ( + 1)  0, the unique Markov SPE is such that the
firm and the first of the  + 1 remaining workers reach an immediate agreement at the wage
+1
(), and the firm and the -th of the  + 1 remaining workers reach an immediate
+11
P
+1
+1
+1
+1
() = +2−1
( + −1
agreement at the wage +1
=1 +1 ()). The wage +11 () paid to
+1
+1
+1
() = 
( + +11
()) paid to the
the first worker is given by (64). The wage +1+1
last worker is given by
(1 − )
+1
() =  + P+1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] 
+1+1

=0 (1 − )

(65)

+1
+1
+1
The sum of wages +1
+1 () = +11 () +  ( + +11 ()) paid to the  + 1 workers is given
by
P

=0 (1 − )
+1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] 
(66)
+1 () = ( + 1) + P+1

=0 (1 − )

If the gains from trade between the firm and the remaining  + 1 workers are equal to zero,
it is easy to verify that the unique Markov SPE also involves immediate agreement at the
wages (65) and (66). Finally, if the gains from trade between the firm and the remaining
 + 1 workers are strictly negative, it is easy to verify that any (Markov) SPE is such that
the firm does not reach an agreement with all of the  + 1 workers. These observations show
that, if Lemma 3 holds for some    + 1, it also holds for  + 1. Since the lemma trivially
holds for  = 1, this means that it holds for any generic . We have thus concluded the
proof of Lemma 3.
Letting  =  + 1 and  = 0 in Lemma 3, we can characterize the payoﬀs of the subgame
In particular, if +1 −   − ( + 1)  0, the unique Markov SPE is such that
the firm immediately reaches an agreement with all of its  + 1 employees. In this case, the
payoﬀ to the firm is given by

Γ+1
+1 (0).

(1 − )+1
[+1 −  − ( + 1)] .
 +1 =   + P+1

=0 (1 − )

The payoﬀ to the -th worker is given by
"
#
−1
X
1
+1 −
+1 −   − ( + 2 − ) .
+1 =  + P+2−

(1
−
)
=0
=1

(67)

(68)

The above results show that, if Proposition 2 holds for some , it also holds for  + 1. Since
the proposition holds for  = 1, this means that it holds for any generic  = 2 3... We have
thus completed the proof of Proposition 2.
35

We are now in the position to characterize the solution of the Rolodex game in the limit
as the probability of breakdown goes to zero.
Theorem 2: (Rolodex game). Consider the Rolodex game between the firm and  workers.
Assume that the total surplus is positive, i.e.  −  −1 −   0. In the limit for  → 0,
the unique Markov SPE of the game is such that the payoﬀ   to the firm is given by the
diﬀerence equation
  =  −1 +

1
[ −  −1 − ] , for  = 1 2 ,
+1

(69)

with initial condition 0 = 0 . The payoﬀ  to the -th of  workers is given by
 =  +

1
[ −  −1 − ] .
+1

(70)

Proof : It is straightforward to show that if  −  −1 −   0 then  −  −1 −   0 for
 = 1 2  − 1. From this observation and Proposition 2, it follows that   is given by (49)
for  = 1 2  and  is given by (50) for  = 1 2 . Taking the limit of (49) and (50)
for  → 0, we obtain (69) and (70).
¥
Theorem 2 shows that, also in the case of a generic number of workers, the equilibrium payoﬀs of the Rolodex game converge to the Shapley values when the probability of a
breakdown following a rejection goes to zero.

4

Conclusions

In this paper, we revisited the bargaining problem between a firm and  workers. In the first
part of the paper, we analyzed the extensive-form bargaining game proposed by Stole and
Zwiebel (1996a). We proved that the equilibrium of the SZ game is not such that all workers
are paid their Shapley value, as incorrectly claimed by Stole and Zwiebel (1996a). Indeed,
we showed that the unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of the SZ game is such that the first
worker to bargain with the firm captures twice as much surplus as the second worker, who in
turn captures twice as much surplus as the third worker, etc. . . The firm captures a fraction
12 of the surplus. These payoﬀs are diﬀerent from the Shapley values both for a particular
realization of the initial ordering of workers, as well as in expectation over any distribution
of orderings. In the second part of the paper, we presented an alternative extensive-form
game, which we dubbed the Rolodex game. The Rolodex game follows a protocol that is
sensible in the context of a wage negotiation between a firm and its workers. Moreover, the
36

Rolodex game admits, under some mild restrictions, a unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
in which the profile of workers’ wages and the profit of the firm coincide with the Shapley
values.
We believe that there are two important results in the paper. First, a large number of
papers in the labor/search literature have adopted the Shapley values as the solution to the
bargaining problem between a firm and multiple workers and have referred to the SZ game
for the game-theoretic foundation of that solution. Our paper shows that the reference to
the SZ game is unwarranted and, instead, the literature should refer to the Rolodex game.
Subject to replacing the SZ game with the Rolodex game, the conclusions reached in this
applied literature are still valid. Second, we believe that the correct characterization of the
solution of the SZ game is of interest on its own. Indeed, one might envision situations in
which a firm needs to reach an agreement with one supplier before it can start bargaining
with the next one. In these situations, we show that the upstream suppliers are in a superior
bargaining position relative to the downstream suppliers and, in equilibrium, they end up
extracting a larger fraction of the total surplus. This property of equilibrium suggests that
it is important to investigate the actions that suppliers can take in order to bargain with a
producer earlier rather than later.

37

References
[1] Acemoglu, D., and W. Hawkins. 2014. “Search with Multi-Worker Firms.” Theoretical
Economics, 9: 583-628.
[2] Andolfatto, D. 1996. “Business Cycles and Labor Market Search.” American Economic
Review, 86: 112-132.
[3] Bertola, G., and R. Caballero. 1994. “Cross-Sectional Eﬃciency and Labour Hoarding
in a Matching Model of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies, 61: 435-456.
[4] Binmore, K., A. Rubinstein and A. Wolinsky. 1986. “The Nash Bargaining Solution in
Economic Modelling.” Rand Journal of Economics, 17: 176-188.
[5] Cahuc, P., F. Marque, and E. Wasmer. 2008. “A Theory of Wages and Labor Demand
with Intra-Firm Bargaining and Matching Frictions.” International Economic Review,
49: 943-972.
[6] Crawford, G., and A. Yurukoglu. 2012. “The Welfare Eﬀects of Bundling in MultiChannel Television Markets.” American Economic Review, 102: 643-685.
[7] Ebell, M., and C. Haefke. 2009. “Product Market Regulation and the US Employment
Miracle.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 12: 479-504
[8] Elsby, M., and R. Michaels. 2013. “Marginal Jobs, Heterogeneous Firms and Unemployment Flows.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5: 1-48.
[9] Fontanay, C., and J. Gans. 2014. “Bilateral Bargaining with Externalities.” Journal of
Industrial Organization, 62: 756-788.
[10] Gul. F. 1989. “Bargaining Foundations of Shapley Value.” Econometrica, 57: 81-95.
[11] Hart, S., and A. Mas-Colell. 1996. “Bargaining and Value.” Econometrica, 64: 357-380.
[12] Helpman, E., and O. Itskhoki. 2015. “Firms, Trade, and Labor Market Dynamics.”
Manuscript, Princeton University.
[13] Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, and S. Redding. 2010. “Inequality and Unemployment in a
Global Economy.” Econometrica, 78: 1239-1283.
[14] Muthoo, A. 1999. “Bargaining Theory with Applications.” Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
38

[15] Nash, J. 1953. “Two-Person Cooperative Games,” Econometrica, 21: 128-140.
[16] Rubinstein, A. 1982. “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica, 50:
128-140.
[17] Shapley, L. 1953. “A Value for -Person Games.” Contributions to the Theory of Games
II, edited by H. Kuhn and A. Tucker. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[18] Smith, E. 1999. “Search, Concave Production, and Optimal Firm Size.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2: 456-471.
[19] Stole, L., and J. Zwiebel. 1996a. “Intrafirm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts.”
Review of Economic Studies, 63: 375-410.
[20] Stole, L., and J. Zwiebel. 1996b. “Organizational Design and Technology Choice Under
Intrafirm Bargaining.” American Economic Review, 86: 195-222.

39

Appendix
A

SZ and BRW Stage Games: Equivalence

Consider the subgame Γ+1
+1 () in which there are  + 1 workers left in the game,  −  of
them have reached an agreement with the firm for wages summing up to ,  + 1 workers
have yet to reach an agreement with the firm, and the firm is about to start a bargaining
session with the first of those  + 1 workers.
We want to characterize the outcome of the bargaining session between the firm and
the first of the  + 1 workers without agreement. As discussed in the main text, if the
bargaining session ends with the firm and the worker agreeing to a wage  ≤ +1
+1 (), with
+1
+1 () ≡ +1 −  −  − , the firm reaches an agreement with all the  remaining
workers for wages summing up to +1
 ( + ). Hence, in this case, the payoﬀ to the firm
+1
is +1 −  −  ( + ) and the payoﬀ to the worker is . If the bargaining session ends
with the firm and the worker agreeing to a wage   +1
+1 (), the firm does not reach an
agreement with the following worker. In this case, the bargaining process starts over with 
workers; the payoﬀ to the firm is   and the payoﬀ to the worker is +1− . Finally, if the
bargaining session ends with a breakdown, the payoﬀ to the firm is  and the payoﬀ to the
worker is .
We focus on Subgame Perfect Equilibria subject to a tie-breaking rule. In particular,
whenever the firm is indiﬀerent, we assume that it chooses to reject an oﬀer   +1
+1 ()
that leads to a breakdown with one of the other workers without agreement. Similarly,
whenever the firm is indiﬀerent, we assume that it does not make a counteroﬀer   +1
+1 ()
that leads to a breakdown with one of the other workers without agreement. In order to
carry out the analysis, it is useful to introduce some additional notation. Consider the
subgame that starts with the worker making an oﬀer to the firm, and denote as  and
 the mimimum and the maximum payoﬀ to the worker among all SPEs that satisfy the
tie-breaking rule. Consider the subgame that starts with the firm making a counteroﬀer to
the worker, and denote as  and  the minimum and the maximum payoﬀ to the firm
among all SPEs that satisfy the tie-breaking rule. Finally, it is useful to define the function
() as the solution with respect to  of the equation
+1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) = .
That is,
() =  + [+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] −
40

µ

2−
1−

¶

[ −   ] .

(A1)

In what follows, we show that there is a unique SPE satisfying the tie-breaking rule
and that such SPE has the same solution as the BRW game. The proof involves three
intermediate claims, which closely follow the steps in Chapter 3 of Muthoo (1999). We carry
out the analysis under the assumption that there are strictly positive gains from trade, i.e.
+1 −  −   −  − +1
 ()  0 or, equivalently, +1 −  −   − ( + 1)  0.
Claim 1: The payoﬀ bounds    ,  and  are such that
 ≥ ,  ≤ +1
 (),

 ≥   ,  ≤  −  −  − +1
 ( + ).

(A2)

Proof : First, notice that the worker can always attain a payoﬀ of  by making an oﬀer
 =  and by rejecting any counteroﬀer   . Hence,  ≥ . Similarly, the firm
can always attain a payoﬀ of   by making a counteroﬀer  = +1
 () and by rejecting
+1
any wage oﬀer    (). Hence,  ≥   . Next, suppose there is an SPE with
+1
  +1
+1 (). Then, at some point, the worker must either make an oﬀer    +1 ()
that is accepted by the firm, or the firm must make a counteroﬀer   +1
+1 () that is
accepted by the worker. In the first case, if the firm accepts the oﬀer it attains a payoﬀ of
  , and if it rejects the oﬀer it attains a payoﬀ greater than  + (1 − ) ≥   . Under
the assumption that, in case of indiﬀerence, the firm rejects an oﬀer that causes a breakdown
with a subsequent worker, the firm always rejects an oﬀer   +1
+1 (). If the firm makes
+1
a counteroﬀer   +1 () which is accepted by the worker, it attains a payoﬀ  . If the
firm makes instead a counteroﬀer 0  +1
+1 (), it attains a payoﬀ non-smaller than   .
Under the assumption that, in case of indiﬀerence, the firm does not make a counteroﬀer
that causes a breakdown with a subsequent worker, the firm never finds it optimal to make
+1
a counteroﬀer   +1
+1 (). Hence,  ≤  +1 (). Finally, suppose there is an SPE with
   −  −  − +1
 ( + ). Then, after some history of play, the firm must either make
a counteroﬀer oﬀer    that is accepted by the worker, or the worker must make an oﬀer
   that is accepted by the firm. If the firm makes a counteroﬀer   , the worker’s
payoﬀ from accepting is  and from rejecting is  + (1 − ) ≥ . Hence, the worker will
never accept a counteroﬀer   . If the worker makes an oﬀer    that is accepted, the
worker’s payoﬀ is    ≤  . Hence, the worker will never make an oﬀer   . Hence,
¥
 ≤  −  −  − +1
 ( + ).
Claim 2: The payoﬀ bounds    ,  and  are such that
 ≥ (  + (1 − ) ),

 ≥ +1 −  −  − (1 − ) − +1
 ( +  + (1 − ) ).
41

(A3)

Proof : Consider a subgame starting with the worker making an oﬀer. Notice that the firm
always accepts an oﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 () such that
+1 −  −  − +1
 ( + ) ≥   + (1 − ) 

(A4)

Since   + (1 − ) ≥   , the oﬀer  for which the left-hand side of the above inequality
equals the right-hand side is smaller than +1
+1 (). Hence, if the worker makes the oﬀer  ,
his payoﬀ is
(A5)
 =  ≡ (  + (1 − ) ).
Since  ≥  , we have established the first part of the claim. Next, consider a subgame
starting with the firm making a counteroﬀer. Notice that the worker always accepts a
counteroﬀer  ≤ +1
+1 () such that
 ≥  + (1 − ) 

(A6)

Since  + (1 − )  +1
+1 (), the counteroﬀer  for which the left-hand side of the
above inequality equals the right-hand side is smaller than +1
+1 (). Hence, the payoﬀ to the
firm when making the counteroﬀer  is
 = +1 −  −  − (1 − ) − +1
 ( +  + (1 − ) ).
Since  ≥  , we have established the second part of the claim.

(A7)

¥

Claim 3: The payoﬀ bounds    ,  and  are such that
 ≤ +1 −  −  − (1 − ) − +1
 ( +  + (1 − ) )
 ≤ (  + (1 − ) ).

(A8)

Proof : Consider a subgame starting with the firm making a counteroﬀer. In any SPE, the
worker rejects every counteroﬀer    , where
 =  + (1 − ) ≤ +1
+1 ()

(A9)

If the SPE involves the worker accepting the counteroﬀer, the payoﬀ to the firm cannot be
greater than
(A10)
 = +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +   ).
If the SPE involves the worker rejecting the counteroﬀer and the continuation payoﬀs are
 and  , the payoﬀ to the firm is


=  + (1 − )
≤   + (1 − )[+1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  )]
+1
≤ +1 −  −  −  ( +  )
≤ +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  )
+1
≤ +1 −  −  −  ( +  ),
42

(A11)

where the second line follows from the fact that  ≤ +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +  ), the
third line follows from the fact that    ≤ +1
+1 () and hence   ≤ +1 −  −  −
+1
 ( +  ), the fourth line follows from the fact that  ≤  , and the last line from
the fact that  ≤  . Overall, the payoﬀ to the firm when making a counteroﬀer cannot
be greater than
 ≤  ≤ max{   } = +1 −  −  − +1
 ( +   ).

(A12)

Next, consider a subgame starting with the worker making an oﬀer. In any SPE, the firm
rejects every oﬀer    , where
+1 −  −  − +1
 ( +   ) =   + (1 − ) 

(A13)

If the SPE involves the firm accepting the counteroﬀer, the payoﬀ to the worker cannot be
greater than
(A14)
 =  = (  + (1 − ) ).
If the SPE involves the firm rejecting the oﬀer and the continuation payoﬀs are  and  ,
the payoﬀ to the worker is


=  + (1 − )
≤  + (1 − )( )
≤ ( )
≤ ( )
≤ (  + (1 − ) ),

(A15)

where the second line follows from the fact that  ≤ ( ), the third line follows from the
fact that  ≤ ( ), the fourth line follows from the fact that  ≤  , and the last line
from the fact that  ≤  . Overall, the payoﬀ to the worker when making an oﬀer cannot
be greater than
(A16)
 ≤  ≤ max{   } =  .
This completes the proof of the claim.

¥

and , it follows that
From Claims 2 and 3 and the definitions of +1

1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)],
2−
1
[+1 −  −  − ( + 1)],
 ≤  +
2−
¶+1
µ
1−
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)],
 ≥   +
2−
¶+1
µ
1−
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)].
 ≤   +
2−
 ≥  +

43

(A17)

Since  ≤  and  ≤  , the above inequalities imply
1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)],
2−
¶+1
µ
1−
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)].
 =  =   +
2−

 =  =  +

(A18)

That is, all SPE’s starting with the worker making an oﬀer give the same payoﬀ for the
worker, and all SPE’s starting with the firm making a counteroﬀer give the same payoﬀ to
the firm.
We can now derive the equilibrium outcome of the bargaining session. The session starts
with the worker making an oﬀer  to the firm. The firm finds it optimal to accepts the
oﬀer if  ≤ +1
+1 () and
(A19)
 ≤ (  + (1 − ) )
The worker chooses the oﬀer taking as given the firm’s acceptance strategy above. Denote
∗ as (  + (1 −) ). If the worker makes the oﬀer ∗ , the firm accepts it as ∗ satisfies
(A19) and it is strictly smaller than +1
+1 (). Hence, the worker’s payoﬀ is
∗

= ( + (1 − ) )
1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] .
=+
2−

(A20)

If the worker makes an oﬀer   ∗ , the firm accepts it as  satisfies (A19) and it is
smaller than +1
+1 (). Hence, the worker’s payoﬀ is


 (  + (1 − ) )
1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)] .
=+
2−

(A21)

If the worker makes an oﬀer   ∗ , the firm rejects it as  either violates (A19) or it is
greater than +1
+1 (). Hence, the worker’s payoﬀ is no greater than
 + (1 − )( )

(1 − )2
[+1 −  −  − ( + 1)]
2−
1
[+1 −  −   − ( + 1)].
 +
2−
= +

(A22)

From the above expressions, it follows that the worker finds it optimal to make the oﬀer ∗ ,
which is immediately accepted by the firm.
44

We can now summarize our findings. When the gains from trade are strictly positive, i.e.
+1 −  −  − ( + 1)  0, the unique SPE (subject to the tie-breaking rule about oﬀers
and counteroﬀers leading to a breakdown between the firm and a subsequent worker) is such
that the bargaining session ends immediately with an agreement at the wage ∗ . When the
gains from trade are strictly negative, it is straightforward to verify that the unique SPE
is such that the bargaining session ends with a breakdown. When the gains from trade are
zero, there are several payoﬀ equivalent SPEs. As standard in the literature, we assume that
the firm and the worker reach an immediate agreement at the wage ∗ . Since ∗ is the same
wage outcome as in the BRW game, it follows that the unique SPE is such that the outcome
of the bargaining session between the firm and the first of  + 1 workers without agreement
is the same as the outcome of the BRW game described in Lemma 1.

B

SZ Payoﬀs not an SPE of SZ Game

We prove that the equilibrium strategies in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a) are not an SPE of the
SZ game. For the sake of illustration, we present the result for the case of 2 workers.
Suppose that, as implied by Stole and Zwiebel (1996a), the outcome of the bargaining
session between the firm and the first worker is given by the SPE of the BRW game with
perfectly transferrable utility. That is, the worker always makes the acceptable wage oﬀer
21 =  +
where

¤
1 £
2 −  1 − 21 (21 ) −  ,
2−

21 () =  +

1
[2 −  −  1 − ] .
2−

(B1)

(B2)

Suppose that the firm makes some arbitrary counteroﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 −  to the worker.
Clearly, the worker finds it optimal to accept the counteroﬀer if and only if


≤  + (1 − )21
=+

(1 − )2
[2 −  1 − 2] .
(2 − )2 − 1

(B3)

Given the worker’s acceptance strategy in (B3), it is straightforward to verify that the firm
finds it optimal to make the counteroﬀer
 =  +

(1 − )2
[2 −  1 − 2] 
(2 − )2 − 1
45

(B4)

In doing so, the firm attains a payoﬀ of


= 2 −  − 21 ( )
∙
¸
1 −  (2 − )2 − (1 − )2 − 1
= 1 +
[2 −  1 − 2].
2−
(2 − )2 − 1

(B5)

Now, suppose that the worker makes the firm some arbitrary oﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 − . The
firm finds it optimal to accept the oﬀer if and only if  is such that
2 −  − 21 () ≥ 1 + (1 − ) .

(B6)

Therefore, if it is optimal for the worker to make an oﬀer  ≤ 2 −  1 − , it must be the
case that the worker makes the oﬀer  such that
2 −  − 21 ( ) =  1 + (1 − ) ,
which, after solving for  , gives
¸
∙
(2 − )2 − (1 − )2 − 1
[2 −  1 − 2] .
 =  + 1 − (1 − )
(2 − )2 − 1

(B7)

(B8)

Notice that 21  2 −  1 − , but 21 is strictly smaller than  . Therefore, the worker
could attain a strictly higher payoﬀ by deviating from the strategy in (B1) and by oﬀering
the wage  .

46

