                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        BUSINESS PRACTICES IN SMALL FIRMS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                        David McKenzie
                                      Christopher Woodruff

                                       Working Paper 21505
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21505


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2015




We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Knowledge for Change Trust fund, as well as the funders
and authors of the underlying surveys which we use. We thank Miriam Bruhn, Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella
Sadun, John Van Reenan, and participants at the AEA annual meeting, Bocconi, Collegio Carlo Alberto,
and Warwick for useful comments. Anna Luisa Paffhausen provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing Countries
David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 21505
August 2015
JEL No. L26,M20,O12

                                              ABSTRACT

Management has a large effect on the productivity of large firms. But does management matter in
micro and small firms, where the majority of the labor force in developing countries works? We develop
26 questions that measure business practices in marketing, stock-keeping, record-keeping, and financial
planning. These questions have been administered in surveys in Bangladesh, Chile, Ghana, Kenya,
Mexico, Nigeria and Sri Lanka. We show that variation in business practices explains as much of the
variation in outcomes – sales, profits and labor productivity and TFP – in microenterprises as in larger
enterprises. Panel data from three countries indicate that better business practices predict higher survival
rates and faster sales growth. The effect of business practices is robust to including numerous measures
of the owner’s human capital. We find that owners with higher human capital, children of entrepreneurs,
and firms with employees employ better business practices. Competition has less robust effects.


David McKenzie
The World Bank, MSN MC3-307
1818 H Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
dmckenzie@worldbank.org

Christopher Woodruff
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
UK
and NBER
c.woodruff@warwick.ac.uk
    1. Introduction

Bloom and Van Reenen’s (2007) work measuring management practices in large firms around
the world has been both path breaking and eye opening. They and their collaborators show that
better managed firms perform better, and that the quality of management practices is strongly
correlated with per capita income at the country level. But the vast majority of the non-
agricultural labor force in most low- and middle-income countries is employed not in the large
firms this blossoming literature studies, but in firms with fewer than 10 employees.1 Bloom et al
(2012) justify the focus on larger firms by noting that “…the formal management practices we
consider will not be so important for smaller firms…where more formal management practices
may not be necessary.”

In this paper, we test the assertion that management practices are less important for smaller
firms. We examine the relationship between management practices and firm outcomes using
several samples of micro- and small enterprises in seven countries. In each of these samples, firm
owners were asked 26 questions related to business practices using a common survey instrument
first used in de Mel et al (2014). Management in the small-firm context is less focused on human
relations than is the case in larger firms. Our diagnostic instrument reflects this, with questions
covering the areas of marketing, record keeping, financial planning, and stock control. We refer
to these as “business practices” rather than management practices to reflect the fact that HR
management is less important in our context.

Our samples come from two South Asian, three African and two Latin American countries. The
samples were all drawn for purposes other than testing our business practices instrument, and
some were selected to reflect very specific sub-populations of interest for particular studies. They
range from female-owned subsistence enterprises to a sample of highly-educated owners
applying to a business plan competition. But while the samples were not formally designed to be
representative of micro- and small-scale enterprises in each country, collectively they reflect the
ranges of enterprises in low- and middle-income countries quite well.



1
  For example, Hsieh and Olken (2014, p.93) note that “About 90 percent of firms in Mexico employ less than 10
workers. In India and Indonesia, the fraction of firms with less than 10 workers is almost visually indistinguishable
from 100 percent”, while McKenzie (2015) reports 99.6 percent of firms in Nigeria have fewer than 10 workers.

                                                         2
Our measures of business practices are designed to be collected in closed-end surveys, and we
code each of the 26 as either carried out or not. For most of the analysis, we focus on a simple
aggregation which measures what percentage of the 26 practices a business implements. We
examine first the correlation between business practices and firm outcomes – sales, profits and
productivity – in the cross section. The exercise is very much in the spirit of Bloom and Van
Reenen (2007), and our results for the sample of microenterprises are remarkably similar to those
in Bloom et al (2012): a one standard deviation improvement in business practices is associated
with a 35 percent increase in labor productivity and a 22 percent increase in total factor
productivity. The comparable relationships for much larger firms based on data from Bloom et al
(2012) are 43 and 17 percent, respectively.

The cross-sectional analysis provides correlations without providing any evidence on the direct
of causation. We then take two steps in the direction of uncovering causality. First, we provide
some evidence using panel data available from three countries – Kenya, Nigeria and Sri Lanka.
Using these data, we show that business practices measured at baseline are associated with
higher rates of enterprise survival and higher rates of sales growth in the following year or years.
Second, we assess evidence from the literature measuring the impact of microenterprise training
programs. Overall, the evidence from entrepreneurship training programs disappointingly finds
little evidence that training induces faster rates of growth (McKenzie and Woodruff 2012).2
Focusing on five studies which measure business practices with a version of our instrument, we
show that the effects on sales and profits found in these studies are always consistent with the
predicted effects given the observed changes in business practices. Most of the studies find
small, and statistically insignificant, effects on sales and profits because they find small effects of
the training programs on business practices. Thus, we cannot conclude from the literature that
business practices do not matter. The correct conclusion is that most of the existing training
programs have effects which are too weak to generate statistically significant effects on
outcomes.

In interpreting the data, we should keep in mind two ways in which the situation of small firms
differs from that of larger firms. First, all of our data on both practices and outcomes are self


2
 Calderon, Cunha and De Giorgi (2013) and Anderson-MacDonald et al. (2014) are recent exceptions, each
showing more substantial growth following microenterprise training.

                                                      3
reported. We might be concerned that individuals who are prone to overstatement will overstate
both practices and outcomes. We address this head on by conducting auditing exercises in two of
the samples. We find that assessments of auditors hired by us, and blind to the survey responses
of the owners, are correlated very highly with the self-reports. We also note that the strong
association between practices and enterprise survival supports the voracity of the measures.
Second, the owner is almost always the top manager in our firms. Both practices and outcomes
may be affected by characteristics of the owners that we cannot measure. We show that the
correlation between practices and outcomes is almost unchanged by the inclusion of several
measures of owner ability, most of which themselves are strongly associated with business
practices.

   2. Defining and Measuring Business Practices in Small Firms

       2.1 Defining and Scoring Business Practices

We developed a set of 26 questions which measure key business practices used in the day-to-day
running of small businesses. These questions were motivated by the content of the International
Labour Organization (ILO’s) Improve Your Business training curriculum, which covers
marketing, buying and stock control, costing and record-keeping, and financial planning
(Borgenvall et al., 1999). The questions cover practices which apply broadly across a range of
different sectors and countries. As in Taylor (1911), they should be seen as “best practices”
which are universally good so that all firms would benefit from adopting them. To give one
example, we ask whether firms maintain written records which allow them to determine sales
patterns for particular products or services. Since our focus is on a set of practices which can be
applied in the vast majority of small firms, we exclude practices which might apply only to
certain industry sectors, or firms of a certain size. In particular, we do not include human
resource practices, since the modal small firm in most of the world has no paid workers.

Our goal was to design questions that could be included in large-scale surveys taken of owners of
small firms. In practice these surveys in developing countries are typically administered by
survey enumerators. For this reason, we rely on closed-ended questions. The surveys are usually
administered on the premises of the business, but also can take place at the dwelling of the
owner, or in a third location such as the offices of the survey firm. As such, we rely on questions


                                                4
that can be asked regardless of location. This precludes the use of measures involving physical
inspection of the business premises or of the businesses’ books by the interviewer. We discuss
reporting issues in Section 2.6.

In order to reduce the subjectivity associated with ordinal scales, we use binary measures of each
practice – the firm is either doing the practice or it is not. For many practices this involves
imposing a time frame on the frequency of the practice. For example, under marketing practices,
we measure whether or not a firm has visited at least one of its competitor’s businesses to see
what prices its competitors are charging within a period of the last three months. A firm which
only checks on the prices of the competition less frequently would then be coded as not
employing this practice. Appendix 1 details each of the 26 practices.

We then define our main measure, the business practices score, as the proportion of these 26
business practices used by a firm. This method of aggregation has several attractive features. It
naturally lies between 0 and 1, so coefficients can be interpreted easily as the effect of employing
none of the practices to employing all of the practices. It also allows to compare practices even
when not all 26 questions are asked in a particular country or answered by a given firm, since we
can scale by the proportion of questions answered.3 Nevertheless, for robustness purposes we
also considered the first principal component of the individual practices, as well as the average of
standardized z-scores for each practice. The correlations between all three of these aggregates
range between 0.965 and 0.997. As such, our results are robust to these alternative methods of
aggregation, as we show in Table A1.

           2.2 Data Collection

These questions were included in surveys of micro and small enterprises conducted in seven
countries between 2008 and 2014. These samples vary in their representativeness and size, since
they were in most cases conducted as part of impact evaluations of particular programs. The
surveys conducted in Bangladesh, Kenya, Mexico, and Sri Lanka provide representative samples
of firms of particular size cutoffs, while those in Ghana and Nigeria come from applicants to
business plan competitions. The Chile survey was administered to a sample of applicants to a
government microenterprise training program. Appendix 2 provides more detail on each sample.

3
    Four of the questions on financial planning were not asked in Kenya and Nigeria.

                                                           5
A consequence of these differences in sample frames in different countries is that we will not be
able to compare the levels of business practices across countries, as Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007) did for management practices. Instead, this sample of over 20,000 small firms provides
rich data that enables us to examine how business practices relate to outcomes across countries,
and to explore what determines differences in business practices among firms within each
country.

Four of the surveys (in Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and Sri Lanka) also provide panel data on the
sampled firms. These allow us to examine survival rates over a one year horizon using data from
7016 firms, and the stability of business practices over a one year horizon with data from 5,742
firms. The Sri Lankan data also provide a longer panel, enabling us to examine the relationship
between business practices and subsequent survival over a 5.5 year period.

       2.3 Summary Statistics

Table 1 provides summary statistics for the full sample, and for each of the seven countries. In
the combined sample, the median firm has zero employees and earns US$167 per month. 96.7
percent of the sample has nine or fewer workers. The gender distribution varies across countries,
from the all-female samples in Kenya and Mexico, to a sample of 99 percent male owners in
Bangladesh. The average business owner is 41 years of age and has 9.7 years of education; the
average firm age is 8.7 years. Owners are youngest and most educated in the Nigerian sample,
which comes from a youth business plan competition. Across all samples, most firms are
informal, with only 34 percent in the combined sample reporting that they are registered for
taxes. The businesses are a mix of trade, manufacturing and services, with this mix varying
across the different countries.

       2.4 Distribution of Business Practices

Table 1 shows that on average firms in the samples employ 39 percent of the 26 business
practices measured. The most frequently used practices are knowing which goods make the most
profit per item (83%), not running out of stock frequently (70%), working out the cost of
producing each main product sold (66%), and attempting to negotiate with suppliers for lower
prices (58%). The least frequently used practices are preparing a balance sheet (5%), cashflow
statement (7%), income and expenditure statement (16%), and doing advertising (17%). This is

                                                6
reflected in the four main subcomponents: the financial planning score is lower on average than
the scores for other components. Table A4 reports means for the individual practices by country.

Figure 1 plots histograms of the distributions of business practice scores in each country. Recall
that differences in the sample frames across countries make inter-country comparisons less
meaningful. For example, the Nigerian sample of highly educated young entrepreneurs who were
selected through a nationwide business plan competition averages much higher scores than the
other samples. However, we do see a large dispersion in business practices within each country.
This echoes the large spread of management practices found by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007)
across larger firms within countries. The dispersion is evident even within samples that screened
the firms to be similar in terms of size and industry. For example, the Kenyan sample consists of
female-owned firms largely operating retail trade businesses in small markets, with less than 3
employees and profits below 4,000 KSH per week (US$47). The standard deviation of the
business practice score is still 0.19 relative to a mean of 0.52 even in this relatively homogenous
sample. Thus there are large differences in the way even very small firms operate.

         2.5 Stability of Business Practices over Time

The data from Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and Sri Lanka enable us to examine how stable these
practices are over a one year period. Figure 2 plots the business practices score in a one-year
follow-up survey against that in the baseline.4 The mass lies close to a 45 degree line, but there
are also firms that change their practices dramatically from one year to the next. The Pearson
(Spearman) correlation is 0.591 (0.593). There is thus a strong persistent component of these
scores. It is unclear how much of the variation over time reflects genuine change in practices
versus measurement error. By way of comparison, Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) report that for
a sample of 64 firms for which repeat interviews were done by different interviewers of different
managers in a plant, but at the same point in time, the correlation was 0.73, while Bloom et al.
(2012) report that their correlation in re-interviews was 0.51 when done for 222 re-interviews.

         2.6 Reporting Issues and Audit Results



4
  We exclude the firms in Sri Lanka and Kenya who were assigned to receive business training treatments for this
part of the analysis in order to examine the stability of practices in the absence of an intervention intended to change
these practices: the correlation falls slightly to 0.56 if we include treated firms.

                                                           7
Our measures of business practices come from survey self-reports. This raises three potential
concerns. The first is that the survey responses may not be informative if everyone claims to be
employing good practices. The second is that there is a systematic bias in reporting after a
training intervention, with individuals who have gone through training claiming to employ more
practices than they actually employ because they want to show they have done what the training
instructed. The final concern is that a systematic bias arises because more able business owners
are better at knowing what the correct answer to these practices should be, and also do better in
business.


We employ several methods to address these concerns. The first consists of audit visits. We
selected a random sample of 135 firms in Nigeria and 200 firms in Sri Lanka that we had
interviewed one to two months earlier. These businesses were visited by a business mentor –
individuals experienced in business and/or business training – hired by us. The visits were
framed to firm owners as a chance to receive individualized feedback on their business. The
mentors were given a set of open-ended questions to ask (e.g. “What methods do you use to
ensure your customers are satisfied with your products?”, “Tell me about any advertising you
have done lately”, “Can you tell me how you keep track of inventory?”, “What are your targets
for the business for the coming year?”, etc.), and typically spent 2-3 hours with the business
owner. At the end of the interview, they provided the owner with suggestions for areas where
she/he could improve practices and provided us with an independent assessment of whether or
not the firm owner was using each of the 26 business practices.


When we compare the business practice score based on this audit with the survey responses, we
find a Pearson (Spearman) correlation of 0.74 (0.73). This is higher than Bloom et al. (2012)
report for their repeat interviews by different surveyors using double-blind surveying. Figure 3
plots the audited score against the survey score, along with a 45 degree line and line of best fit.
Note that the fitted line has slope less of less than one, implying that it is more common for the
audit visit to suggest a lower score than the survey than vice versa. This could reflect some over-
reporting by firm owners, or could reflect that mentors are not able to always tell whether a
practice is being implemented on the basis of the visit. Nevertheless, the strong positive



                                                8
correlation provides us with some confidence that the reported scores contain a strong signal of
actual business practice.


In Sri Lanka, 90 of the 200 firms audited had been assigned to a business training course. The Sri
Lankan audit sample can therefore also be used to assess the extent to which training biases the
self-reported responses. In Appendix Table A1 we show the results of regressing the difference
between the audited business practice score and the survey score on treatment assignment. The
treatment effect is small in magnitude (0.01) and not statistically significant, suggesting there is
no systematic bias in reporting coming from some individuals having done business training.
Finally, on the possibility that more able business owners report more business practices than
they actually employ, and also do well in business, we show below that controlling for multiple
measures of owner ability has little effect on our results. Taken together with the audit results,
this provides some confidence that the associations we find between business practices and
business performance are not an artifact of biased survey reporting.


   3. Validating the Data

We follow the approach of Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) in viewing the correlations of our
business practice scores as a form of validation that the business practices are likely to be picking
up a quantity of interest. As with their management practices, the purpose here is not to identify
or claim a causal relationship between business practices and firm outcomes of interest, but
rather to demonstrate that these measures do seem to at least have some predictive power for
explaining differences in performance across firms.

       3.1 Business Practices and Firm Productivity

Consider a standard production decision of a small firm, in which the owner is choosing labor L,
materials M, and capital K inputs to maximize output Y=f(A,L,M, K), with output price p, cost of
labor w, cost of raw materials s, cost of capital r, and productivity factor A. With a given wealth
level W, the owner’s production decision is:

                                                                                             (1)



                                                 9
Where λ reflects the tightness of borrowing constraints on both fixed and working capital. How
then might business practices affect this production decision? Bloom et al. (2012) discuss several
views of management that have analogs here. The first is to view management as another factor
of production, which itself has a market price and is chosen by the firm owner like other inputs.
In micro and small firms the owner is typically the manager (and often the only worker), so
managers are not hired through the labor market. But owners may be able to purchase better
business practices by investing in business training. A second view is that management is a
technology, with better management allowing firms to produce more out of the same inputs. In
our context this would mean have business practices affect the A term in this optimization
decision. For example, better stock-keeping, record-keeping and planning ahead may result in
less spoilage and wastage, and less downtime that comes from not having the right parts or
goods.

However, we believe that the types of business practices we measure also are likely to matter in
ways other than productivity. In particular, marketing practices are likely to affect the demand
faced by firms, which is reflected in the price p it receives. Better buying practices such as
seeking an alternative supplier can result in low raw materials prices s, while better record-
keeping and financial planning can potentially affect the willingness of banks to lend ( ), and
cost of finance r. As a result, both prices and inputs are likely to be endogenous to business
practices B. But in general the different channels all suggest we should expect firms with better
business practices to have higher revenues and to be more profitable, so we can examine whether
these associations hold.

We start by simply examining whether firms with better business practices have higher revenues.
To do this we run local linear regressions of log sales on our business practices index. Next, we
examine cross-sectional associations with labor productivity by estimating for firm i in industry j
in country c:

                                                                            (2)

where y is log sales or log profits, B is our business practices index score, and l is labor. This
specification controls for country and industry dummies. Industry sector is defined differently
across the datasets, so we allow for the industry to vary by country. Typically industry is at the 2

                                                10
or 3 digit SIC level, and in total we have 294 industry*country dummies. For labor, we control
for log of the owner’s labor hours, and log of the number of workers. To deal with zero hours or
zero workers, we include separate dummy variables for having zero hours and for having zero
workers, as well as for having missing values of these variables. 5 A positive value of                          then
shows that better business practices are associated with higher labor productivity in the cross-
section.

We then add controls for the log of the value of inventories and log capital stock, again including
separate dummies for zero and missing values, in order to capture total factor productivity. Next,
we add a set of controls for owner and firm characteristics that might be correlated with both
firm productivity and the business practices used: the gender, age, and schooling of the owner,
their ability as measured by raven and digitspan recall tests, and the age of the firm. Finally, we
allow the coefficients on all of these control variables to differ by country.

         3.2 Econometric Results for the Association of Business Practices with Productivity

Table 2 reports the results of estimating equation (2) on the combined sample. Column 1 shows a
strong positive and significant association between better business practices and higher labor
productivity. A one standard deviation (0.25) increase in the business practices score is
associated with 0.30 log points (35 percent) higher labor productivity. Controlling for inventories
and raw materials reduces this association from a one s.d. change in business practice scores to
0.24 log points (27 percent). Adding the set of owner and firm controls in column 3 reduces the
coefficient on business practices only slightly, despite the controls themselves being highly
significant. From column 3 we find that a one standard deviation increase in business practices
scores is associated with a 23 percent increase in productivity. Allowing for additional flexibility
in the production function in column 4 by allowing all control variables to have country-specific
coefficients does not change this very much, with a one standard deviation increase in business
practices still associated with a 22 percent increase in productivity.




5
  About 2.4 percent of respondents report sales of zero, and 3.9 percent report negative or zero profits. We exclude
these from the regressions reported in the body of the paper. We think this is likely the proper treatment because, for
example, there are many observations with zero sales but positive profits, However, we find almost identical results
when we define the left hand side variable as log(sales+1) and log(profits+1).

                                                          11
Columns 5 through 8 show the corresponding regressions with log profits as the outcome;
business practices are again statistically significant in all specifications. From column 8 we find
a one standard deviation increase in business practices is associated with an 18 percentage point
increase in profits, conditional on labor, raw materials, capital, and owner and firm
characteristics.

Because the survey respondent is also typically the manager, there might be a concern that the
reported measures of business practices and outcomes are both influenced by characteristics of
the owners which we are unable to control for. High ability owners, for example, may report
better business practices either because they are more likely to use better practices or because
they are more likely to know what the “correct” answer to the questions is. Even if higher ability
owners employ better practices, the relationship between practices and sales or profits may be
biased upward by the exclusion of variables positively correlated with both practices and
outcomes. In that regard, the comparison of column 2 with column 3, or column 6 with column 7
is reassuring. These results indicate that the inclusion of several controls for the ability of the
owner does not reduce very much the relationship between measured business practices on the
one hand and sales or profits on the other, suggesting that the relationship is not driven by
unmeasured owner ability (Altonji et al 2005).

The estimations reported on Table 2 impose a linear functional form between business practices
and firm performance. One might alternatively hypothesize that business practices either have
strongly decreasing returns (what matters is having a few in place), or strongly increasing returns
(they don’t matter unless you are doing almost all of them). We therefore relax the linearity
assumption in two ways. First, Figure 4 shows local linear regressions of log sales against our
business practices score for the combined sample, and for each country separately. Point-wise
95 percent confidence intervals are also shown. In some of the individual country cases the
confidence intervals are wide at one or the other tail, reflecting few observations in this range.
This is particularly the case for the smaller Chilean sample. In all cases we see strong positive,
and reasonably linear, relationships. Firms with better business practices have higher sales on
average. Second, in Appendix Figure A1 we re-estimate column 8 of Table 2, allowing for non-
linearity in the association with business practices by including nine dummy variables for
different business practice ranges instead of the linear term. The relationship is fairly linear,


                                                 12
showing if anything slightly increasing returns to business practices. We therefore proceed with a
linear specification for the remainder of the paper for ease of interpretation.

In Appendix Table A2 we examine the robustness of our results to alternative methods of
aggregating the business practices. We do this for the subsample of observations with no missing
business practice data, since principal components drops observations in which one or more
business practices are missing.6 We see from the foot of Table A2 that the estimated change in
log sales from a one standard deviation change in the business practice measure is robust to how
business practices are aggregated, and we get a positive and strongly significant association in all
cases. Appendix Table A3 examines the association between business practices and productivity
country by country. Panel A shows labor productivity, and Panel B total factor productivity. We
see positive and significant associations with labor productivity in all countries, and positive
associations with total factor productivity in all countries, which are statistically significant in six
out of seven countries (the exception being Ghana, which has a relatively small sample size).
Therefore our results are not being driven by any one country, or by the method of aggregation.

Our specifications in Table 2 are similar to those in the first few columns of Table 3 of Bloom et
al. (2012). It is therefore of interest to compare the magnitude of association of outcomes with
business practices in our sample to the associations of outcomes with management practices in
their sample. In their equivalent of        column 1, a one standard deviation increase in their
management practices score is associated with a 42.6 percent increase in labor productivity,
while in their equivalent of column 4, a one standard deviation increase in management is
associated with a 17.1 percent increase in total factor productivity. These are similar in
magnitude to our estimated effect sizes of 35 percent and 22 percent respectively.7

        3.3 Association of Business Practices with Business Subcomponents

Table 3 separates our overall business practice measure into the four subcomponent indices:
marketing, buying and stock control, record-keeping, and financial planning. Column 1 shows
that each component has a positive and significant association with labor productivity. Columns


6
  Note that this drops the entire samples from Mexico, Nigeria, and Kenya where one or more of the business
practice questions were not asked.
7
  Note that the standardized effect sizes are much smaller in Bloom and Van Reenan (2007), which has a much
smaller spread of management practices over which to draw inferences.

                                                    13
2 and 3 shows this is also true for total factor productivity. Column 6 shows that it is the record-
keeping and marketing practices that have the strongest associations with profits, conditional on
input use and owner and firm characteristics. Table A4 presents the coefficients from estimating
(2) separately for each practice, and finds that 25 out of the 26 practices have a statistically
significant positive correlation with labor productivity (the exception being whether they run out
of stock frequently).

         3.4 Association of Business Practices with Firm Survival and Firm Growth

Table 4 uses our panel data to examine the extent to which baseline business practices help
predict subsequent firm survival and firm growth.8 Columns 1 through 4 use data from Kenya,
Nigeria, and Sri Lanka and look at survival over one year. Column 5 uses only the Sri Lanka data
to examine a longer-term horizon of 5.5 years. We see from column 1 that baseline business
practices do positively and significantly predict one-year survival. A one standard deviation
improvement in business practices is associated with a 1.3 percentage point higher likelihood of
survival, in a context where on average only 8.8 percent of firms exit in one year. Baseline
practices continue to significantly predict survival even after conditioning on initial employment
levels (column 2), and on owner and firm characteristics (column 3). However, they lose their
significance once we condition on baseline sales and profitability (column 4), suggesting that one
of the main channels in helping firms survive is through making them more profitable. Column 5
shows that our business practice measure also predicts survival over longer periods – a one
standard deviation increase in baseline practices is associated with 2.2 percentage point higher
survival rates over a 5.5 year horizon.

Columns 6 through 8 show that there is a strong positive association between initial business
practices and subsequent sales growth (conditional on survival).9 Sales growth here is measured
as the change in log sales. This positive association holds over the one year horizon (columns 6
and 7), and in our Sri Lankan sample over the 5.5 year horizon (column 8). A one standard



8
  Note in our survival probits we control for industry classification at the level of manufacturing, trade, and services,
in order that the probit does not drop observations from industries with small numbers of firms in our sample and in
which all the firms survive or all fail.
9
  Since sales growth can be noisy, for robustness we also considered sales growth truncated at the 5 th and 95th
percentile, and using this truncated growth measure also results in a positive and statistically significant association.

                                                           14
deviation increase in business practices is associated with 7 percent higher growth over one year
(column 7), and with 15 percent higher growth over 5.5 years (column 8).

       3.5 Discussion of Business Training Experimental Literature

The above analysis shows that there exists a strong positive association between our measure of
business practices and business performance and growth. In order to show that this relationship
is causal, we would ideally experimentally change business practices and measure their impact
on firm growth. A growing experimental literature, summarized in McKenzie and Woodruff
(2014), has attempted to do this. However, much of this literature has struggled to find
significant impacts of business training on firm performance. This raises the question of whether
the strong associations we see in our data are inconsistent with experimental results, and
therefore suggest that we are not capturing a causal phenomenon.

To examine this, we use the fact that three of our datasets were collected as part of business
training experiments. The first three rows of Table 5 show the effects on business practices of the
International Labor Organization (ILO) Start-and-Improve-Your-Business and Get Ahead
training programs in two of our Sri Lankan sub-samples and our Kenyan sample. The first
column shows the measured effect of training on business practices. In all three experiments, the
treatment effect on our business practices measure is between 0.04 and 0.06, implying the
owners undertake an additional 1 to 1.5 practices after training. The next two columns present
the 95 percent confidence intervals for the treatment effects on log sales and log profits one year
after this training. Many of these contain zero, which is consistent with the general struggle in
the literature to find significant impacts of training on sales and profits. In the final two columns
we use the coefficients from columns 4 and 8 of Table 2 to predict changes in profits and sales,
given the change in business practices that the training causes. Given the small change in
business practices, the earlier regressions suggest we should see only a 3-4 percent increase in
sales and profits in each study. These estimates lie well within the confidence intervals of the
estimated treatment effects.

Although most other business training evaluations have not measured business practices in as
comprehensive a way as our measures, the evidence summarized in McKenzie and Woodruff
(2014) shows that other existing training programs have generally also only increased the use of


                                                 15
good business practices of around 6 or 7 percentage points, or 0.1 to 0.2 standard deviations.
This contrasts with the experimental evidence on management practices in large firms provided
in Bloom et al. (2013), in which intensive consulting resulted in a 37.8 percentage point increase
in management practice use.

The bottom two rows of Table 5 summarize two recent studies that have used more intensive
training programs and also found larger impacts on business practices, using measurement tools
based on our survey instrument. The control group data from Martínez et al. (2013) provides the
Chile data used in our paper. In their experiment, they find an approximate 0.18 increase in the
business practice score, which is about four times as large as in the ILO training experiments.
This results in a statistically significant increase in business income. Our associations from Table
2 would again yield an estimated treatment effect within their confidence interval. 10 Anderson-
MacDonald et al. (2014) use a 10 week course in South Africa, and obtain average increases in
business practices of 26 percentage points. Based on Table 2 we would predict that this would
lead to 17-21 percent increases in profits and sales. These predictions are lower than their point
estimates, but lie within the confidence intervals for their estimated effects.

Taken together, we therefore view the experimental evidence on business training as being
consistent with the strong associations we find between business practices and firm performance.
The reason most business training studies struggle to find effects is that relatively short training
courses do not lead to much of a change in business practices, leaving the studies with limited
power for measuring impacts on sales and profits.

     4. What explains the variation in business practices across firms?

We have found that there is large variation within countries in terms of the business practices
used by small firms, and that these differences are strongly correlated with firm performance and
survival. This raises the question of what causes business practices to vary so much across firms.
We consider several key factors, examining the extent to which factors identified as explaining
differences in management practices among larger firms also play a role in determining business
practices among small firms.

10
   Note that their intervention combined the training with a grant, and they are unable to separate the effect of
training from that of the grant. This may explain why our estimated effect based on Table 2 is near the bottom of a
confidence interval for their effect size.

                                                        16
       4.1 Human Capital

In small firms the business practices used are to a large extent implemented by the firm owner.
Without intermediate levels of management and workers, we expect the human capital of the
owner to play a key role in determining which business practices are used. We have seen that our
business practice measures retain significance even after controlling for multiple measures of
human capital, suggesting that it is not that business practices are simply capturing owner ability.
But it does seem likely that more educated and more able owners will find it easier to learn and
adopt good business practices.

Figure 5 shows local linear regressions of business practices on years of schooling for the
combined sample, and country by country. We see a strong positive association. The association
is weakest in Nigeria, where most of the sample has post-secondary education. Column 1 of
Table 6 examines this association in more detail, also controlling for owner gender, age, country,
and business sector, and for two other measures of human capital: digitspan recall and Raven test
score. These latter two measures are both measures of analytical and cognitive ability, and were
only collected in some countries (see Table 1). We see that business practices tend to be better in
male-owned firms, and don’t vary with the age of the owner. Conditional on this, each year of
education is associated with a 1.2 percentage point increase in business practices: so a one
standard deviation increase in education is associated with a 0.20 s.d. increase in business
practices. Digitspan recall and Raven test both have positive and significant associations as well,
but the magnitudes are smaller: a 1 s.d. increase in either measure is associated with a 0.03-0.08
increase in business practice scores, conditional on the other variables in this regression. Formal
education therefore appears to have a stronger association than innate ability in explaining the
practices used.

       4.2 Family History of Entrepreneurship

Evidence from higher-income countries indicates that children of self-employed parents are more
likely to become self-employed themselves. Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (2000) find that the effect
parents’ self-employment on occupational choice remains large even after controlling for wealth
levels, suggesting that the transition of human capital from parent to child is the most important
channel for the intergenerational effect. Motivated by this, in column 2 of Table 2 we examine


                                                17
whether owners whose parents were business owners have different business practices. We see
that both having a father who owned a business and having a mother who owned a business are
positively associated with business practices. This provides support for the idea that parents who
are business owners transmit human capital relevant to running a business to their children.

       4.3 Product Market Competition

Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) emphasize the role of product market competition in driving out
poorly managed firms or getting them to improve. We have three different measures of
competition in our surveys. The first is the number of competitors the firm faces in their local
area (typically in their marketplace or census tract). Many firms face a lot of competition, with
the median facing 8 competitors, and the mean 30. We split this variable into categories in order
to see how different degrees of competition associate with business practices, and to avoid the
results being driven by outliers (one firm reports 7,000 competitors!). Column 3 shows the
results. There is no significant association between any level of competition and business
practices.

Our second measure of competition is whether the most important competitor is located within 1
kilometer of the business, reflecting close competition. This question was asked only in the
Bangladesh, Ghana and Sri Lanka samples. In those samples, 81 percent of firms say yes to this.
Our third measure is whether the firm owner says that customers could replace them in a less
than 1 day if they shut down. 44 percent of the respondents in Bangladesh, Ghana and Nigeria,
where the question was asked, report this is the case. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 6 show negative
correlations with both measures of competition, with the measure of being able to be replaced
within one day being significant at the 1 percent level.

While the results using the latter two measures of competition appear to be much more strongly
negative than the results when using the number of competitors, the difference is driven as much
by the difference in samples as the differences in the way competition is defined. When we run
the regression from column 3 on either of the samples where the other competition measures are
defined, all four coefficients are negative, those for between 5 and 20 competitors significantly
so. Conversely, when we run the column 3 regression on the sample where the other measures of
competition are not defined, we obtain four positive coefficients, with those for between 1 and 9


                                                 18
competitors both just missing the .10 significance level. Taken together, these results suggest
that the effect of competition varies across the samples, but is at least as likely to be associated
with worse business practices among small firms. This is in strong contrast to the results for
larger firms. One reason that competition effects may differ for small firms is that competition
itself is endogenous to business practices.11 Better managed small firms will market differently,
differentiate their products, and choose locations such that they may not have to compete with as
many other firms. In contrast, firms with poor business practices are likely to be producing goods
that are the same as those produced by many other firms, and thus face large amounts of
competition.

        4.4 Firm Size

Finally we examine whether larger firms have better business practices. The causation here may
go both ways: firms with better practices will sell more and be able to grow larger – consistent
with the results for sales growth we show on Table 4 – in the end hiring more employees. But
being larger may also allow owners to hire specialists to perform some of the functions we
measure (such as record-keeping) and give the owner more time for strategic planning and
marketing rather than day-to-day operations. Column 6 of Table 6 shows that larger firms do
have better business practices. A firm with 1 to 4 paid workers has a 0.101 higher business
practices score than a firm with no workers, and the coefficients increase with each category of
firm size, so that a firm with 21 or more workers has a 0.235 (almost one s.d.) higher business
practice score than a firm with no workers.

The last column of Table 6 considers all these factors together. We continue to see positive
associations between better business practices and human capital, having parents who owned a
business, and firm size.

5. Conclusions

Micro and small enterprises are the predominant form of economic activity in low- and middle-
income countries. There is broad recognition that the microenterprise sector is highly


11
  It is also possible that firm owners with worse business practices have inaccurate information about how many
competitors they actually face. The response of “Don’t know” is dummied out along with missing observations for
this variable in our regressions.

                                                       19
heterogeneous, with some owners drawn by opportunities to create a business and others drawn
by the necessity to scrape out a living. Aspirations and education have been the viewed as the
main underlying sources of heterogeneity. We show that the enterprises are also differentiated by
the quality of the business practices they employ, and that business practices have effects on
enterprise outcomes which are independent of the effects of basic human capital.

Our index of business practices is designed to be easily implemented in closed-end field surveys
and is customized to microenterprises. Most of our data are self-reported, but we show that the
reports of owners are highly correlated with measures from independent auditors visiting the
businesses and spending several hours asking open-ended questions about practices. Using data
from seven countries, we show that the index of business practices is highly correlated with
enterprise heterogeneity in the cross-section. Owners implementing better business practices
have higher sales, profits, labor productivity and total factor productivity. Moreover, better
business practices are associated with higher rates of firm survival, and substantially higher rates
of sales growth. The effect of business practices on outcomes is not only statistically significant
but economically meaningful. A one standard deviation improvement in business practices is
associated with an increase of 35 percent in labor productivity and 22 percent in total factor
productivity – relationships similar to those found for large firms in Bloom et al (2012).

The correlation between business practices and business outcomes raises the obvious question of
whether the correlations we find in the data line up with causation. That is, can practices be
improved with training or consulting and, if so, do the improved practices lead to improved firm
outcomes? A growing literature tests the effectiveness of training programs which aim to
improve management of small enterprises. The literature generally shows insignificant effects of
training on firm outcomes. But our data show that the failure to find significant effects is
explained by the fact that the training programs have only a very modest effect on improvement
of business practices. The changes in sales and profits predicted by cross-sectional data for the
given changes in business practices are all well within the confidence limits for increases in sales
and profits found in the experimental literature. Our findings thus point to the need for more
intensive training programs that have larger effects on business practices.




                                                20
References

Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder and Christopher Taber (2005) “Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(1): 151-184.

Anderson MacDonald, Stephen, Rajesh Chandy and Bilal Zia (2014) “The impact of marketing
(versus finance) skills on firm performance: evidence from a randomized controlled trial in
South Africa”, Mimeo. London Business School.

Bloom, Nicolas and John Van Reenen (2007) “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
Across Firms and Countries”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1351-1408

Bloom, Nicolas, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen (2012) “Management as a Technology”,
Mimeo. Stanford.

Bloom, Nicolas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie and John Roberts (2013) “Does
Management Matter? Evidence from India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1): 1-51

Borgenvall, Mats, Håken Jarskog, Barbara Murray and Cecilia Karlstedt (1999) Improve Your
Business: Basics. International Labour Office, Geneva.

Calderon, Gabriela, Jesse M. Cunha, Giacomo De Giorgi , 2013, “Buisness Literacy and
Development: Evidence From a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural Mexico,” working paper
Barcelona GSE.

Calderon, Gabriela, Leonardo Iacovone and Laura Juarez (2015) “Opportunity Vs. Necessity:
Understanding the Heterogeneity of Female Micro-entrepreneurs”, Mimeo. World Bank.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2009) “Innovative Firms or
Innovative Owners? Determinants of Innovation in Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises",
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 4934.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2010) “Wage Subsidies for
Microenterprises”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 100(2): 614-18.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2013) “What Generates Growth in
Microenterprises? Experimental Evidence on Capital, Labor and Training”, Mimeo. World Bank.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “Business Training and
Female Enterprise Start-up, Growth, and Dynamics: Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka”,
Journal of Development Economics, 106: 199-210.




                                             21
Diwan, Faizan, Grace Makana, David McKenzie, and Silvia Paruzzolo (2014) “Invitation Choice
Structure Has No Impact on Attendance in a Female Business Training Program in Kenya”
PLOS ONE, 9(10): e109873

Dunn, Thomas and Douglas Holtz-Eakin, 2000, “Financial Capital, Human Capital, and the
Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links,” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol 18(2), pp. 287-305.

Fafchamps, Marcel and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “Identifying Gazelles: Expert panels vs.
surveys as a Means to Identify Firms with Rapid Growth Potential”, Mimeo. Warwick.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Benjamin Olken (2014) “The Missing “Missing Middle””, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 28(3): 89-108.

Martínez, Claudia, Esteban Puentes and Jaime Ruiz-Tagle (2013) “Micro-Entrepreneurship
Training     and     Asset    Transfers:   Short Term    Impacts   on    the    Poor”,
http://works.bepress.com/claudia_martinez_a/5

McKenzie, David (2010) “Dimensions of informality in Bangladesh”, Mimeo. World Bank.

McKenzie, David (2015) “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship:
Experimental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition”, Mimeo. World Bank.

McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “What are we learning from business
training evaluations around the developing world?”, World Bank Research Observer, 29(1): 48-
82.

Taylor, Frederick (1911), Principles of Scientific Management, New York and London: Harper
and Brothers.



Appendix 1: Business Practices Measured

The total score – the composite business practice score -- ranges between 0 and 1. The total is the
proportion of the following 26 business practices used by the firm:

Marketing Practices: coded as 1 for each of the following that the business has done in the last 3 months:

    -   M1: Visited at least one of its competitor’s businesses to see what prices its competitors are
        charging
    -   M2: Visited at least one of its competitor’s businesses to see what products its competitors have
        available for sale
    -   M3: Asked existing customers whether there are any other products the customers would like the
        business to sell or produce



                                                    22
    -   M4: Talked with at least one former customer to find out why former customers have stopped
        buying from this business
    -   M5: Asked a supplier about which products are selling well in this business’ industry
    -   M6: Attracted customers with a special offer
    -   M7: Advertised in any form (last 6 months)

        Note: M1 and M2 are coded as zero if the firm says it has no competitors. M4 is coded as zero if
        the firm says it has no former customers.

Buying and Stock Control Practices: coded as 1 for each of the following:

    -   B1: Attempted to negotiate with a supplier for a lower price on raw material
    -   B2: Compared the prices or quality offered by alternate suppliers or sources of raw materials to
        the business’ current suppliers or sources of raw material
    -   B3: The business does not run out of stock monthly or more (coded as one if the business has no
        stock)


Costing and Record-Keeping Practices: coded as 1 for each of the following that the business does:

    -   R1: Keeps written business records
    -   R2: Records every purchase and sale made by the business
    -   R3: Able to use records to see how much cash the business has on hand at any point in time
    -   R4: Uses records regularly to know whether sales of a particular product are increasing or
        decreasing from one month to another
    -   R5: Works out the cost to the business of each main product it sells
    -   R6: Knows which goods you make the most profit per item selling
    -   R7: Has a written budget, which states how much is owed each month for rent, electricity,
        equipment maintenance, transport, advertising, and other indirect costs to business
    -   R8: Has records documenting that there exists enough money each month after paying business
        expenses to repay a loan in the hypothetical situation that this business wants a bank loan



Financial Planning Practices: coded as 1 for each of the following:

    -   F1: Review the financial performance of their business and analyze where there are areas for
        improvement at least monthly
    -   F2: Has a target set for sales over the next year
    -   F3: Compares their sales achieved to their target at least monthly
    -   F4: Has a budget of the likely costs their business will have to face over the next year
    -   F5: Has an annual profit and loss statement
    -   F6: Has an annual statement of cash flow
    -   F7: Has an annual balance sheet
    -   F8: Has an annual income/expenditure sheet



                                                   23
Note that F5 through F8 were not asked in the Kenya and Nigeria datasets, so the business practices score
for these two countries is the proportion of the other 22 practices implemented.

Appendix 2: Additional Details on Surveys

Bangladesh:

The survey was conducted between March and May 2010 as part of a World Bank project intended to
investigate the differences between formal and informal firms in Bangladesh (McKenzie, 2010). The data
consists of 1725 enterprises, selected from a sample frame formed by a census of 55,817 firms in the
randomly selected areas in urban parts of the 19 old districts. The sample was stratified by firm size (in
terms of full-time employment) and broad industry (manufacturing, trade or services. Oversampling of
firms with 10-99 full-time workers was done to ensure sufficient sample sizes of these firms. Only one
round of this survey was taken.

Chile

The data consist of the follow-up survey from individuals owning enterprises in the control group of
Martínez et al. (2013). The original sample consists of beneficiaries of Chile’s anti-poverty program
(Chile Solidario) who applied to a government microenterpreneurship support program in 2010, and who
were located in the metropolitan area of Santiago. 566 individuals were assigned to the control group. The
follow-up survey, which measured business practices, took place between October and November 2011.
We use the sample of 158 individuals in the control group who were found to be running enterprises in
this follow-up survey. Only one round of business practice data are available, and we use time-invariant
characteristics of the business owners from the baseline survey coupled with the outcome and business
practice data from the follow-up survey.

Ghana

The sample consists of 335 applicants to a business plan competition in Accra and Kumasi, described in
Fafchamps and Woodruff (2014). Baseline data were collected in 2010, and then two rounds of follow-up
surveys were collected in July-August 2011, and August-September 2012, approximately one and two
years after the baseline. 257 individuals were surveyed in the first follow-up, and 279 in the second
follow-up. The survey did not collect detailed survival data, and so we only use the time dimension of this
data for examining the persistence of business practices over time.

Kenya

The sample comes from an ongoing evaluation of a business training program for women in four counties
of Kenya: Kakamega and Kisii in the Western region, and Embu and Kitui in the Eastern region. In each
county a census was taken of market centers, and then a screening was done to select a sample in which
the business did not have more than 3 employees; the business had profits in the past week between 0 and
4000 Kenyan Shillings (KSH) (1 US Dollar averaged approximately 85 KSH over the survey period);
sales in the past week less than or equal to 50,000 KSH; and the individual had at least one year of
schooling (Diwan et al, 2014). The survey is therefore representative of microenterprises of this size run
by women in these four counties. The baseline survey took place between June and November 2013, and
consisted of 3,537 individuals. The survey is missing responses on business practices F5-F8 (financial

                                                    24
statements) in the baseline, because the question only allowed for one response, rather than a yes/no for
each type of financial statement (70.2% report not having any accounting statement prepared).A follow-
up survey was conducted one year later, with survival data collected for 3,446 individuals and follow-up
business practices data for 2,860 individuals.

Mexico

This survey is the baseline of a randomized-controlled trial to evaluate the impact of "Mujeres Moviendo
a Mexico", a large-scale business training program for female micro-entrepreneurs funded by INADEM
("Instituto Nacional del Emprendedor Mexicano") and implemented by the NGO Crea Comunidades de
Emprendedores Sociales. The survey was conducted in 2014 and consists of a representative sample of
female-run firms with 5 or fewer employees and less than 4 million Mexican pesos in annual turnover
operating in eight urban areas in Mexico: Aguascalientes, Dolores Hidalgo, Irapuato, León, Mexico City,
Querétaro, San Juan del Río and Toluca. The data are described further in Calderon et al. (2015). The data
consists of 10,275 individuals. The business practice questions asked did not include R2 (keeping a record
of every purchase and sale.

Nigeria

The sample consists of applicants to a nationwide business plan competition, described in McKenzie
(2014). The first round data consist of 1725 individuals surveyed between November 2012 and April
2013 who were operating businesses at that time. The sample consists of applicants who had been
selected for a business plan training workshop, or had scores close to the threshold for being selected. A
second follow-up survey was conducted between October 2013 and February 2014, allowing
measurement of survival over a 1 year horizon, and of the stability of business practices. The business
practice questions asked did not include F5-F8 (financial statements).

Sri Lanka

The business practice questions were asked in three separate surveys undertaken in Sri Lanka, and we use
the data from all three.

The first sample comes from the Sri Lankan Longitudinal Survey of Enterprises (SLLSE), a long-term
panel survey of microenterprises designed by the authors in collaboration with Suresh de Mel (de Mel et
al, 2010, 2013). The baseline survey was intended to be a representative survey of male microenterprises
with 2 or fewer employees in the Colombo, Kandy, and Galle-Matara areas of Sri Lanka, and was
conducted between April and October 2008. This gives 1562 individuals with business practice scores.
These enterprises were then subsequently re-interviewed in 10 additional follow-up rounds, in April and
October of 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012, and in April of 2013 and 2014. This enables us to examine
survival over periods of as long as 5.5 years.

The second sample consists of a representative sample of current female business owners operating in
greater Colombo and greater Kandy areas, who had monthly profits of 5,000 Rs or less (US$43). These
628 women were first interviewed in January 2009, and form the current enterprise sample for a business
training intervention described in de Mel et al. (2014). Four rounds of follow-up surveys were conducted
in September 2009, January 2010, September 2010, and June 2011. We use the January 2010 follow-up to
measure the one-year survival rates and stability of business practices over a one-year horizon.

                                                   25
The third sample consist of small and medium enterprises that were a booster sample to the baseline of
the SLLSE, which were surveyed in order to generate a larger sample of firms of this size (de Mel et al,
2010). The baseline sample consisted of 610 of these firms, but did not ask business practice questions.
We use the 471 firms that were reinterviewed and still surviving in April 2009.




                                                  26
          Figure 1: Variation in Business Practices Within Countries
                          Bangladesh                Chile                 Ghana
          0 1 2 3 4




                            Kenya                  Mexico                 Nigeria
          0 1 2 3 4
Density




                                            0           .5      1     0     .5      1

                           Sri Lanka
          0 1 2 3 4




                      0       .5       1
                                       Proportion of Practices Used

                                                   27
         Figure 2: Stability of Business Practices Over 1 Year
 1
.8
.6
.4
.2
 0




     0            .2            .4             .6             .8   1
                       Business Practices Score at Baseline

                                     28
         Figure 3: Audited Scores vs Survey Scores
 1
.8
.6
.4
.2
 0




     0       .2           .4            .6            .8   1
                  Business Practices Score (Survey)

                                Linear Fit
                                45 degree line


                              29
                            Figure 4: Local linear regressions of log sales on business practices
             Combined Sample                                                                      Bangladesh                                                     Chile                                      Ghana




                                                                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                         7
                   7.5

Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                    Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                                                                                    Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                 10
               7
        6.5




                                                                                                                                             5




                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                              6
  6




                                                                            6
5.5




                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                             0       .2 .4 .6 .8          1                                   0    .2 .4    .6 .8                                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1                        0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                       Proportion of Business Practices Used                           Proportion of Business Practices Used                        Proportion of Business Practices Used   Proportion of Business Practices Used




                                        Kenya                                                      Mexico                                                       Nigeria                                  Sri Lanka




                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                        7.5
                                6




                                                                                                                                                         8
           Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                   Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                                                                                    Log of Monthly Sales




                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                 7
                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                         6.5
                4




                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                    0
           3




                                    0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1                                           0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1                                                0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1                        0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                           Proportion of Business Practices Used                       Proportion of Business Practices Used                        Proportion of Business Practices Used   Proportion of Business Practices Used




                                                                                                                               30
                        Figure 5: Local linear regressions of Business Practices on Education
                            Overall Sample                                                    Bangladesh                                                            Chile                                  Ghana
                        1




                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                            1
 Business Practices Score




                                                               Business Practices Score




                                                                                                                              Business Practices Score
                    .8




                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
              .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
         .4




                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
    .2




                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                             0
                            0       5     10 15 20                                        0       5     10 15 20                                         0         5       10       15             0      5      10 15 20
                                Years of education of owner                                   Years of education of owner                                    Years of education of owner        Years of education of owner




                                      Kenya                                                        Mexico                                                         Nigeria                               Sri Lanka
                        1




                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                            1
 Business Practices Score




                                                               Business Practices Score




                                                                                                                              Business Practices Score
                    .8




                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
              .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
         .4




                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                            0        5     10 15 20                                       0       5     10 15 20                                         10 12 14 16 18                            0      5      10 15 20
                                Years of education of owner                                   Years of education of owner                                    Years of education of owner        Years of education of owner




                                                                                                                            31
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                            Full Sample                                  Means by Country
                                         Mean          SD    Bangladesh   Chile      Ghana     Kenya    Mexico   Nigeria   Sri Lanka
Male                                      0.23        0.42      0.99      0.09        0.78      0.00      0.00    0.85        0.47
Owner's Age                               41.0        12.6      41.9      36.6        39.3      35.7      45.3    30.9        37.3
Years of Educ                             9.7         4.1        9.7      10.0        14.0      9.0        8.6    14.8        10.8
Digitspan recall                          4.5         2.1        5.4       n.a.        6.5      5.0        3.3     7.5         6.4
Raven test score                          5.0         2.9       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.      6.9        4.9     4.4         3.2
Father Owned a Business                   0.35        0.48      n.a.       n.a.       0.36      0.30      n.a.    n.a.        0.42
Mother Owned a Business                   0.28        0.45      n.a.       n.a.       0.53      0.41      n.a.    n.a.        0.07
Trade                                     0.55        0.50      0.51      0.73        0.44      0.76      0.62    0.04        0.34
Manufacturing                             0.11        0.32      0.28      0.37        0.24      0.00      0.05    0.24        0.31
Firm age (years)                          8.7         10.5      12.4       3.5        10.7      6.4        9.2     4.5        10.0
Number of Paid Workers                    2.3         25.8      12.5       0.2         4.2      0.2        0.2     6.7         3.6
Monthly Sales (USD)                      2751        25258     13999       293        3571      279       1285    3835       2818
Monthly Profits (USD)                     647        5523       1461       195        2067       53        512    1996        280
Capital Stock (USD)                      25229      945813     42757       n.a.       9809      163       1463   229730      6740
Registered for Taxes                      0.34        0.47      0.46       n.a.       0.61      n.a.      0.31    0.38        0.33
Closest competitor within 1km             0.81        0.39      0.96       n.a.       0.63      n.a.      n.a.    n.a.        0.70
Customers can replace in <1 day           0.44        0.50      0.59       n.a.       0.71      n.a.      n.a.    0.24        n.a.
Business Practice Score                   0.39        0.25      0.40      0.38        0.44      0.52      0.30    0.76        0.32
Marketing Score                           0.36        0.31      0.27      0.37        0.41      0.62      0.25    0.66        0.30
Buying and Stock Score                    0.57        0.30      0.55      0.57        0.42      0.81      0.47    0.78        0.57
Record-Keeping Score                      0.46        0.34      0.66      0.44        0.62      0.42      0.38    0.85        0.42
Financial Planning Score                  0.28        0.32      0.20      0.26        0.31      0.35      0.23    0.73        0.14
Medians
Median Sales (USD)                        500                   2676      128        1135      132       667     1290        231
Median Profits (USD)                      167                   294       96          355      47        267      645        93
Median Capital Stock (USD)                506                   1176            .    2128      39        545     45161       926
Median number paid workers                 0                     4          0          3        0         0        4          0

Number of Observations                   20400                  1724      158         335      3532     10265     1725       2661
Notes:
n.a. denotes not asked in this dataset



                                                                                32
Table 2: Cross-Sectional Associations of Business Practices with Sales and Profits
                                      Log Sales Log Sales Log Sales Log Sales Log Profits Log Profits   Log Profits Log Profits
Business Practices Score               1.211*** 0.965*** 0.833*** 0.795*** 1.010*** 0.830***              0.697*** 0.655***
                                        (0.047) (0.046)      (0.048) (0.048)       (0.045)  (0.045)        (0.047)    (0.046)
Log(Paid Workers)                      0.653*** 0.475*** 0.464***                 0.496*** 0.365***       0.357***
                                        (0.026) (0.026)      (0.027)               (0.026)  (0.026)        (0.026)
Log(Owners Hours)                      0.351*** 0.313*** 0.302***                 0.260*** 0.232***       0.221***
                                        (0.020) (0.019)      (0.019)               (0.019)  (0.018)        (0.018)
Log(Capital Stock)                               0.094*** 0.085***                         0.072***       0.065***
                                                  (0.007)    (0.006)                        (0.006)        (0.006)
Log(Inventories)                                 0.200*** 0.198***                         0.148***       0.146***
                                                  (0.010)    (0.010)                        (0.009)        (0.009)
Owner is male                                                0.096**                                      0.130***
                                                             (0.045)                                       (0.045)
Age of owner                                                -0.005***                                    -0.006***
                                                             (0.001)                                       (0.001)
Years of education of owner                                 0.012***                                      0.011***
                                                             (0.003)                                       (0.003)
Digitspan recall                                            0.036***                                      0.034***
                                                             (0.007)                                       (0.007)
Firm age (years)                                            0.008***                                      0.007***
                                                             (0.001)                                       (0.001)
Raven test score                                            0.019***                                      0.013***
                                                             (0.004)                                       (0.004)
Control coefficients vary by country      No        No          No       Yes         No       No             No         Yes

Sample Size                             18146      18146      18146      18146       18135      18135       18135       18135
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses,***,p<0.05
                                           **, ******
                                                  indicate
                                                      p<0.01"
                                                           significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively
Regressions also include dummies for zero or missing values of each control.
All regressions include country dummies and country*industry sector dummies.
Columns 4 and 8 allow the coefficients on all control variables to vary by country.
                                                                       33
Table 3: Cross-Sectional Associations with Index Subcomponents
                                                       Log Sales    Log Sales   Log Sales   Log Profits   Log Profits Log Profits
Proportion of marketing practices used                0.310***      0.229***    0.195***    0.302***      0.246*** 0.209***
                                                      (0.036)       (0.035)     (0.035)     (0.034)       (0.034)     (0.034)
Proportion of buying and stock control practices used 0.112***      0.086***    0.072**     0.025         0.005       -0.006
                                                      (0.034)       (0.033)     (0.032)     (0.032)       (0.032)     (0.032)
Proportion of record-keeping practices used           0.574***      0.459***    0.409***    0.479***      0.394*** 0.344***
                                                      (0.035)       (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.033)       (0.033)     (0.033)
Proportion of financial planning practices used       0.152***      0.136***    0.109***    0.117***      0.104*** 0.078**
                                                      (0.039)       (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.037)       (0.036)     (0.036)
Log(Paid Workers)                                     0.654***      0.476***    0.466***    0.497***      0.367*** 0.359***
                                                      (0.026)       (0.026)     (0.027)     (0.026)       (0.026)     (0.026)
Log(Owners Hours)                                     0.351***      0.313***    0.302***    0.260***      0.232*** 0.221***
                                                      (0.020)       (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)       (0.018)     (0.018)
Log(Capital Stock)                                                  0.092***    0.084***                  0.071*** 0.064***
                                                                    (0.007)     (0.007)                   (0.006)     (0.006)
Log(Inventories)                                                    0.200***    0.198***                  0.149*** 0.147***
                                                                    (0.010)     (0.010)                   (0.009)     (0.009)
Owner is male                                                                   0.100**                               0.134***
                                                                                (0.045)                               (0.045)
Age of owner                                                                    -0.005***                             -0.006***
                                                                                (0.001)                               (0.001)
Years of education of owner                                                     0.012***                              0.011***
                                                                                (0.003)                               (0.003)
Digitspan recall                                                                0.035***                              0.033***
                                                                                (0.007)                               (0.007)
Firm age (years)                                                                0.008***                              0.007***
                                                                                (0.001)                               (0.001)
Raven test score                                                                0.019***                              0.013***
                                                                                (0.004)                               (0.004)
Sample Size                                              18102       18102      18102     18089           18089       18089
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *, **, *** indicate**significance
                                                             p<0.05 *** at
                                                                         p<0.01"
                                                                           the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels
respectively
Regressions also include dummies for zero or missing values of each control.
All regressions include country dummies and industry sector dummies.

                                                                                   34
Table 4: Baseline Business Score and Survival Dynamics
                                            1-year   1-year      1-year      1-year      5.5 Year          1-year       1-year           5.5 Year
                                           Survival Survival    Survival    Survival     Survival      Sales Growth Sales Growth     Sales Growth
Baseline Business Practices Score         0.055*** 0.039**       0.038**       0.022      0.110**      0.476***     0.277***         0.556***
                                            (0.017) (0.017)      (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.053)      (0.087)      (0.089)          (0.196)
Baseline log(paid workers)                          0.025***     0.015**       0.011       -0.019                   0.110**          -0.025
                                                     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.015)                   (0.043)          (0.088)
Male                                                            0.028***     0.023**                                0.142***
                                                                 (0.010)     (0.010)                                (0.052)
Owner's Age at Baseline                                         0.002***    0.002***                                -0.004**
                                                                 (0.000)     (0.000)                                (0.002)
Owner's Years of Education                                        -0.001      -0.001                                0.034***
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)                                (0.006)
Digitspan Recall                                                   0.000      -0.000                                -0.010
                                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)                                (0.011)
Age of Firm at Baseline                                         0.003***    0.003***                                0.001
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)                                (0.002)
Raven test score                                                0.003***    0.003***                                0.013**
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)                                (0.006)
Baseline Log Sales                                                           0.005*                    -0.697***    -0.760***        -0.798***
                                                                             (0.003)                   (0.015)      (0.017)          (0.035)
Baseline Log Profits                                                         0.006*                                 0.079***
                                                                             (0.003)                                (0.018)
Sample Size                                    7016       7016       7015      6847         1413       5689         5629                   1152
Mean of Dependent Variable                     0.912     0.912       0.912     0.913       0.874       0.394        0.392                  0.483
Notes:
Marginal effects from probit estimation shown in columns 1-5, regression estimates in columns 6-8. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
*, **, *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Columns 1 to 4, and 6 and 7 are data from Kenya, Nigeria, and Sri Lanka. Columns 5 and 8 are from Sri Lanka only.
All specifications include sector and country dummies, and controls for missing values of the control variables where needed.
Sector is defined as manufacturing, trade, services or other for columns 1 to 5, and defined at the detailed country*sector level for columns 6 to 8



                                                                           35
Table 5: Reconciling our results with experimental estimates
                                                                                                                         95% confidence interval
                                                                                                Treatment Effect on       for treatment effect on         Implied Effect from Association in Table 2
Sample                                                 Training Program                         Business Practices Log(Sales)        Log(Profits)             Log(Sales)           Log(Profits)
Sri Lankan women                                       ILO SIYB five day course                      0.058***        [-0.23, +0.15]    [-0.12, +0.17]           0.046                  0.038
                                                                                                      (0.016)
Sri Lankan men                                         ILO SIYB five day course                      0.056***        [-0.06, +0.17]    [+0.01, +0.18]           0.045                  0.037
                                                                                                      (0.010)
Kenyan women                                           ILO GET Ahead five day course                 0.042***       [+0.00, +0.18]     [-0.01, +0.16]           0.033                  0.028
                                                                                                      (0.007)
Related studies
Chilean unemployed (Martínez et al., 2013)               MESP: three weeks intensive training          0.180***                             [+0.08, +0.79]                              0.12
                                                         + 3 months mentoring (+ grant)
South African firms (Anderson MacDonald et al, 2014) Business Bridge: 80 hours over 2 months           0.260***           [+0.18, +1.39]    [-0.00, +1.36]         0.21                 0.17
Notes:
Treatment effects on log sales and log profits for Sri Lankan women taken from Table 3 of de Mel et al. (2014).
Treatment effects for Sri Lankan men and Kenyan women calculated approximately one year after training.
Implied effects from association in Table 2 are calculated by multiplying the treatment effect on business practices by the coefficient in column 4 (sales)
and column 8 (profits) from Table 2.
Chile estimates: estimated effect on business practices calculated as 4.493/25 from Table 4 of Martinez et al. (2013); estimated effect on log profits approximated by change in
self-employment income relative to control mean
South African estimates: estimated effect on business practices calculated from marketing treatment as average of effect sizes on each of 30 practices measured; effect on profits and sales
approximated by percentage change in levels relative to control means.




                                                                                                 36
Table 6: Which Factors are Associated with Higher Business Practices?
Dependent variable: Business Practices Score
Years of education of owner                                   0.012***                                                                0.011***
                                                              (0.000)                                                                 (0.000)
Digitspan recall                                              0.010***                                                                0.009***
                                                              (0.001)                                                                 (0.001)
Raven test score                                              0.003***                                                                0.003***
                                                              (0.001)                                                                 (0.001)
Owner is male                                                 0.026***    0.029***    0.027***    0.015**     0.029***    0.026***    0.008
                                                              (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Age of owner                                                  -0.001***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.003***   -0.001***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Father owned a business                                                   0.016***                                                    0.011**
                                                                          (0.005)                                                     (0.005)
Mother owned a business                                                   0.015***                                                    0.011**
                                                                          (0.006)                                                     (0.005)
Has between 1 and 4 competitors                                                       0.005                                           0.013
                                                                                      (0.010)                                         (0.009)
Has between 5 and 9 competitors                                                       -0.003                                          0.008
                                                                                      (0.010)                                         (0.010)
Has between 10 and 20 competitors                                                     -0.002                                          0.005
                                                                                      (0.010)                                         (0.010)
Has 21+ competitors                                                                   0.010                                           0.016
                                                                                      (0.010)                                         (0.010)
Most important competitor is located within 1 km of business                                      -0.013                              -0.007
                                                                                                  (0.008)                             (0.008)
Would take less than a day for customer to replace them                                                       -0.017***               -0.003
                                                                                                              (0.007)                 (0.006)
1 to 4 paid workers                                                                                                       0.101***    0.087***
                                                                                                                          (0.005)     (0.005)
5 to 9 paid workers                                                                                                       0.143***    0.119***
                                                                                                                          (0.009)     (0.008)
10 to 14 paid workers                                                                                                     0.172***    0.143***
                                                                                                                          (0.010)     (0.010)
15 to 20 paid workers                                                                                                     0.190***    0.156***
                                                                                                                          (0.014)     (0.014)
21+ paid workers                                                                                                          0.235***    0.193***
                                                                                                                          (0.014)     (0.013)
Owner started business themselves                                                                                                     0.019***
                                                                                                                                      (0.007)
Sample Size                                                        20162      20162     20162      20162    20162     20162           20162
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions also control for sector, country, and for missing values of the control variables where needed.




                                                                    37
Table A1: Business Training Does Not Affect Reporting
Dependent variable: Business practice score from audit less business practice score from survey
Randomly Assigned to Training Treatment                                                0.013
                                                                                       (0.027)
Sample Size                                                                            200
Mean Difference between Audit and Survey                                               -0.065
SD of Difference                                                                       0.189
Robust standard error in parentheses.
*, **, *** denotes significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Note: data are from Sri Lanka only




Table A2: Robustness to Form of Aggregating Business Practices
                                                     Log Sales Log Sales Log Sales    Log Sales Log Sales Log Sales
Business Practices Score                              1.361***                         0.614***
                                                       (0.096)                          (0.089)
First Principal Component of Business Practices                 0.120***                         0.057***
                                                                 (0.008)                          (0.008)
Average of Z-scores of Business Practices                                 0.628***                         0.287***
                                                                           (0.044)                          (0.041)
Log(Paid Workers)                                     0.793*** 0.776*** 0.788***       0.553*** 0.545*** 0.550***
                                                       (0.027) (0.027)     (0.027)      (0.027) (0.027)     (0.027)
Log(Owners Hours)                                     0.106*** 0.113*** 0.107***       0.078*** 0.079*** 0.078***
                                                       (0.030) (0.029)     (0.029)      (0.027) (0.027)     (0.027)
Log(Capital Stock)                                                                     0.082*** 0.081*** 0.082***
                                                                                        (0.009) (0.009)     (0.009)
Log(Inventories)                                                                       0.232*** 0.231*** 0.232***
                                                                                        (0.011) (0.011)     (0.011)
Sample Size                                             4474       4474       4474       4474      4474      4474
Business Practices Mean                                 0.353     -0.073     -0.203      0.353    -0.073    -0.203
Business Practices SD                                   0.196      2.468      0.433      0.196     2.468     0.433

Implied Effect of a 1 S.D. change in business practices    0.267      0.296      0.272       0.120     0.141 0.124
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels
respectively
Regressions also include dummies for zero or missing values of each control.
All regressions include country dummies and industry sector dummies. Columns 4 through 6 also control for
owner and firm characteristics (sex, age, education, digitspan, raven test score, age of firm).




                                                        38
Table A3: Cross-Sectional Productivity Relationships by Country
                               Bangladesh Chile          Ghana  Kenya Mexico Nigeria               Sri Lanka
Panel A: Labor Productivity
Business Practices Score         1.140*** 0.944*** 0.661* 0.973*** 1.001*** 2.636***               1.604***
                                  (0.150)      (0.338) (0.337)  (0.098) (0.056) (0.284)             (0.127)
Log(Paid Workers)                0.825***       0.720 0.817*** 0.325** 0.619*** 0.437***           0.636***
                                  (0.030)      (0.722) (0.126)  (0.126) (0.071) (0.062)             (0.066)
Log(Owners Hours)                 -0.061*     0.667*** 0.325** 0.625*** 0.465*** 0.201***          0.358***
                                  (0.034)      (0.100) (0.152)  (0.056) (0.027) (0.072)             (0.056)

Panel B: Total Factor Productivity
Business Practices Score           0.471***    0.650*    0.121 0.572*** 0.874*** 2.481***          0.862***
                                    (0.129)    (0.334) (0.279)   (0.094) (0.055) (0.287)            (0.126)
Log(Paid Workers)                  0.540***     0.256 0.510*** 0.215* 0.603*** 0.402***            0.484***
                                    (0.030)    (0.570) (0.116)   (0.125) (0.069) (0.064)            (0.070)
Log(Owners Hours)                    0.005    0.592*** 0.113 0.382*** 0.416*** 0.190***            0.210***
                                    (0.031)    (0.104) (0.128)   (0.056) (0.027) (0.071)            (0.056)
Log(Capital Stock)                 0.048***      n.a.  0.263*** 0.057*** 0.128*** -0.038           0.090***
                                    (0.011)      n.a.   (0.040)  (0.016) (0.008) (0.027)            (0.014)
Log(Inventories)                   0.303***   0.223*** 0.177*** 0.278***    n.a.  0.192***         0.190***
                                    (0.016)    (0.063) (0.036)   (0.016)    n.a.   (0.036)          (0.017)

Sample Size                           1724         146       321        3413      8585      1499     2458
Notes:
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses, *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels respectively.
All regressions also include sector dummies, and controls for zero or missing values of the
factors of production.
n.a. Capital stock not available in Chile data, Inventories not available in Mexico data




                                                     39
Table A4: Practice Means by Country and Association of Labor Productivity with Individual Practices
                                                                                                                                                                                             Labor Productivity
                                                                                                          All      Bangladesh Chile        Ghana       Kenya      Mexico Nigeria   Sri Lanka Coefficient Std Error
Marketing 1: Visited competitor's business to see prices                                                 0.41          0.36         0.44      0.49       0.73        0.24   0.74       0.41     0.160      0.019
Marketing 2: Visited competitor's business to see products                                               0.39          0.36         0.41      0.52       0.75        0.22   0.70       0.34     0.181      0.020
Marketing 3: Asked existing customers what other products they should offer                              0.49          0.40         0.44      0.59       0.82        0.35   0.74       0.43     0.195      0.019
Marketing 4: Talked with former customer to see why stopped buying                                       0.33          0.33         0.15      0.40       0.76        0.15   0.59       0.26     0.234      0.022
Marketing 5: Asked supplier what products selling well                                                   0.44          0.37         0.39      0.38       0.67        0.36   0.62       0.33     0.255      0.019
Marketing 6: Used a special offer to attract customers                                                   0.29          0.02         0.55      0.32       0.45        0.24   0.61       0.18     0.273      0.021
Marketing 7: Have done advertising in last 6 months                                                      0.19          0.04         0.23      0.18       0.14        0.17   0.61       0.15     0.252      0.026
Buying & Stock Control 1: negotiate for lower price                                                      0.52          0.81         0.37      0.51       0.89        0.29   0.72       0.55     0.191      0.021
Buying & Stock Control 2: compare alternate suppliers                                                    0.49          0.59         0.54      0.49       0.84        0.31   0.75       0.48     0.240      0.020
Buying & Stock Control 3: Don't run out of stock frequently                                              0.72          0.26         0.82      0.26       0.71        0.80   0.88       0.68    -0.070      0.020
Costing & Record Keeping 1: Keep written records                                                         0.49          0.76         0.45      0.80       0.33        0.44   0.97       0.36     0.347      0.018
Costing & Record Keeping 2: record every purchase and sale                                               0.42          0.60         0.43      0.66       0.24        n.a.   0.80       0.30     0.378      0.031
Costing & Record Keeping 3: can use records to know cash on hand                                         0.41          0.60         0.42      0.61       0.23        0.39   0.79       0.28     0.368      0.020
Costing & Record Keeping 4: use records to know whether sales of product increase or decrease            0.37          0.48         0.42      0.59       0.21        0.36   0.77       0.25     0.358      0.020
Costing & Record Keeping 5: worked out cost of each main product                                         0.59          0.77         0.61      0.73       0.74        0.42   0.89       0.63     0.283      0.019
Costing & Record Keeping 6: know which goods make most profit per item                                   0.78          0.86         0.72      0.84       0.97        0.64   0.92       0.88     0.306      0.024
Costing & Record Keeping 7: have a written budget for monthly expenses                                   0.33          0.49         0.33      0.38       0.27        0.26   0.85       0.20     0.342      0.020
Costing & Record Keeping 8: have records that could document ability to pay to bank                      0.33          0.67         0.22      0.38       0.38        0.14   0.83       0.41     0.407      0.022
Financial Planning 1: review financial performance monthly                                               0.32          0.25         0.45      0.38       0.36        0.27   0.67       0.26     0.202      0.020
Financial Planning 2: have sales target for next year                                                    0.40          0.36         0.59      0.41       0.56        0.32   0.86       0.21     0.241      0.019
Financial Planning 3: compare sales goal to target monthly                                               0.26          0.15         0.41      0.35       0.29        0.25   0.61       0.06     0.215      0.021
Financial Planning 4: have a budget of costs for next year                                               0.26          0.22         0.28      0.25       0.21        0.24   0.79       0.11     0.284      0.022
Financial Planning 5: prepare profit and loss statement                                                  0.24          0.12         0.05      0.40        n.a.       0.29   n.a.       0.13     0.272      0.025
Financial Planning 6: prepare cashflow statement                                                         0.10          0.12         0.07      0.14        n.a.       0.10   n.a.       0.09     0.359      0.035
Financial Planning 7: prepare balance sheet                                                              0.09          0.05         0.05      0.15        n.a.       0.09   n.a.       0.10     0.535      0.039
Financial Planning 8: prepare income and expenditure statement                                           0.26          0.36         0.21      0.39        n.a.       0.26   n.a.       0.17     0.258      0.023
Notes: columns 1 to 8 show the proportion of firms in each country sample which use the particular business practice. Columns 9 and 10 report the regression coefficient and
standard error respectively from regressing log sales on this individual practice, along with controls for labor usage, industry, and country as in column 1 of Table 2.
Means in bold are those with adoption rates of 50 percent or higher.




                                                                                                        40
    .8
    .6
    .4
    .2         Figure A1: Are the Returns to Business Practices Non-linear?
       0


                 0.1 to 0.2


                              0.2 to 0.3


                                           0.3 to 0.4


                                                            0.4 to 0.5


                                                                         0.5 to 0.6


                                                                                           0.6 to 0.7


                                                                                                        0.7 to 0.8


                                                                                                                     0.8 to 0.9


                                                                                                                                  0.9 to 1.0
                                                        Business practices in range

Notes: Figure plots coefficients from estimating column 8 of Table 2, but using nine dummies for different business practice score ranges instead
of a linear term in business practice score.


                                                                                      41
