NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ISLAM, INEQUALITY AND PRE-INDUSTRIAL COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT
Stelios Michalopoulos
Alireza Naghavi
Giovanni Prarolo
Working Paper 21506
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21506

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Quamrul Ashraf, Roland Benabou, Maria Bigoni, Maristella
Botticini, Richard Bulliet, Matteo Cervellati, Allan Drazen, Skander Esseghaier, Mohammad Reza
Farzanegan, Oded Galor, Gordon Hanson, Laurence Iannaccone, Timur Kuran, Georg Leube, Gilat
Levy, Beatrice Manz, Peter Neary, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Arsen Palestini, Elias Papaioannou, Jean-Philippe
Platteau, Ronny Razin, Jared Rubin, Thierry Verdier, Christoph Werner, and participants at the Collegio
Carlo Alberto, University of Bologna, NBER SI Political Economy Group, the NBER conference
on the Economics of Religion, the CEPR conference on Economics of Culture, Institutions, and Crime
in Milan, ASREC annual conference at Chapman University, the International Economic Association
conference in Jordan, Silvaplana Workshop in Political Economy in Pontresina, Center for Near and
Middle Eastern Studies (Marburg), Northeastern University, Toulouse School of Economics, Stockholm
University, Tufts University, University College Dublin, University of Los Andes, University of Milan
and University of Oxford for constructive comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Stelios Michalopoulos, Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Prarolo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Islam, Inequality and Pre-Industrial Comparative Development
Stelios Michalopoulos, Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Prarolo
NBER Working Paper No. 21506
August 2015
JEL No. F10,O1,Z0,Z12
ABSTRACT
This study explores the interaction between trade and geography in shaping the Islamic economic
doctrine. We build a model where an unequal distribution of land quality in presence of trade opportunities
conferred differential gains from trade across regions, fostering predatory behavior by groups residing
in the poorly endowed territories. We show that in such an environment it was mutually beneficial
to institute an economic system of income redistribution featuring income transfers in return for safe
passage to conduct trade. A commitment problem, however, rendered a merely static redistribution
scheme unsustainable. Islam developed a set of dynamic redistributive rules that were self-enforcing,
in regions where arid lands dominated the landscape. While such principles fostered the expansion
of trade within the Muslim world they limited the accumulation of wealth by the commercial elite,
shaping the economic trajectory of Islamic lands in the pre-industrial era.

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
Alireza Naghavi
Department of Economics
University of Bologna
Piazza Scaravilli 2
Bologna 40126
Italy
alireza.naghavi@unibo.it

Giovanni Prarolo
University of Bologna
Piazza Scaravilli 2
40125 Bologna
ITALY
giovanni.prarolo@unibo.it

“ For the protection of the Quraysh.
Their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer.
So let them serve the Lord of this House.
Who feeds them against hunger and gives them security against fear." 1
(Qur’an, 106: 1-4; MH Shakir’s translation)2

1

Introduction

In the last two decades, the empirical growth literature has seen a renewed interest in the relationship between religion and politico-economic performance.3 This voluminous body of work,
which traces its intellectual roots in the pioneering study of Weber (1905 [1930]) stressing the
independent role of Protestant ethics in fostering economic progress, treats religious beliefs and
attitudes as fundamental drivers of economic outcomes.4 Nevertheless, despite the prominence
of religion as a focal research topic across disciplines, its economic origins are poorly understood. Identifying the forces behind the formation of religious principles will greatly enhance
our understanding of the phenomenon and its implications for comparative economic performance. This study theoretically examines the economic origins of the Islamic doctrine and
explores the consequences of its adoption for the process of development in the Muslim world.5
The starting point of our theory lies in the observation that Islam originated in the
Arabian peninsula, a region featuring a distinctively unequal geography, and at a historical
time period when trade routes gained importance in this area. With this particular historical
background in mind we build a model where the interplay between inequality in regional natural
productivity and the emergence of trade possibilities dictates the nature of the Islamic economic
principles. The argument is as follows. In a stage of development when land determines
productive capabilities, regional agricultural suitability plays a fundamental role in shaping the
potential of a region to produce a surplus and thus engage in and pro…t from trade. Motivated
by this observation, the theory illustrates how an unequal distribution of land quality across
regions may induce instead of productive and mutually advantageous activities predation by
groups residing in the less privileged territories, (Olson, 2000). In particular, it suggests that
1

Quraysh was the tribe dominating Meccan trade in the eve of Islam. Mohammad himself was member of
the Quraysh.
2
Tahrike Tarsile Qur’an, Inc., (1983).
3
See for example, Barro and McCleary (2003, 2006a, 2006b) , Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2015),
Chaney (2012b), Porta, de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997), Pryor (2007), and Martin, Doppelhofer, and
Miller (2004).
4
See Becker and Woessmann (2009), and Botticini and Eckstein (2005, 2007), for more work on the Protestant
ethic and Judaism, respectively.
5
It is important to note that the proposed theory is an attempt to rationalize the set of economic principles
embedded in the Islamic doctrine, remaining agnostic as to its theological underpinnings.

1

inequality in agricultural productivity in presence of trade opportunities conferred di¤erential
gains from trade across regions, fostering predatory behavior by those residing in the poorly
endowed ones. The costly nature of predation created room for intervention and redistribution,
leading to concessions towards the dwellers of arid regions in exchange for secure passage and
access to the trade networks.
The link between the structure of production and institutional formation was early identi…ed by Marx (1833 [1970]). According to Marx (1833 [1970]), religion, like any other social
institution, is dependent upon the economic realities of a given society, i.e., it is an outcome of
its productive forces. Similarly, this study argues that since Islam emerged when land capabilities dictated productive decisions, the Islamic institutional arrangement had to be compatible
with the con‡icting interests of groups living in regions characterized by an unequal distribution
of agricultural endowments. Hence, Islamic principles were devised as a means of governing
the divergent interests of geographically unequal regions in Arabia during the 6th century AD,
at a critical juncture when trade routes were diverted over the peninsula. This is a prime example of how historical accidents, trade diversion in this case, may interact with geographical
features to shape a particular institutional framework, that of Islam. We do not claim that
Islamic principles are the only rules that may emerge under unequal geographic conditions
once trade opportunities arise. We do show, nevertheless, that these rules prescribed in the
Islamic economic doctrine may provide a solution to the con‡icting interests that emerge in
such environments.
In the theory provided we highlight that rules featuring only static intragenerational
income transfers were prone to commitment problems and, hence, were not sustainable. As
a result, the institutional complex of Islam evolved to include elements of intergenerational
redistribution as well, where bequests no longer exclusively bene…ted the heirs of the rich.
We show that such a dynamic scheme can be mutually bene…cial for populations living in
di¤erentially endowed regions in the presence of trade opportunities and is more likely than
static mechanisms to be viable in the long-run. To render the intergenerational transfers
individually optimal, the Islamic doctrine had to distort the relative returns to the factors of
production against private wealth accumulation and in favor of investments that would di¤use
wealth within the society over time. Throughout the history of Islam, such investments often
manifested in the religious endowments which frequently bene…ted, either directly or indirectly,
the less privileged in the ummah.
It has been argued that Islam acted as a state-building force, unifying warring clans and
tribes through a common identity under one god that transcended clan and class divisions
(Stearns, Adas, Schwarz, and Gilbert, 2010). In the context of the model, the Islamic economic

2

principles o¤ered the means for materializing this goal. This is in line with Levy and Razin
(2012) who argue that religious organizations arise endogenously to foster social cooperation
and social behavior by instilling beliefs in the connection between rewards and punishments.
Moreover, o¤ering a rationale for the distortion of the allocation of productive assets in the
Muslim world our study is complementary to the works of Iannaccone (1992) and Aimone,
Iannaccone, Makowsky, and Rubin (2013), who view religion as a club good which features
unproductive costs, but is nevertheless socially optimal because it overcomes free-rider problems
associated with collective action.
We conjecture that the adoption of Islam across geographically unequal regions gave
them an early developmental lead by facilitating trade over territories that would otherwise
remain in a state of constant strife. However, by discouraging the concentration of wealth via
its wealth-fragmenting principles, it reduced the investment capabilities necessary for keeping
pace with the progressively capital intensive modes of trade. The resulting anemic commercial
elite may have contributed to the eventual decline of the Muslim lands vis-à-vis Western Europe. Incidentally, this line of thinking may provide an angle for understanding the democratic
de…cit in the Muslim world today, see Huntington (1993), Platteau (2008) and Chaney (2012a).
Contrary to the Islamic lands, in the Western world transatlantic trade gave rise to a powerful
and wealthy commercial class that was able to turn the political scene in its favor, limiting
the rulers’powers and contributing to the rise of constitution and eventually democracy, (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2005). In sum, the Islamic economic principles that allowed
the Muslim world to escape from a state of constant feuding and ‡ourish in the pre-industrial
era, limited their potential for growth on the eve of large scale shipping trade and capital-based
industrialization (Chaudhuri, 1985).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the role of trade and
geography in the formation of Islam as detailed in the historical account and presents the
elements of the Muslim economic doctrine. Section 3 presents the theory and the results.
Section 4 summarizes the key …ndings and concludes.

2

Historical Background

The proposed theory emphasizes that the formation of Islam was a response to two historical
facts of 7th century Arabia: (i) valuable trade routes had recently been redirected through the
region, and (ii) an unequal distribution of land quality resulted in these trade ‡ows conferring
di¤erential gains across the region. In fact, in Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2012) we
show that the interaction between proximity to trade routes and geographic inequality is not
only important for understanding the origins of Islam, but is also a key determinant of the
3

spatial distribution of contemporary Muslim societies across as well as within countries.
We argue that the interaction of these two features led to the emergence of a set of
economic rules: (i) static income redistribution through arrangements known as ilaf prior toand zakat upon the advent- of Islam, and (ii) a dynamic redistribution system, which on the one
hand, imposed explicit costs on wealth accumulation via the anti-riba laws, and on the other
hand, encouraged public investments through donations to build religious or philanthropic
endowments to serve the common good in perpetuity. This echoed the concept of sadaqa in
the Qur’an and was later institutionalized in the legal entity of the waqf.6

2.1

The Origins

Arabia has a distinct geography, primarily consisting of desert and semi-arid landscapes. Only
some regions in today’s Yemen, Bahrain and Central Arabia, and several scattered oases in the
interior were fertile enough to produce on the eve of Islam frankincense, myrrh, vine, dyes and
dates (Ibrahim, 1990). While farming dominated these fertile pockets, herding was the main
subsistence pattern in the relatively arid ones. It has been argued that this distinctive geography
shielded the local populations from urbanization, allowing them to maintain their tribal culture
and prevent the formation of a unifying social structure (Haber and Menaldo, 2010). At the
same time, the limited number of urban commercial economies in the oases exacerbated social
and economic inequities between clans (Berkey, 2003). Di¤erences in climate and endowments
led to local trade between farmers and nomadic herders, who exchanged agricultural products
for animal products. Despite gains from intra-regional trade, long-distance trade opportunities
were biased in favor of the oasis dwellers and often resulted in predatory behavior by the
Bedouins (Richerson, 1996). Across infertile swaths of land, tribes were directly involved in the
collection of booty by conducting raids, known as ghazw, on commercial caravans trading local
produce as well as spices, gold, ivory, pearls, precious stones, and textiles - arriving at the local
ports from Africa, India, and the Far East (Berkey, 2003).
In the pre-Islamic era, safety of trade activities was maintained in the Peninsula by peripheral kingdoms along the edges of Arabia, namely the Himyarites, Ghassanids and Lakhmids,
who guarded the routes and policed the Bedouin tribes. These kingdoms all disintegrated in
the course of the 6th century. As a result, political and commercial control over the Bedouin
communities could no longer be exerted and the Arabian economy went into decline (Lapidus,
2002). In parallel, the Persian and Byzantine empires had been …ghting a series of long and
6

Although a comparison between communism and Islamic economic principles is beyond the scope of the
study it is perhaps interesting to note that the common goal of narrowing income inequality was pursued via
very di¤erent means. Notably, Islam encouraged a market economy tolerating individual property rights while
limiting capital accumulation, whereas communism featured the opposite characteristics.

4

exhausting wars since the start of the 6th century. By the early 7th century the con‡icts had
disrupted long-distance trade crossing the two empires (Lewis, 1993). In addition, piracy in the
Red Sea was on the rise due to the declining sea power of the Byzantines (Winder, 2008). These
events caused long-distance trade diversion through the peninsula, giving profound commercial value to overland trade routes in Arabia. The resulting trade ‡ows created new potential
economic bene…ts for the scattered oases. First, by selling to the merchants they could take
advantage of markets outside Arabia. Second and perhaps more pertinent to the case of Mecca,
the increased merchant tra¢ c increased demand for local amenities to accommodate the passing caravans. The attractiveness of such oases along the routes contributed to the emergence
of pro…table trade hubs nearby, which specialized in the provision of services to the trading
community.7
In order to materialize these bene…ts safe passage needed to be maintained for thousands
of miles of trails through the desert, crossing numerous tribal territories (Bogle, 1998). Caravans were constantly exposed to raids by the Bedouins, who made up a considerable fraction of
the population in the Arabian peninsula at that time (Berkey, 2003). This situation prompted
early attempts to mitigate con‡ict in pre-Islamic Arabia. For example, in search of security
the Meccan merchants o¤ered the arrangement of ilaf, according to which they would carry
commodities produced by other tribes to be sold in markets and fairs. In exchange, these tribes
would provide security and protection for Meccan caravans passing through their territories.
Such attempts, coupled with the formation of tribal alliances, partially decreased tensions;
however, these measures were short-lived since many tribes were not bound by the institution of ilaf and alliances were constantly switching. Ibrahim (1990) succinctly summarizes the
economic conditions prevailing on the eve of Islam: “An unequal distribution of wealth and
resources already existed in and around Mecca. This unequal distribution had the potential to
disrupt its network of alliances and trade routes."
It was in this cross-section of historical events that Muhammad was born. In Muhammad’s Arabia there was no government at any level. The Prophet formed his own state, and
he gave it a sacred law prescribed by Allah (Muller, 1958). The importance of trade in the
formation of Islamic principles can hardly be underestimated.8 Muhammad himself was a Meccan merchant, and the majority of those who contributed to the crystallization of the Muslim
law over time had a merchant or craftsman background (Cohen, 1970).9 To reach out to the
7
Crone (2007) discusses the possibility that Meccans bene…ted directly from the Persian and Byzantine wars
supplying leather and hides to the Roman army.
8
See Bairoch (1988) for a discussion on how trade preceded urbanization in the Middle East.
9
In addition, Hodgson and Burke (1993) stress that the interests of merchants who wanted to gain access
to the widest possible network of trade routes coupled with the casteless and egalitarian message of Islam
contributed to its massive expansion.

5

heterogeneous Arabian tribes, a doctrine with a political base appealing to the divergent interest groups was necessary. It is perhaps interesting to note that Muhammad’s message was
…rst accepted in Medina as a result of Medina’s oasis cultivators facing increased con‡ict from
nomads in the periphery, consistent with the proposed argument that Islamic economic principles were forged to align these clashing interests nurtured by an underlying unequal geography,
(Aswad, 1963).

2.2

The Adoption

The conditions predating the adoption of Islam in later periods in di¤erent parts of the Old
World are reminiscent of the geographic and social conditions prevailing in its birthplace.
Below, we o¤er two examples where the spread of Islam took place in the presence of trade
across geographically unequal regions and its voluntary adoption worked towards mitigating
con‡ict.
The Mali empire After the breakup of the Ghana empire, the Mali empire ‡ourished
in the western part of the Sahel, the African biogeographic zone where the Sahara desert and
savannas meet. This region includes part of today’s territories of Ghana, Mali, Mauritania and
Senegal, an undoubtedly unequal zone in terms of agricultural suitability given the very small
portion of arable land. At the end of the …rst millennium AD, natural resources such as gold and
salt helped the Ghana Empire achieve a primal position in the area by satisfying the increasing
demand coming from the rich Northern African Empires, in particular the Almoravids (Chu and
Skinner, 1965). Although the Ghana Empire experienced its …rst contact with Islam through
trade, it did not convert from local tribal religions to Islam. The Ghana Empire disintegrated
at the beginning of 11th century due to repeated attacks by the nomadic tribes located in the
northern part of Ghana, in attempts by these tribes to gain control of the increasingly lucrative
trade routes linking North Africa with Ghana (Goucher, et al., 1998). Similar to Saudi Arabia
at the beginning of 7th century, the unequal geography of Mali and the availability of trade
opportunities made the inhabitants there prone to the implementation of Islamic economic
principles. After more than a century of feuding, during which the contact between Mali tribes
and Muslim traders grew, around 1235 the Muslim king Sundiata founded the Mali Empire.
Islam was initially an elite religion and coexisted with other previously established animist
religions. Islamic adherence increased in subsequent decades and in 1312, at the apex of the
Mali Empire’s extension, Mansa Musa became the …rst truly devout Muslim Mali Emperor.
Mansa Musa gathered fame for his e¤orts to establish many universities and mosques, and the
further development of extraction and trade of gold and salt (Stride and Ifeka, 1971).

6

Inner Asia

Another instance of voluntary adoption of Islam by newly established

elites is that of Inner Asia in the 13th century. This region, characterized by the coexistence
of arid and fertile regions, was invaded in the 13th century by the Golden Horde, a Mongol
army which established a Turco-Mongol khanate there until around the beginning of the 16th
century. After destroying the Abbasid Caliphate, the Mongols initially a shamanic culture
conquered Muslim lands and soon converted to Islam themselves, beginning an era of Turkic
and Mongol expansions of Muslim rule into Eastern Europe and the Golden Horde. With
the Silk Road passing through Sarai, the capital of Golden Horde became a prosperous center
of commerce. Genghis Khan’s grandson Berke was the …rst ruler of the Golden Horde, who
converted to Islam. Later, it was the Mamluk ruler Baibars, the Khan’s long-standing trade
partner in the Mediterranean who played an important role in bringing many Golden Horde
Mongols to Islam. By AD 1330’s three of the four major khanates of the Mongol Empire
had become Muslim. These were the Golden Horde, Hulagu’s Ulus and Chagatai’s Ulus. It
was Uzbeg Khan (1312–41) who adopted Islam as the o¢ cial religion of the Golden Horde,
while allowing for religious tolerance and free trade across the whole empire (Halperin, 1987;
Mantran, 1986; De Weese, 1994). Interestingly, the only khanate that did not convert to Islam
was that of the Yuan Empire found by Kublai Khan which spanned most of present-day China
featuring a rather homogeneously fertile geography.
Other cases of voluntary adoption of Islam in which geography and trade possibly played
an important role are those of the Volga Bulgaria State and Karakhans Empire. The regions
that hosted these two entities (the con‡uence of Volga and Kama river, in today’s Russia, and
an area including parts of Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and China) were
both endowed with fairly unequal geography and, for at least three centuries after Muhammad’s
death, they were crossed by one of the most important trade routes that connected Europe to
Asia.

2.3

The Codes

We now describe in some detail the speci…c socioeconomic institutions that are at the core
of our theory. The Islamic doctrine is known to have been inspired by institutions from preexisting monotheistic religions and adjusted into codes that became the building blocks of the
Islamic institutional complex.
In Islam, acts of charity are divided into obligatory (zakat) and voluntary (sadaqa),
Their origins can be traced, at least in part, back to the poverty-alleviating institutions already
present in Judaism and Christianity. Zakat is a religious obligation and is one of the Five Pillars

7

of Islam.10 As outlined in the Qur’an, Zakat requires a believer of su¢ cient economic means
to give a fraction of her accumulated income for alms. The collected alms are then allocated
among the needy, the poor, those in debt, travelers, the zakat collector and for buying the
freedom of slaves or captives. During the early history of Islam, zakat was collected and
distributed by government appointed o¢ cials, in a centralized manner and it was e¤ective in
alleviating poverty. While zakat remained a main pillar of Islam its centralized collection was
less frequently enforced over time and adherence was left to the discretion of local authorities
(Kuran, 2008b).11
The Islamic doctrine has several remarkable features including its dynamic nature of redistribution and wealth-fragmenting principles. Indeed, Islam prescribes detailed rules limiting
the accumulation of private wealth. Two of the most well-known rules are those governing
inheritance and usury, respectively. Regarding the inheritance laws Qur’an speci…es that twothirds of one’s wealth be allocated to various family members, including very distant relatives
making it a rather egalitarian distribution system (Kuran, 2008a). Equitable inheritance laws
coupled with the fact that more wealthy individuals were allowed to have more wives and consequently children, was an additional force against the concentration of wealth. For a thorough
discussion on the economic principles of Islam, see Kuran (2004a). Also Kuran (2003) argues
that a by-product of such inheritance laws was an increase in the costs of dissolving a business
partnership following a partner’s death rendering business enterprises small, simple, and generally ephemeral. An additional force against the mobilization and pooling of resources can be
traced in the fact that the Islamic law by recognizing only natural persons e¤ectively blocked
the emergence of more complex organizational forms such as corporations.
Di¤erent forms of interest bans existed in various pre-industrial societies as a primitive
means of social insurance and were more common in the presence of high inequality (Glaeser
and Scheinkman, 1998). Hence, it is perhaps not surprising that the most widely known Muslim
economic principle, particularly in …nance, is the prohibition against riba, which most Muslim
scholars have interpreted as “interest”.12 Riba in the pre-Islamic days was a system whereby
the principal owed by a borrower doubled each time that he or she was due to repay a loan and
unable to do so. This arrangement would frequently lead to unpayable debts and hence the
10

For a discussion on how the doctrines of salvation and damnation provide di¤erent incentives for performing
economic activities and charitable deeds in Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam, see McCleary (2007).
11
Kuran (2001) notes that the third Caliph Uthman turned the obligation to pay zakat essentially into a tax
on agricultural output. Also, Jalili (2006) recognizes that although the tax systems di¤er considerably among
the Shiite and the four Sunni Schools (Malekite, Shafeite, Hana…te and Hanbalite) they share the common key
objectives of alleviating poverty and improving the income distribution.
12
There was substantial controversy among early Muslims regarding the scope of this prohibition or even on
the de…nition of “interest”, see Rahman (1964) for a detailed discussion. Nevertheless, in the Islamic lands,
Christians and Jews who were not subject to this restriction, systematically engaged in money lending.

8

imprisonment or enslavement of the borrower. As a result of the riba-ordinance of the Qur’an,
Islam was formally committed to the eradication of interest in loan contracts. Kuran (2004b)
argues that in practice, money lending continued, however, uncertainty about the legitimacy
of interest, combined with the lack of corporate law, imposed signi…cant transactions costs on
lenders and borrowers. It is worth noting that although the prohibition on charging interest
became less of an obstacle over time in Islam, it was never fully eradicated, as it was in
Christianity (Rubin, 2009, 2011).13
One could use either of the principles described above to formalize the frictions on wealth
accumulation under Islamic law. In the context of the proposed theory we focus on the limitations regarding interest bearing loans as well as on the formation of more e¢ cient organizational
forms. Such restrictions distorted the relative returns to the factors of production against capital accumulation and in favor of investments featuring societal returns. In fact, the Qur’an
declares that the opposite of riba is sadaqa which is spending to the bene…t of people, that
is, investing in assets enhancing the welfare of the community (Rahman, 1964). In Islam, the
institution that eventually emerged to allow for investing in such public functions was the waqf,
an inalienable endowment created by a person who granted land or other immovable property
in perpetuity for the advancement of a charitable or pious purpose.
While zakat catered to the immediate needs of the poor, a waqf was a permanent asset
that created positive externalities across generations, for the society at large. Its purpose
was to integrate heterogeneous societies and its particularities were twofold: …rst, it o¤ered a
mechanism for managing and anticipating the future returns of bequeathed assets (Raissouni,
2001) and second, it acted as a vehicle for the economic and social integration of the various
layers of the Muslim society (Kato, 2004). The institution of waqf is known to have been
formalized in the centuries following the birth of Islam. Therefore, all references to the origins of
waqf during the …rst century of Islam are only based on preserved hadith collections (Hennigan,
2004). Early indications of waqf during the time of Muhammad are also documented in Cizakca
(1998), Gil (1998), Kuran (2001), and Habib (2004). The …rst known Waqf is the mosque of
Quba’in Medina built upon the arrival of the Prophet Muhammad in 622 C.E. It stands now
on the same lot with a new and enlarged structure. Six months later, Quba’was followed by
the mosque of the Prophet in the center of Medina. There are also records of a fountain in
Medina, bi’r ru’ma, purchased by Uthman for the purpose of providing free drinking water to
the public as waqf. A preserved waqf narrative is Muhammad asking Umar to make the land
he received in Khaybar waqf for the Muslim community. Hennigan (2004) also lists the market
in Medina and the seven gardens of Mukhayriqor as some of the …rst examples of the prophetic
13

See Rubin (2009) for a comprehensive overview of interest bans in di¤erent religions.

9

waqf.14 The earliest solid evidence of waqfs, however, begin about a century after the birth of
Islam. In particular, a widespread form of waqf was the building of caravanserais to provide
accommodation to merchants. Waqfs endowed later were mostly geared towards the provision of
labor-productivity enhancing public goods such as education, health care, and public utilities.
For example, Shatzmiller (2001) stresses that “what conferred a unique historical signi…cance
on the public waqf, was the fact that for hundreds of years it provided the only regular …nancial
support for the medresa, a provider of higher education".
Waqfs contributed to the integration of Islamic society initially by …nancing mosques
as religious, political, and cultural centers, in the rising Islamic cities and eventually schools,
hospitals, and several infrastructure projects. The former places promoted social interactions
and mitigated existing strati…cation (Babacan, 2011). Moreover, it has been argued that in
the newly-created Islamic urban hubs the public facilities frequently funded by waqfs gave an
incentive to the nomadic populations nearby to join the rising urban centers contributing to
what is known as the sedentarization of the Arabs. For instance, the Islamic caliphate in the
seventh century A.D. rose out of the large-scale sedentarization of previously nomadic tribes
who settled in Basra and Kufa. The success of these settlements is attributed to the development of the caravan trade and the concomitant rise of the urban centers, which brought about a
close economic integration of the nomads and the farmers or city-dwellers (Bulliet, 1980). Even
for those that remained nomadic the various caravanserais built throughout their territories allowed them to bene…t from the trade ‡ows passing through (Bamyeh, 1999). Moreover, once
in the cities the common use of public facilities was the main source of interaction across the
di¤erent clans and facilitated the rise of an Islamic identity. Patel (2007) provides an extensive
discussion of the role of Islamic cities in developing an Islamic supra-identity across tribes, and
of the horizontal transmission of Islamic cultural norms among initially inward-oriented Arab
tribes through attendance in entities such as schools and central mosques.
Both the intragenerational redistributive aspects of Islam exempli…ed by the zakat and its
intergenerational components discussed above will form the heart of the theoretical framework
below. We will establish that although zakat was not self-sustained on its own, in conjunction
with its inter-generational elements it provided a self-enforcing structure attractive to both
urban-dwellers and nomads.
14

In general, Bonine (1987) speci…es agricultural land, irrigation projects, and even entire villages as examples
of common waqfs endowed in rural areas, whereas in urban areas they usually consisted of real estate such as
land, houses, or commercial property.

10

3

The Model

The theory illustrates the conditions under which residents of geographically unequal regions
once exposed to trade opportunities adopt the Islamic economic principles. The crux of the
argument is as follows. The appearance of trade routes exacerbates di¤erences in economic
opportunities between arid and fertile lands by creating a marketplace (i.e., trade hub) in the
latter naturally increasing the value of goods and services o¤ered by those in the oasis. In
this case, however, the nomads may predate on the caravans crossing their territories. To
the extent that the mass of arid regions is large enough to signi…cantly threaten trade ‡ows,
i.e., few fertile pockets of land surrounded by vast arid steppes, we show that a set of rules
resembling the economic principles of Islam may be adopted. As in Anderson and Bandiera
(2006) the interaction of predators and prey is crucial. A confrontation between the trading
caravan and the Bedouins taking place in the desert on the way to trade routes results in a
loss of cargo. The more desert to cross, the more vulnerable are merchants’activities, giving
geographic inequality a crucial role in determining the emergence of economic institutions.
Consider an overlapping-generations economy in which economic activity extends over
in…nite discrete time. Each group produces a single homogeneous good in every period using
e¤ective labor, capital, and land quality (a technological parameter). Regional output grows
over time due to the accumulation of capital and e¤ective labor, while land quality is exogenous
and …xed. Denoting Ti as the land quality of the region where each tribe resides i = fL; Hg
(low or high) and setting TH = 1, we can de…ne the relative land quality as v =

TH
TL

=

Without loss of generality, the fertile region (oasis) is surrounded by a desert of mass 0

1
TL

> 1.
1.

With the vector (v; ) we may characterize the economy-wide land quality distribution whose
inequality is increasing in both arguments.
Assume that the price of the good is initially normalized to unity, so that p = 1.
The appearance of trade routes in the vicinity results in an increase in the demand for products/amenities of the fertile region because they can better accommodate merchants and provide trading services: p > 1. Thus, the diversion of trade routes over the Arabian peninsula
favors the few oases and leads to predatory behavior by nomads.15 Engaging in long-distance
trade is costly since it requires food and shelter for the merchants. We model the latter as a
…xed cost

< 1=2.16 Moreover, the more desert merchants have to cross (larger ), the more

likely they are to be ambushed and incur losses. Roving bandits can challenge the caravans by
15

Allowing for di¤erentiated products and local trade between regions, a price shock as such would also result
in a lower purchasing power of the tribe in the arid region due to a deterioration in their terms of trade.
16
We assume that it is prohibitively costly to engage in long-distance trade at the individual level. This is
consistent with the historical record, where long-distance trade expeditions were organized and implemented at
the community/clan level.

11

incurring a cost equal to

< 1=2, where

is the fraction of the booty lost at the end of a raid.

Additionally, we assume agents cannot migrate between regions since adapting to di¤erent ecologies requires the accumulation of very di¤erent types of speci…c human capital (Chaney,
2012; Michalopoulos, 2012). In the Middle East and North Africa region for example, people
living in arid lands were predominantly nomadic, while those living in fertile zones were mainly
sedentary (Mikhail, 2012). It will be seen later in Section 3:3:2 that allowing for migration of
nomads into fertile land or for their direct engagement in trade will not a¤ect the core results.
Within each period, the timing of the events can be summarized as follows: (1) agents
inherit e¤ective labor and/or private wealth from the previous generation; (2) production takes
place; (3) static or dynamic redistribution is o¤ered by the tribe in the fertile region; (4) caravan
sets o¤ to trade; (5) the nomads in arid lands decide whether or not to attack the caravan;
(6) raid/redistribution/trade outcomes are realized; (7) decisions regarding consumption and
bequests of wealth and/or investment in waqf take place.

3.1

Production

Production in each region displays constant-returns-to-scale with respect to the reproducible
factors of production. The output produced at time t in region i, is xi;t :
xi;t = Ti (1

)hi;t + ki;t ;

2 (0; 1); i = fL; Hg:

where Ti is land quality in region i, hi;t and ki;t represent the regional e¤ective labor and
the amount of capital employed at period t in region i. Marginal product of e¤ective labor
and capital are equal to the wage rate per unit of e¤ective labor wi and the rate of return to
capital ri respectively. With perfect substitutability, the producers’inverse demand for factors
of production is:
wi = (1

)Ti

ri = T i ;

(1)

that is constant over time in each region i. We assume that capital depreciates fully every
period and that
1
> ;
2

(C1)

implying that capital is relatively more productive than labor.

3.2

Income and Preferences

A representative agent from each tribe lives two periods. An adult at time t is an individual of
generation t. In the …rst period, agents are economically idle. In the second period, they supply
inelastically their e¤ective labor hi;t in region i where they are born, earning the prevailing wage
12

rate wi . Moreover, they may receive capital bequests, si;t

1;

from their parents, generating an

income that is the return rate on capital ri times the amount of bequests. Each agent’s gross
income is therefore:
Ii;t = wi hi;t + ri si;t

1;

(2)

which can be consumed locally or traded abroad. Moreover, the rich tribe can transfer a part
of their gross income to the poor tribe in order to avoid the risk of being raided.
An individual’s preferences are de…ned over consumption in the second period of his life,
ci;t , and potential gross income of his o¤spring, Ii;t+1 . We assume that people consume up to
a satiation level c~, after which they maximize utility on the basis of the gross income of their
child. Consider a utility function U (ct ; It+1 ) de…ned as:
U (ct ; It+1 ) = ct + It+1 ;
together with the constraint ct

c~, where

(3)

< 1. As will become apparent this utility function

is adopted to capture the spirit of Kaldorian-Keynesian savings behavior i.e., bequests and
savings are an increasing function of wealth. Allowing for a more standard utility function, like
Ui;t =

ln ci;t + (1

) ln Ii;t+1 ; would deliver qualitatively similar results. However, in this

case the adult’s income threshold of investing in children’s income (either through savings or
e¤ective labor enhancing investments) becomes endogenous to the anticipated factor returns,
making the analysis more cumbersome without adding material insights. More generally, the
qualitative predictions would be equivalent as long as there are non-convexities in the economic
environment.

3.3

Optimal Consumption and Transfers

Proceeding backward, in this section we look at the optimization problem of rich and poor
agents given their net income, Yi;t . Gross income Ii;t evolves into net income Yi;t through the
process of trade and con‡ict, as described in Section 3.4 below.
3.3.1

Bequests and Waqf Investments

Waqfs allowed the rich to earn some returns on their assets, and at times were the only way to
do so securely, Kuran (2001). Without loss of generality, we model this as e¤ective labor accumulating over time through the waqf investment, eH;t . The following law of motion describes
how e¤ective labor evolves over time:
hH;t+1 = 1 + eH;t :

13

(4)

Each rich individual is endowed with one unit of e¤ective labor in absence of any waqf investment and 0 <

< 1 captures the marginal bene…t of waqf.17 Alternatively, waqf could take

the form of an investment that increases the productivity of land in the fertile region, TH;t+1 .
It could as well be described as an investment that enhances the value of products and services
of the fertile region, pt+1 . The common feature of the di¤erent descriptions of waqf is the fact
that the investment directly increases the next period gross income of the region endowed with
fertile land, i.e., @IH;t+1 =@eH;t > 0.
It follows from (3) that an adult allocates her net income towards own consumption up
to the level of c~, and devotes her remaining income to maximize the potential gross income of
her child in (2). In deciding how to best …nance a child’s gross income, an adult anticipates
future wage rates and capital returns and optimally splits bequests between private capital
sH;t and a waqf investment, eH;t : Investment in capital delivers a marginal bene…t equal to rH
whereas from (4) the marginal bene…t of investing in waqf is wH . If net income is YH;t

c~; it

is entirely spent on consumption, while if YH;t > c~, utility (3) is maximized subject to budget
constraint:
sH;t + eH;t
where YH;t
3.3.2

YH;t

c~;

(5)

c~ is net income after consumption.

Spillovers of Waqf Investments

Unlike capital bequests that are individual speci…c, public waqfs by nature had spillovers and
provided some bene…ts across the society as a whole. Kuran (2003, 2010) also points out
that waqfs served as means of sheltering wealth from expropriation by the ruler. Therefore,
from the perspective of the rich, waqf is an asset-shielding entity engineered to protect one’s
wealth against con…scation either by the Muslim ruler according to Kuran or by the roving
bandits according to our theory. These distinct but complementary arguments highlight the
dual bene…ts of waqf pertaining to di¤erent points in the history of Islam.18
As explained in the historical section, waqfs took di¤erent forms over time. As far as
the welfare of the recipients is concerned, the basic ideas we would like to convey are related to
the dynamic bene…ts of waqfs and their role in economically integrating di¤erent parts of the
Islamic society throughout the history of Islam. We therefore resort to a general framework
that encompasses the alternative redistributive aspects of waqf investments discussed above.
17

Formally, the initial conditions under which only the rich can invest in waqf are de…ned in Section 3.3.4.
An interesting analogy between Kuran’s interpretation and ours is that both arguments view waqf as a
means of sheltering private assets by placing them in suboptimal investments. According to Kuran waqf is a
static solution to the threat of con…scation by the ruler while ours is a dynamic solution against expropriation
by the Bedouins. In other words, Kuran discusses how waqf was used in an already established Muslim society,
whereas we o¤er an interpretation perhaps more pertinent to the early formative centuries of Islam.
18

14

Based on narratives, the …rst evidence of waqf date to the very beginning of the Islamic
era and took the form of a sadaqa to build mosques as a place of interaction for the Muslim
community and to provide free water through public fountains (or wells). As these investments
were made in urban areas, they also attracted non-city dwellers into the towns, encouraging
interactions between the oasis inhabitants and the surrounding nomads. Hence, one could view
these investments as directly increasing TH;t+1 in the oases over time. Moreover, the access
to improved urban amenities may have also indirectly bene…ted the next generation nomads
by enlarging the future gains from trade which translates into increased zakat transfers for the
nomads’o¤spring.
Another well-known form of waqfs was the construction of accommodation stops for
the trading community known as caravanserais. Although concrete evidence for this type of
waqf dates to few centuries after the birth of Islam, it is the form directly related to longdistance trade. As caravanserais are built outside urban centers, they are also the type of waqf
more transparently associated with cross-regional spillovers. We may interpret the impact
of caravanserais as permanently increasing the future pro…tability of long-distance trade, i.e.,
increasing pt+1 , which may impact the nomads in the periphery in two ways. First, by increasing
the future zakat transfers received by the nomads due to the larger gains from trade of the
rich and second, by eventually encouraging the Bedouins themselves to be integrated in the
activities related to long-distance trade. The latter case is consistent with the idea that the
goal of the Islamic institutional complex was to align the interests of the roving bandits (the
Bedouins) with those of the oasis dwellers and merchants.
The …nal form of waqf we consider is the establishment of public goods such as schools
or hospitals, which bene…ted the rich tribe. Such entities were by de…nition built for use
by all in the city and therefore raised labor productivity of the children of the rich through
human capital development. A waqf of this type therefore also indirectly bene…ts the poor by
enhancing next period’s size of zakat payments to the poor by a factor of . In what follows
we de…ne waqf spillovers for the poor as W (TH;t+1 ; pt+1 ; hH;t+1 ), where
and

@W (:)
@hH;t+1

@W (:)
@TH;t+1

> 0,

@W (:)
@pt+1

> 0,

> 0. The idea boils down to waqf investments by the city/oasis dwellers directly

increasing their own next period gross and net income, creating a larger pie a fraction of which
is indirectly spilled over to the nomads in the periphery.
Alternatively, waqfs can be thought of as a step towards facilitating the sedentarization
of the nomads and hence directly increasing the welfare of the poor. Given the location-speci…c
nature of waqf, the newly sedentarized Bedouins could directly gain access to the bene…ts of
such public investments.

15

3.3.3

Anti-Riba Regulation

Kuran (2008a) argues that anti-riba laws for the Muslims were equivalent to increasing transactions costs, which limited the return on wealth accumulation for Muslim adherents. In the
context of the model, what drives the choice between private wealth accumulation and waqf
investments are the relative returns of these two assets. Introducing the anti-riba law induces
the rich agents to switch from private-only bequests to waqf investments.
N = r , where
De…ne the net return on capital investments as rH
H

2 [0; 1] is an inverse

measure of the distortion in the marginal product of capital induced by the limitations on con-

tracts involving capital investments. The comparison between the two forms of investment boils
down to evaluating the returns from private capital bequests versus public good investments,
i.e., rH 7 wH .
Thanks to the linearity of the production function, returns to factors of production are
independent of the quantity of factors employed. Hence, individuals from fertile regions prefer
public good investments over capital savings as long as:
1
H

Below we study the bequest behavior of parents as a function of the riba regime in
which they live, i.e., with or without restrictions on capital investments. When there are no
distortions on capital accumulation,

= 1; rich either bequeath only capital:
(
0
if YH;t c~
sH;t (YH;t ) =
:
YH;t c~ if YH;t > c~

When restrictions are signi…cant, i.e., riba is not allowed,

H;

(6)

the rich invest in public

goods. In this case optimal labor enhancing investment becomes:
(
0
if YH;t c~
eH;t (YH;t ) =
:
YH;t c~ if YH;t > c~

(7)

Note that because of (4) the poor bene…t from the waqf investment made by the rich.19
3.3.4

Initial Conditions

Now that we have de…ned the main building blocks and individuals’optimization structure, it
is useful to de…ne the starting point of the economy:
De…nition 1 The initial condition of the model (at time t = 0) is one in which h0 = 1 and
sH;

1

= 0, so that IH;0 = 1

and IL;0 =

1
v

.

19

Given our utility function, there are no free riding incentives. Given < H once c = c~ is attained, the
only way to increase utility is to leave bequests. Moreover, allowing the waqf donors to partially internalize the
return on waqfs would not change the qualitative predictions.

16

In order for trade to act as a trigger for capital accumulation, we assume that prior to
the emergence of long-distance trade opportunities, p = 1; no individuals leave bequests:
1

< c~:

(C2)

It follows that without trade and under (C2) regional incomes remain constant. Moreover,
throughout the analysis we assume that the tribe in the agriculturally poor region is initially
unable to engage in trade, i.e.,:
IL;0 < ;

(C3)

and this is always true for large enough values of v. Condition (C3) implies that if v ! 1 the

poor region is indistinguishable from the rich one because their natural productivities coincide
and they would behave similarly in terms of production, trade, and bequests. Moreover, looking
at (1), (2) and (4), v ! 1 gives IL;0 ! 0. Hence, we consider small enough values of land
productivity, TL ; such that the emergence of trade opportunities creates con‡icting interests
between regions.
Finally, let us de…ne a minimum price obtained by trading abroad,
p

c~
(1

)

;

(C4)

which is attainable once commercial trade routes appear. In what follows, we characterize the
optimal behavior of agents in the rich region given conditions (C1), (C2), (C3) and (C4). Note
that in absence of income transfers agents in the poor region cannot reach satiation point,
c~, and hence do not leave bequests. Thus, in the rest of this section we only refer to the
bequeathing behavior of the rich.

3.4

Trade, Con‡ict, and Redistribution

The economic value of trade, p, and the level of land quality determine the ability to engage in
long-distance trade. Hereafter, we refer to bene…ts brought about by an increase in p as gains
realized from long-distance trade. The argument remains valid if one assumes that instead of
actively engaging in long-distance trade, oases only accommodate and provide trading services
to the ‡ow of merchants passing by, i.e., fertile pockets of land only act as trade hubs. In the
latter scenario the cost of trade

would now re‡ect the cost of setting up the urban amenities

necessary to accommodate the incoming trade ‡ows. Generally, a region trades if and only if
Ii;t < p(Ii;t

) () Ii;t >

p
p 1

when there is no risk of con‡ict. In this section, we discuss the

initial stage of the economy at t = 0 as de…ned above.

17

3.4.1

Trade and the Threat of a Raid

When trade becomes a viable option only the tribe in the fertile region may participate. Given
condition (C3), the tribe in the poor region cannot overcome the …xed trade-related cost,

.

However, it may choose to raid the caravans and obtain part of the goods if pro…table. These
decisions are considered to be collective actions as tribalism or asabiyya (the clan spirit) obliged
each tribe to protect its fellow members (Watt, 1961). The outcome of the confrontation depends on the probability that the nomadic tribe intercepts a caravan fL ( ) 2 [0; 1] whose
argument is the mass of desert, , and is continuous and di¤erentiable. Without loss of generality we interpret fH ( ) = 1
where fH (1) = 0, fH (0) = 1,

fL ( )
@fH ( )
@

as the probability that a caravan safely retains its goods,
< 0 and

@fL ( )
@

> 0. Properties of fi ( ) emphasize the

fact that overland trade is space intensive, so that the higher is the proportion of arid lands,
, the larger is the predation threat to any caravan on the way to trading ports. Note that the
importance of relative population densities in determining the con‡ict outcome is less relevant
in this context as the encounter takes place out in the desert.20 This observation also suggests
that allowing for Malthusian dynamics (which are shut o¤) would not change the predictions
regarding the onset of raids. However, endogenizing fertility decisions would imply that in
equilibrium there would be no systematic di¤erences in income per capita but all productivity
di¤erences would be manifested in di¤erential population densities across regions, Ashraf and
Galor (2013).
We model the trade and raid process as a sequence, where the rich evaluate the profitability of trade conditional on the decision of the poor whether or not to raid. It follows from
(3), (6), and (7) that utility is increasing in net income. At any period t and in absence of
c
any institutional arrangements, the rich tribe would trade if her post-con‡ict net income YH;t

exceeds the income under no trade, IH;t :
c
IH;t < YH;t

p(IH;t

)fH ( );

which in period 0 can be rewritten as
fH ( )

1
p(1

)

> 0:

(8)

The inequality shows that trade is more likely to occur as the ability of the rich to retain goods
during a raid increases (larger fH ( )), and gains from trade are large (a higher gross income
1

, higher prices p, or lower trade costs ).
20

Sustaining large contingents of guards in the desert is economically ine¢ cient or practically impossible. For
example, note that the Roman army despite its apparent military superiority did not take over the Arabian
peninsula.

18

Lemma 1 There exists a unique threshold mass of desert

2 (0; 1), giving fH ( ) =

such that trade in the presence of con‡ict is only pro…table for

1
p(1

),

< .

Proof. Since fH ( ) is continuous, monotonically decreasing in , fH (0) = 1 and fH (1) =
0, it follows from the Intermediate Value Theorem and (8) that there exists a unique mass of
arid land

such that fH ( ) =

1
p(1

fH . Hence there exists a

)

then fH ( ) > fH and the rich trade, whereas if

>

such that if

<

then fH ( ) 6 fH and they only consume

locally.
The tribe in the arid region may plunder the goods being traded. In line with the
historical evidence, we assume a raid may occur when a caravan is on its way to the trade
routes, therefore the potential booty to be gained in a raid is the pre-trade income of the rich
tribe.21 There is a cost of con‡ict for the Bedouins that represents resources lost during an
ambush. In particular, they sustain a loss equivalent to a fraction

of caravan’s merchandise.

Thus, raiding is only a credible threat if what the poor can obtain exceeds the income of
remaining passive and consuming own production, i.e.,:
IL;t < IL;t + (IH;t

)[fL ( )

];

(9)

which can be rewritten as
fL ( )

> 0:

(10)

The inequality shows that the poor would only raid if probability of obtaining the goods is
large enough to overcome the costs of con‡ict .
Lemma 2 There exists a unique threshold mass of desert
that a raid is only a credible threat for

>

> .

2 (0; ), giving fL ( ) = , such

Proof. Note that fL ( ) is continuous and monotonically increasing in , fL (0) = 0 and
fL ( ) = 1

1
p(1

).

(C2), (C4) and

< 1=2 imply that p >

1
(1

)(1

),

and therefore that

fL ( ) > . It follows from the Intermediate Value Theorem that there exists a unique mass of
arid land

2 0;

such that fL ( ) =

fL . Hence, there exists a

then fL ( ) > fL and the poor raid, whereas if

3.4.2

6

such that if

>

then fL ( ) 6 fL and there is no con‡ict.

The Static Redistribution System

We now introduce the possibility of zakat, that is static, same-period income redistribution,
and investigate the necessary conditions under which a zakat contract is (i) mutually bene…cial
21

Note that as the poor cannot overcome the costs of setting up a caravan, we assume away the possibility
that they subsequently trade goods collected during a raid.

19

and (ii) an equilibrium outcome. The zakat contract takes the form of a fraction z of the
pre-trade income of the rich tribe that is transferred to the poor. The poor would prefer a
zakat payment as a form of compensation to refrain from con‡ict if the transfer is larger than
what they would gain from a raid:
IL;t + z(IH;t

)

IL;t + [(fL ( )

](IH;t

):

This gives a minimum acceptable zakat rate, z; of
z( ) = maxf0; fL ( )

z

g;

(11)

which is weakly increasing in fL ( ), thus weakly increasing in

and weakly decreasing in .

Note that z only becomes positive at fL , which looking at (10) occurs when the mass of arid
areas exceeds , that is when the poor …nd it optimal to raid.
The maximum zakat rate the rich would be willing to pay can be found by comparing
their post-trade income under con‡ict with that under a zakat regime:
p(1

z)(IH;t

)

fH ( )p(IH;t

);

which gives
z

z( ) = fL ( )

1:

(12)

and is increasing in . Note that con‡ict occurs only when fL ( ) > fL : Below this threshold
there is no con‡ict so the maximum zakat rate of the rich is 0. It is easy to see from (11)
and (12) that z < z always holds, thus there exists a positive zakat rate that delivers a Pareto
preferred outcome as long as

> .

Given the structure of trade and assuming that z is the rate of redistribution, we can
now de…ne the net income of the rich as:
p (IH;t

YH;t =
(1

)

no raid

fH ( )p (IH;t

)

raid

(1

)

zakat

z)p (IH;t

z)fH ( )p (IH;t

(13)

) zakat and raid.

The net income of the poor is equal to their gross income, plus zakat earnings, with the
latter being equivalent to their potential gains from con‡ict:
YL;t = IL;t + z (IH;t

20

):

(14)

rich
no zakat

poor

poor:

zakat

1− α
+ [ f L (λ ) − θ ]∆
υ

poor:

1− α
+ {z + (1 − z )[ f L (λ ) − θ ]}∆
υ

raid

no raid

rich: 1 − α + α [ pf H (λ )∆ − c~ ]

rich: 1 − α + α [ pf H (λ )(1 − z )∆ − c~ ]

poor: 1 − α
υ

poor:

rich: 1 − α + α ( p∆ − c~ )

rich: 1 − α + α [ p (1 − z ) ∆ − c~ ]

1− α
+ z∆
υ

where ∆ = I HG ,t − µ

Figure 1: The Failure of a Static Redistribution System

If the poor deviate by raiding after receiving the transfer payment and before trade takes place,
they can achieve a net income of:
YL;t = IL;t + [z + (1

z)(fL ( )

)] (IH;t

):

(15)

Although adopting a static redistribution system is Pareto e¢ cient, it is not a Nash
equilibrium because the poor may deviate and attack the caravan after having received the
transfer. This is straightforward to see in Figure 1 that illustrates the outcome of the game
between the rich and the poor in terms of their net income. The equilibrium strategy is for the
rich to not redistribute and for the poor to raid, giving rise to an ine¢ cient outcome. A static
redistribution system hence is not self-enforcing and fails to deliver a sustainable solution that
safeguards trade, as the nomadic clan always …nds it optimal to raid the caravan after receiving
the redistribution. Note that in a repeated game, a static redistribution by itself would have
been enforceable and might have delivered a sustainable solution. Failure of the ilaf agreements
to eliminate raids prior to Islam, nevertheless, clearly indicate that this was historically not
the case.

Lemma 3 Using (11) and (12), a zero zakat rate obtains for
21

, while for

>

there

State of nature introduces Islam
rich
adopt

no adopt

poor

poor

no raid

raid

poor:

poor:
rich:

poor

no raid

1− α
+ {z + (1 − z )[ f L (λ ) − θ ]}∆
υ

poor:

raid

1− α
υ
1− α
+ [ f L (λ ) − θ ]∆
υ
rich: 1 − α + α [ pf H (λ )∆ − c~ ]

1− α
+ z∆ + W (.)
υ
(1 − α ){1 + γ [ p(1 − z ) ∆ − c~ ]}

poor:

~
for λ > λ0c

where ∆ = I HG ,t − µ

Figure 2: Islam as a System of Dynamic Redistribution

exists a positive zakat rate of z increasing in

, which is bene…cial for both sides. Commit-

ment problems, however, result in the Pareto e¢ cient outcome not being a Nash Equilibrium,
rendering a static redistribution system as such ine¤ ective over time.
Proof. Follows by directly comparing (11) to (12), the properties of fL ( ), and the
properties of the Nash equilibrium in Figure 1.

3.5

Geography and the Emergence of the Islamic Economic Principles

Islam can be viewed as a contract that adds a dynamic layer of redistribution to the static
transfer, which alone was shown to be unsustainable. This can be modelled as any force
that spreads wealth intergenerationally and avoids its concentration. Historically, such forces
included a partible inheritance system and a combination of regulations that limited wealth
accumulation and induced public investments by the rich, such as waqfs. In the latter case,
bene…ts to the next generation are enjoyed by both the rich and poor tribes. Speci…cally, in
our model the Islamic contract comprises an anti-riba law together with a zakat transfer from
the rich to the poor.
We assume that at t = 0 an Islamic pact is o¤ered and is enacted if it is accepted by both
sides. Figure 2 displays a redistribution scheme that exhibits both static and dynamic aspects.
The introduction of the latter acts as a coordination device by eliminating the commitment
problem present in a system of static redistribution only. We model this as a dynamic game,
22

where …rst the rich adopt Islam if pro…table, and then the poor decide whether to abide by the
doctrine or resort to violence and predation.
The nomadic clan uses the threat of con‡ict to establish Islam, and its bargaining power
is increasing in . To see whether or not a contract encompassing the set of economic rules
present in the Islamic doctrine is adopted, one may compare the utility of the rich clan with
and without Islam. The latter calculate their utility under Islam, UH , with both zakat and
c , which is con‡ict for all
anti-riba in place and compare it to their outside option, UH

At time t = 0, the level of net income under con‡ict

YHc

that gives

YHc

> .

= c~, above which the

rich leave capital bequests, solves for:
fH ( )

c~
p(1

)

> 0:

(16)

c
< ~ 0 and zero
c
otherwise. In addition, looking at (8) and (16) along with (C2) and (C4) assures that < ~ 0 <

With equality, (16) gives

~ c so that capital bequests are positive if
0

. Bequests are more likely to be positive when fH ( ), 1

, and p are larger, and when trade

costs, , are smaller.
c

Lemma 4 Under con‡ict there exists a unique threshold mass of desert ~ 0 2
c
c
fH ( ~ 0 ) = p(1 c~ ) , such that capital bequests are positive only for < ~ 0 .

;

, giving

and fH ( ) = p(11
) . Given
c
=) fH ( ~ 0 ) > 1
, which holds from

Proof. Note that fH ( ) is continuous, fH ( ) = 1
(C2), (6), (8), (13) and (16), as long as p >

c~
(1

)(1

)

(C4) and

< 1=2, it follows from the Intermediate Value Theorem that there exists a mass of
c
c
c . Also, since f ( ) is monotonically
such that fH ( ~ 0 ) = p(1 c~ ) f~H;0
arid areas ~ 0 2 ;
H
c
c
c
decreasing in , this ~ is unique. So, if < ~ then fH ( ) > f~ and capital savings by the
0

rich are positive, whereas if

0

H;0

c
c
and savings are zero.
> ~ 0 then fH ( ) 6 f~H;0

Similarly, one may derive the threshold

below which waqf investments are positive

under an Islamic contract, by solving for the net income under Islam, YH , that guarantees
consumption equal to c~: The only di¤erence from the previous case is the additional gain from
avoiding con‡ict. The following inequality solves for ~ below which bequests under Islam are
0

positive:
fH ( )

c~
p(1

)

+ > 0:

(17)

Substituting for p from (C4), one can show that (17) always holds, hence waqf bequests by
c
the rich are always positive under Islam. Note that while Y c > c~ no longer holds for > ~ ,
H

0

YH > c~ still obtains due to the extra term .
The poor in absence of dynamic redistribution always …nd it optimal to raid as in the
static redistribution case. In contrast, under the combination of zakat, an anti-riba regime and
23

waqf, when waqf gains W (:) are su¢ ciently large they strictly prefer compliance to raiding.
c
Given the su¢ cient condition for the rich to adopt Islam, > ~ 0 , from Lemma 4, should the
poor choose to raid after the Islamic contract is o¤ered neither side can enjoy the bene…ts of
waqf as no wealth remains to be bequeathed. Indeed, since the rich get raided and pay zakat
c
in this case, the zero bequest threshold is reached at a lower level of than ~ . Raiding is
0

therefore no longer incentive compatible for the poor under the structure o¤ered by Islam. This
leaves a choice between the static bene…ts of a raid versus the dynamic gains from Islam:
Lemma 5 When gain from waqf are large, W (:) > (1

z)(1

)(1

), the utility of

the poor under Islam is greater than the one-time bene…ts from a raid obtained upon deviation
from the principles, i.e., UL > ULc .
Proof. The utility of the poor in case they accept Islam or forego its bene…ts and raid are
depicted on the left branch of the tree in Figure 2. Islam is strictly preferred by the poor if the
dynamic gains outweigh a one-time raid such that UL > ULc ) W (:) > (1

at time t = 0, where z(1

) and

1

v

z)(1

)(1

)

appear on both sides and therefore cancel out, and

fL ( ) = 1 to depict the maximum value it can take.
Lemma 5 reveals that when the gains from waqfs are su¢ ciently large the poor adopt
Islam, i.e., the tribes unify into an Islamic community. Focusing on t = 0, it is straightforward
c
to show that Islam is accepted by both sides for all > ~ , where the alternative is no bequests.
0

In this range, the only option for the rich to leave bene…ts to the next generation is to switch to
Islam and waqf investments, as opposed to bequests strictly bene…ting their heirs. Islam also
brings static gains by preventing con‡ict. The di¤erence between what the rich tribe is willing
to pay to avoid con‡ict and what it actually pays, i.e., the di¤erence between z and z in (11)
and (12), is the economic value added by Islam, and is equal to . On the dynamic side, the
poor also gain by assuring waqf spillovers will be accrued to their o¤spring, which under large
gains from trade outweigh the static gains from a raid. One may thus state:
Proposition 1 When trade opportunities arise, an Islamic contract is agreed upon by the tribe
in the fertile region and respected by the nomadic tribe in the periphery at t = 0 when the mass
c
of the arid lands and gains from waqf are such that > ~ 0 and W (:) > (1 z)(1 )(1
).
Proof. Follows directly from Lemmas 4 and 5. For large enough values of W (:) that
c
make dynamic gains from Islam more attractive than a one-time raid for the poor, > ~ 0 is a
su¢ cient condition for Islam to be accepted as an institution because (i) the rich will have a
static gain by avoiding a raid, (ii) the rich will have dynamic bene…ts as opposed to no capital
bequests, (iii) the poor obtain higher dynamic gains from waqf than raiding since predation
leaves no wealth to the rich to be invested socially.
24

Looking back at Figure 2, Islam is proposed for all

c
> ~ 0 , where the rich prefer waqf to

individual accumulation of wealth under con‡ict and the poor consequently respect the system
and refrain from raiding in exchange for receiving the long-run bene…ts of Islam.
< ,

In summary, when the mass of relatively infertile regions to cross is small, i.e., for

there is no signi…cant threat of a raid and no redistributive institutions emerge. However, when
c
they account for a moderate part of the landscape, i.e., < < ~ ; the rich may prefer to
0

trade and privately accumulate and the poor therefore continue to raid. This is an economy
where static redistribution schemes collapse due to commitment problems. Finally, as long
as the mass of arid land is large enough, the rich accept Islam because the threat of con‡ict
c
is e¤ective and potential losses are high. Islam is accepted for > ~ 0 because the rich will
otherwise not be able to leave any bequests under con‡ict, or even trade for
consequence, once trade becomes feasible in period t = 0, Islam is founded for

> . As a
c
> ~ 0 , the rich

pay zakat, and leave bequests in the form of public waqfs.
In what follows we explore some aspects of the dynamics to establish the conditions
under which the Islamic economic principles, once adopted, also persist in the long run. In
c
other words, we examine whether there exists a threshold value of poor regions’size, ~ < 1,
S

above which the Islamic equilibrium survives in the steady state.

3.6

Persistence of the Islamic Doctrine and the Long-term Evolution of the
Economy

We now conduct a dynamic analysis to study the persistence of Islam and assess the long-run
evolution of the economy. We derive the steady state income under Islam and observe the
conditions under which Islam persists.
We know from Proposition 1 that an Islamic institution is initially founded if

c
> ~0.

The anti-riba law sways the rich to divert bequests from private capital accumulation to public
good investments that enhance productivity of all agents. Note that due to the public nature of
waqf, initial inequality under Islam does not change along the process of development. However,
c
~ c (IH;t ) henceforth, may change due
the bequest and the Islam thresholds, referred to as ~
t

t

to IH;t increasing over time.
c
Corollary 1 At any period t, the expression fH ( ~ 0 ) derived in Lemma 4 is generalized to
c
c
c
(~t )
fH ( ~ t ) = p(IH;tc~ ) . Since @f@IHH;t
< 0, it follows that the threshold value ~ t rises over time as

IH;t increases. Intuitively, a larger gross income eases the constraint to leave bequests for the
wealthy in presence of con‡ict and discourages the persistence of Islam.
Proof. Substituting the gross income in period 0, (1
), with the gross income in
c
c
period t; IH;t ; in the RHS of fH ( ~ 0 ) in Lemma 4, the expression becomes fH ( ~ t ) = p(IH;tc~ ) .
25

Further,

c
@ ~t
@IH;t

> 0 follows by directly inspecting the expression in the Corollary and using the

properties of fH ( ).
~ c , Islamic rules are accepted in every period. Assuming
t

Given Corollary 1, as long as

that the gross income of the poor does not surpass that of the rich after acquiring the bene…ts
from waqf, the limits of the economy can be measured by seeing how the income of the rich
evolves according to the dynamic equation
IH;t+1 = (1

)(1 + [(1

z)p(IH;t

)

c~]);

(18)

where we have used equations (7), (11), and (13). Gross income increases in every period and
eventually monotonically reaches the steady state level:
IH;S = (1
if p < 1=[(1

) (1

) 1+

p (1
1 p (1

) (1 z) c~
) (1 z)

(19)

z)]. It is easy to see that the su¢ cient condition on p ensures that

both the denominator in the parenthesis in (19) is positive guaranteeing a positive steady state
income level, and the slope of the linear function IH;t+1 is between 0 and 1. A …rst-order
linear dynamic equation with such properties delivers a stable steady state with monotonic
convergence. The steady state gross income is the wage rate times the steady state level of
investment in waqf. It is positive and larger than the initial gross income (1

) from (C4).

If the price condition above is not satis…ed, growth of income of the rich is unbounded and the
importance of implementing the Islamic economic principles declines in the long run.
Corollary 1 shows that the Islamic contract may be abandoned as the gross income of
the rich increases. However, using (19) one may show that there exists a threshold mass of the
c
arid lands, ~ S , above which the rich remain loyal to Islam even in the long run.
c

c

Proposition 2 There exists a unique threshold ~ S 2 ( ~ 0 ; 1), where Islam is adopted in the
c
short-run and maintained in the long-run 8 > ~ .
S

c
Proof. To check for the existence and uniqueness of ~ S < 1, …rst substitute = 1
c
into expression fH ( ~ t ) in Lemma 4, yielding p(1 c~ ) . From (C2) and (8) we know that

fH (1) <

c~

therefore in the limit case of ! 1 the rich would prefer the Islamic contract.
c
Next, Corollary 1 shows that ~ t is increasing over time. It follows from the Intermediate Value
c
c
c
Theorem that there exist a unique ~ > ~ such that if > ~ then Islam persists in the long
p(1

),

S

run, whereas if

S

0

c
< ~ S then Islamic economic principles may be abandoned or modi…ed despite

being adopted in t = 0.
Proposition 2 establishes the existence of an interval, in which Islam is sustainable in
the long run. We may conclude that Islam is initially founded and may be abandoned after
26

c
some period t~ > 0 for ~ 0 6

c
c
< ~ S , while it persists in the long-run for ~ S 6

< 1. If the

contract is abandoned, the economy ultimately evolves back into a no-institutions case. Figure
3 presents the main results of the two propositions on the critical values of

that determine

the adoption and persistence of the Islamic institutions paralleling the optimal decisions of
the society regarding trade, raid and bequests. It is important to note that in absence of the
determinants of the Islamic framework, i.e., unequal geography interacted with trade opportunities, Islamic principles are likely not to be followed in the long-run, see Rubin (2009, 2011)
for several examples in which the prohibition of interest rates was no longer enforced among
Muslim subjects in the era of the Ottoman empire.

0

~c

λ

λ0

1

trade, no raid positive bequests zero bequests
trade with raid

0
no institution

~c ~c

λ

λ0 λS

1

static redistribution Islamic lands
unsustainable

sustainable

Figure 3: Distribution of Land Quality and Islamic Institutions
The results in this section suggest that the adoption of the Islamic economic doctrine
seemingly hampered economic development by limiting private investments and wealth accumulation, thereby constraining long-run growth of income. However, it is crucial to recognize
that in absence of Islamic rules territories characterized by a large share of poorly endowed
regions would be trapped in a state of eternal feuding. So, while the emergence of Islam allowed these economies to escape a con‡ict trap and ‡ourish in the pre-industrial world, these
very institutions resulted in negligible capital accumulation shaping the economic trajectory
of the Islamic lands in the pre-modern era. The long run implications of the model are consistent with the well-developed thesis of Kuran (2010) who argues how public waqfs impeded
development due to their in‡exibility and the diversion of productive resources away from the
relatively more pro…table private investments and towards rent-seeking activities. Our …ndings
also complement Galor and Tsiddon (1997), who show that polarization of income in early
27

stages of development are a necessary ingredient for future economic growth and that prematurely implementing policies designed to reduce inequality leads to stagnation in the long-run.
Similarly, Galor and Moav (2004) argue that income inequality in the early stages of development is growth promoting since it leads to wealth being channeled towards those with higher
propensity to save, fueling the accumulation of capital.

4

Conclusion

This research sheds new light on the economic origins and consequences of the Islamic economic
doctrine. The theory provided links the emergence of trade opportunities across geographically
unequal territories to the formation of the Islamic principles and investigates how the adoption
of the latter shaped the economic performance of the Muslim world in the pre-industrial era.
We have sketched a simple model that illustrates how geographic inequality when exposed to trade opportunities leads to the emergence of redistributive principles featuring both
static and, perhaps more critically, dynamic aspects similar to those prescribed by the Islamic
doctrine. In the context of our model two elements are crucial in determining the institutional
setup: (i) the existence of substantive gains from trade, and (ii) the relative proportion of
regions that cannot directly reap these gains. If poorly-endowed territories constitute a small
fraction of the landscape no redistributive institutions arise, while for intermediate values, only
static redistribution is feasible, but it is unsustainable due to commitment problems. Nevertheless, once the representation of poorly-endowed regions crosses a critical threshold, the
threat of a raid induces the rich to adopt the Islamic contract. The results are consistent with
our companion paper, Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2012), where we …nd that the
interaction between distance to pre-industrial trade routes and geographic inequality is a key
predictor of the distribution of Muslim communities in the Old world.
We argue that geography and trade opportunities forged the Islamic economic doctrine,
in‡uencing the process of historical development of the Islamic lands. In particular, the unequal
distribution of land endowments conferred di¤erential gains from trade across regions, fostering
predatory behavior from tribes residing in the poorly endowed regions. In such an environment,
it was mutually bene…cial to institute an economic system dictating redistribution. A static
income transfer only, however, was unsustainable due to commitment problems undermining
the viability of trade. Islam o¤ered principles that in addition to static transfers also provided
a dynamic layer of redistribution tailored to limit the accumulation of wealth over time across
highly unequal regions. Examples of dynamic transfers that kept wealth inequality within
limits include the partible inheritance rules, the frictions on borrowing and lending and the
concomitant emphasis on public goods provision via religious endowments. As a result of these
28

principles the Muslim lands managed to escape a state of constant feuding and ‡ourish in the
pre-industrial world, this however limited the wealth accumulation for the commercial elite and
hence the potential for growth in the era of large-scale shipping trade and industrialization.
Finally, it is worth noting that Christianity emerged in current day Israel and Palestine
which also feature a prominently unequal distribution of land endowments. Despite these
common geographical origins, which may explain the similarities in the economic doctrine
between Christianity and Islam, the former eventually spread in Europe modifying its economic
doctrine over time. For example, although Christianity did initially rigorously implement
the prohibition on interest, gradually, and particularly following the Protestant Reformation,
enforcement of laws against usury were relaxed (Rubin, 2011).22 We view this study as a …rst
step towards a broader e¤ort to shed light on the origins of religious beliefs and their impact
on comparative development. Natural questions come to mind, such as why other Abrahamic
religions over time toned down or signi…cantly modi…ed their initial economic doctrine and why
Muslim jurists did not, and how these di¤erences shaped the process of development.23 Other
inquiries may engage with why non-Muslims performed di¤erently within the Islamic lands,
as the limited evidence on Greeks, Armenians and Jews in the Ottoman empire suggests. We
hope to tackle some of these questions in the near future.
22
In fact, by the beginning of the 17th century usury was downgraded from an o¤ence against public morality
to a private conscience issue, Visser and Macintosh (1998). Also, during the Amoraic period in Babylonia
(200AD to 500AD) charging interest started being accepted by the Jewish community.
23
For example, the di¤erent paths of development experienced by the Christian world have been associated with
the inheritance laws, which in several instances preserved economic inequality and encouraged the accumulation
of capital (Bertocchi, 2006).

29

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2005): “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic
Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, 95(3),
546–579.
Aimone, J. A., L. R. Iannaccone, M. D. Makowsky, and J. Rubin (2013): “Endogenous
Group Formation via Unproductive Costs,” Review of Economic Studies, 80(4), 1215–1236.
Anderson, J. E., and O. Bandiera (2006): “Traders, Cops and Robbers,” Journal of
International Economics, 70(1), 197–215.
Ashraf, Q., and O. Galor (2013): “The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 1–46.
Aswad, B. C. (1963): “Social and Ecological Aspects in the Origin of the Islamic State,”
Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters, 48, 419–442.
Babacan, M. (2011): “Economics of Philanthropic Institutions, Regulation and Governance
in Turkey,” Journal of Economic and Social Research, 13(2), 61–89.
Bairoch, P. (1988): Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the
Present. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Bamyeh, M. A. (1999): The Social Origins of Islam: Mind, Economy, Discourse. University
of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN.
Barro, R., and R. M. McCleary (2003): “Religion and Economic Growth Across Countries,” American Sociological Review, 68, 1.
(2006a): “Religion and Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 49–72.
(2006b): “Religion and Political Economy in an International Panel,”Journal for the
Scienti…c Study of Religion.
Becker, S. O., and L. Woessmann (2009): “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory
of Protestant Economic History,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 531–596.
Berkey, J. P. (2003): The Formation of Islam: Religion and Society in the Near East, 6001800. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bertocchi, G. (2006): “The Law of Primogeniture and the Transition from Landed Aristocracy to Industrial Democracy,” Journal of Economic Growth, 11, 41–68.
30

Bogle, E. C. (1998): Islam: Origin and Belief. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX.
Bonine, M. E. (1987): “Islam and Commerce: Waqf and the Bazzar of Yazd, Iran,”Erdkunde,
41, 182–196.
Botticini, M., and Z. Eckstein (2005): “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions, or Minorities?,” Journal of Economic History, 65, 922–948.
(2007): “From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions and Diaspora: Human Capital and
Jewish History,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 885–926.
Bulliet, R. W. (1980): “Sedentarization of Nomads in the Seventh Century: the Arabs in
Basra and Kufa,” in When Nomads Settle: Processes of Sedentarization as Adaptation and
Response, ed. by P. C. Salzman, pp. 35–47. Praeger.
Campante, F. R., and D. H. Yanagizawa-Drott (2015): “Does Religion A¤ect Economic
Growth and Happiness? Evidence from Ramadan,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(2), 615–658.
Chaney, E. (2012a): “Democratic Change in the Arab World, Past and Present,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 42(1), 363–414.
(2012b): “Islam and Human Capital Formation: Evidence from Pre-Modern Muslim
Science,” in Handbook of the Economics of Religion, ed. by R. McCleary. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.
Chaudhuri, K. (1985): Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History
from the Rise of Islam to 1750. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Chu, D., and E. Skinner (1965): A Glorious Age in Africa. Garden City, New York, US.
Cizakca, M. (1998): “Awqaf in History and its Implications for Modern Islamic Economies,”
Islamic Economic Studies, 6(1), 43–70.
Cohen, H. J. (1970): “The Economic Background and the Secular Occupations of Muslim
Jurisprudents and Traditionists in the Classical Period of Islam: (Until the Middle of the
Eleventh Century),” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 13, 16–61.
Crone, P. (2007): “Quraysh and the Roman Army: Making Sense of the Meccan Leather
Trade,” Bulletin of SOAS, School of Oriental and African Studies, 70, 63–88.
De Weese, D. (1994): Islamization and Native Religion in the Golden Horde. Penn State
Press.
31

Galor, O., and O. Moav (2004): “From Physical to Human Capital Accumulation: Inequality and the Process of Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 1001–1026.
Galor, O., and D. Tsiddon (1997): “The Distribution of Human Capital and Economic
Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2(1), 93–124.
Gil, M. (1998): “The Earliest Waqf Foundations,” Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 57(2),
125–140.
Glaeser, E. L., and J. Scheinkman (1998): “Neither a Borrower nor a Lender Be: An Economic Analysis of Interest Restrictions and Usuary Laws,” Journal of Law and Economics,
41(1), 1–36.
Goucher, C., C. Leguin, and L. Walton (1998): “Trade, Transport, Temples, and Tribute:
The Economics of Power,”in In the Balance: Themes in Global History, ed. by McGraw-Hill,
pp. 231–245. Stanford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Haber, S., and V. A. Menaldo (2010): “Rainfal, Human Capital, and Democracy,”mimeo
Stanford University and University of Washington.
Habib, A. (2004): “Role of Zakah and Awqaf in Poverty Alleviation,” Islamic Development
Bank Group, Occasional Paper No. 8.
Halperin, C. J. (1987): Russia and the Golden Horde: The Mongol Impact on Medieval
Russian History. Indiana University Press.
Hennigan, P. C. (2004): The Birth of a Legal Institution: The Formation of the Waqf in
Third-Century A.H. Hana… Legal Discourse. Brill.
Hodgson, M. G. S., and E. Burke (1993): Rethinking World History: Essays on Europe,
Islam and World History. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Huntington, S. (1993): “The Clash of Civilizations?,” Foreign A¤ aris, 72(3), 22–49.
Iannaccone, L. R. (1992): “Sacri…ce and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults, Communes,
and other Collectives,” The Journal of Political Economy, 100(2), 271–291.
Ibrahim, M. (1990): Merchant Capital and Islam. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Jalili, A. R. (2006): “A Descriptive Overview of Islamic Taxation,” Journal of American
Acedemy of Business, 8(2), 16–28.

32

Kato, H. (2004): “A Historical Study of the Market Society Re‡ected in the Waqf System in
Muslim Societies,” Annals of Japan Association for Middle East Studies (AJAMES), 20(1),
47–63.
Kuran, T. (2001): “Provision of Public Goods under Islamic Law: Origins, Impact, and
Limitations of the Waqf System,” Law and Society Review, 35(4), 841–897.
(2003): “The Islamic Commercial Crisis: Institutional Roots of Economic Underdevelopment in the Middle East,” Journal of Economic History, 63, 414–446.
(2004a): Islam and Mammon: The Economic Predicaments of Islamism. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
(2004b): “Why the Middle East Is Economically Underdeveloped: Historical Mechanisms of Institutional Stagnation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 71–90.
(2008a): “Institutional Causes of Underdevelopment in the Middle East: A Historical
Perspective,” in Institutional Change and Economic Behavior, ed. by J. Kornai, L. Matyas,
and G. Roland, pp. 64–76. Palgrave-Macmillan, New York.

(2008b): “Islamic Redistribution Through Zakat: Historical Record and Modern
Realities,” in Poverty and Charity in Middle Eastern Contexts, ed. by M. Bonner, M. Ener,
and A. Singer, pp. 275–293. State University of New York Press, Albany.

(2010): The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Lapidus, I. M. (2002): A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Levy, G., and R. Razin (2012): “Religious Beliefs, Religious Participation and Cooperation,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4(3), 121–151.
Lewis, B. (1993): The Arabs in History, 6th Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Mantran, R. (1986): “A Turkish or Mongolian Islam,”in The Cambridge Illustrated History
of the Middle Ages: 1250-1520, ed. by R. Fossier. Cambridge University Press.
Martin, X. S. I., G. Doppelhofer, and R. I. Miller (2004): “Determinants of LongRun Growth: a Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” American
Economic Review, 94(4), 813–835.

33

Marx, K. (1833 [1970]): Critique of Hegel Philosophy of Right. Cambridge University Press,
Ed. Joseph Malley, London.
McCleary, R. M. (2007): “Salvation, Damnation and Economic Incentives,” Journal of
Contemporary Religion, 22(1), 49–74.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 102(4), 1508–1539.
Michalopoulos, S., A. Naghavi, and G. Prarolo (2012): “Trade and Geography in the
Origins and Spread of Islam,” NBER Working Paper 18438.
Mikhail, A. (2012): Water on Sand. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Muller, H. J. (1958): The Loom of History. Harper and Brothers, New York, NY.
Olson, M. (2000): Power And Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist And Capitalist Dictatorships. Basic Books, New York, NY.
Patel, D. S. (2007): Islam, Information, and Social Order: the Strategic Role of Religion in
Muslim Societies. Stanford University.
Platteau, J.-P. (2008): “Religion, Politics, and Development: Lessons from the Lands of
Islam,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 68, 329–351.
Porta, R. L., F. L. de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997): “Legal Determinants
of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131–1150.
Pryor, F. L. (2007): “The Economic Impact of Islam on Developing Countries,” World
Development, 35(11), 1815–1835.
Rahman, F. (1964): “Riba and Interest,” Islamic Studies, Karachi, 3, 1–43.
Raissouni, A. (2001): Islamic ’Waqf Endowment’: Scope and Implications (A. Benhallam,
Trans.). Rabat: Islamic Educational, Scienti…c, and Cultural Organisation, ISESCO, www
edition.
Richerson, P. J. (1996): Principles of Human Ecology. Pearson Custom Pub, New York,
NY.
Rubin, J. (2009): “Social Insurance, Commitment, and the Origin of Law: Interest Bans in
Early Christianity,” Journal of Law and Economics, 52, 761–777.

34

(2011): “Institutions, the Rise of Commerce, and the Persistence of Laws: Interest
Restrictions in Islam and Christianity,” Economic Journal, 121, 1310–1339.
Shatzmiller, M. (2001): “Islamic Institutions and Property Rights: The Case of the Public
Waqf,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 44(1), 44–74.
Stearns, P. N., M. Adas, S. B. Schwarz, and M. J. Gilbert (2010): World Civilizations:
The Global Experience (6th Edition). Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Stride, G. T., and C. Ifeca (1971): Peoples and Empires of West Africa: West Africa in
History, 1000-1800. Africana Publication Corp., New York.
Visser, W. A., and A. Macintosh (1998): “A Short Review of the Historical Critique of
Usuary,” Accounting, Business and Financial History, 8(2), 175–189.
Watt, W. M. (1961): Islam and the Integration of Society. Northwestern Univ Press,
Evanston, IL.
Weber, M. (1905 [1930]): The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Allen and Unwin,
London.
Winder, R. (2008): “Makka - The Modern City,” in Encyclopaedia of Islam, ed. by C. B. E.
V. D. P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, and W. Heinrichs. Brill, Leiden.

35

