                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE DOLLAR AND REAL INTEREST RATES




                         John V. Campbell

                        Richard H. Clarida




                     Working Paper No. 2151




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            February 1987




Prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy,
November 21-22, 1986, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. This paper was commissioned and the work completed
before Clarida assumed his position as Senior Staff Economist at
the CEA. The views expressed in this paper should not be inter-
preted as reflecting the views of members of the Council of
Economic Advisers or their staff. We would like to thank John
Montgomery, Robin Lumsdaine, and Pradeed Srivastava for their able
research assistance, and John Huizinga, Rick Mishkin and members of
the MIT macro lunch group for helpful comments. The support of the
National Science Foundation, grants SES 85-11070 and SES 84-20227,
is acknowledged with thanks. We are of course responsible for all
errors. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2151
                                                   February 1987



                   The Dollar and Real Interest Rates



                                  ABSTRACT




   In this paper, we investigate the link between the real foreign exchange
   value of the dollar and real interest rates since 1979. We argue that it
   is important to consider the possibility that real exchange rate
   movements reflect movements of the long-run equilibrium exchange rate as
   well as real interest differentials. We use a state-space approach to
   estimate the importance of shifts in the long-run equilibrium exchange
   rate, the persistence of the ex ante short-term real interest
   differential, and the effect of this differential on the exchange rate.
   Using U.S., Canadian, British, German and Japanese data from October 1979
   to March 1986, we find that movements in the dollar real exchange rate
   have been dominated by unanticipated shifts in the expected long-run real
   exchange rate. Ex ante real interest differentials have not been
   persistent or variable enough to account for a major part of exchange
   rate variation. We use Mussa's (1984) rational expectations model of the
   real exchange rate and the current account to interpret our results.




John Y. Campbell                                  Richard H. Clarida
NBER                                              The Council of Economic
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                           Advisers
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Old Executive Office
(617) 868—3900                                      Building
                                                  Washington, DC 20500
                                                  (202) 395—3114
                      Th Dollar   and Real Interest Rates

                                     by

                   John Y. Campbell and Richard H. Clarida



1. Introduction

   The substantial, sustained real appreciation of the dollar during the

first half of the 1980's and its subsequent depreciation since February

1985 are perhaps the most debated and discussed macroeconomic events of

this decade. According to one influential view (as put forth by Blinder

(1986), Branson (1985), Frankel (1985), and Sachs (1985)), the strong

dollar of 1980 through early 1985 was the result of a significant shift

in the U.S. policy mix toward persistent structural budget deficits and a

credible, anti-inflationary monetary stance on the part of the Federal

Reserve. Other authors (Obstfeld (1985), Poole (1985), the Council of

Economic Advisers (1985,1986)) have linked the real appreciation of the

dollar in the years following the 1981-82 recession to the surprising

surge in real business fixed investment spending. Still another

hypothesis (which has been explored by Frankel (1985)) is that the rise

and fall of the dollar resulted from a speculative bubble in the foreign

exchange market.

   The real appreciation of the dollar in 1980-1985 coincided with a

marked increase in short and long term real interest rates, particularly

in the U.S. but also abroad (Blanchard and Summers (1984)). This led to

the view, especially popular in the financial press, that "the dollar is

strong because U.S. real interest rates are high." Of course, to the

extent that a shift in monetary policy was responsible for high real


                                          1
interest rates in the U.S. relative to those elsewhere, theory would

predict a real appreciation of the dollar -   with   overshooting -   followed
by a real depreciation to offset high U.S. real interest rates. However,

the dollar consistently appreciated in real terms from 1980 through

February 1985. This fact, along with the observation that the slowdown

in U.S. money growth over the 1980-1984 period was in fact moderate

compared with that experienced in Japan, Germany, and the United Kingdom,

has directed research towards explanations of the sustained real

appreciation of the dollar which emphasize real rather than purely

monetary factors.

   Since February 1985, the dollar has depreciated substantially in both

nominal and real terms against the currencies of the other G5 countries.

The extent of depreciation against the currencies of other major U.S.

trading partners - Canada, the Latin American countries, and the NIC's in

particular - has been less pronounced, especially in real terms. During

this period, there has been a sustained increase in U.S. money growth, a

decline in GNP growth, the announcement in September 1985 of an effort by

the G5 central banks to bring down the value of the dollar, and

Congressional deliberation of a major reform of the tax code. In

addition, passage of the Gramm-Rudman legislation in December 1985

committed Congress and the President to a budgetary process which would

achieve a balanced Federal budget by Fiscal 1991. Against this backdrop,

both long and short term interest rates have declined sharply in the U.S.

and abroad, as has the the slope of the U.S. term structure.

   In this paper, we investigate the link between the real foreign

exchange value of the dollar and real interest rates since 1979. We ask


                                      2
 how much movement in real exchange rates can be attributed to real

 interest differentials, and how much is due to shifts in the long-run

 equilibrium real exchange rate.

    We begin in Section 2 by analyzing the responses of the real exchange

 rate, the real interest differential and the long-run equilibrium real

 exchange rate when there is a shock to autonomous expenditure on domestic

 goods. As discussed above, this type of shock -     in   private investment or

perhaps government spending -   is   one possible explanation of the high

dollar in the early 1980's. We show that under certain circumstances, a

permanent positive shock to spending on domestic goods can lead to a

higher real interest rate at home (a negative real interest differential)

in the short run, and a real appreciation (a decrease in the real

exchange rate, the relative price of imports) in both the short and long

run. The shock also generates current account deficits in the short run.

Our analysis is important for two reasons. First, it clarifies the way

in which spending shocks might account for the experience of the early

1980's. Secondly, the claim is sometimes made that an autonomous

increase in spending which, in the short run, worsens the current account

must of necessity lead to a long-run real depreciation which generates

the trade surpluses required to service the accumulated stock of net

foreign debt. Our analysis shows, contrary to this, that the long-run

equilibrium exchange rate can move in the same direction as the current

exchange rate when there is a spending shock.

   In Section 3 we discuss the traditional methodology for identifying

movements in the long-run equilibrium exchange rate. In general, the

difference between the log level of the real exchange rate and its


                                         3
expected long-run value depends upon the expected sum of current and all

future short-term real interest differentials as well as a risk premium.

This relationship is of sufficient generality that it is virtually devoid

of empirical content. In particular, in the absence of restrictions on

the expected long-run equilibrium real exchange rate and the time series

properties of the real interest differential and the risk premium, there

is no simple link between the level of the real exchange rate and the ex

ante real interest differential.

   The traditional approach (taken by Frankel (1985), Shafer and Loopesko

(1983) and Sachs (1985)) is to assume that the expectations hypothesis of

the term-structure holds, and that the cross-currency risk premium is

zero. These restrictions imply that the difference between the log of

the real exchange rate and its expected long-run level is proportional to

the ex ante long-term real interest rate differential. Of course this

differential is unobservable, and must be constructed using the long-

term nominal differential and a proxy for the expected long-term

inflation differential.

   The problem with this is that it is hard to measure expected long-term

inflation rates. We provide evidence that widely cited estimates of the

differential between the ex ante long-term real interest rate in the U.S.

and the other G7 countries as of February 1985 (the month in which the

real value of the dollar peaked) may substantially overstate the absolute

value of the true real differential as of that date. If this is true,

the estimates understate the extent of long-run equilibrium dollar

appreciation.

   In Section 4 we propose an alternative approach to the problem. We


                                      4
develop an econometric framework which can be used to estimate the effect

of the ex ante short-term real interest differential on the exchange

rate, and the extent to which real exchange rate changes reflect shifts

in the expected long-run equilibrium real exchange rate. The framework

also provides an estimate of the correlation between innovations in the

ex ante real interest differential and the expected long-run exchange

rate, and allows for the presence of a time varying risk premium.

   Our approach may be described as follows. The ex ante short-term real

interest differential is unobservable as is the expected long-run real

exchange rate. However, the ex post short-term real differential and the

current log level of the real exchange rate are observable. We assume

that the ex ante short-term real differential is AR(l). This implies

that the difference between the current log level of the real exchange

rate and its expected long-run level is proportional to the ex ante

short-term real interest differential. We also assume that the long-run

real exchange rate follows a random walk.

   With these assumptions, it is possible to estimate a state-space model

in which two observable variables, the log level of the real exchange

rate and the ex post short-term real interest differential, are an exact

linear combination of the unobservable state variables, the ex ante real

differential, the expected long-run real exchange rate, and the error in

forecasting inflation differentials.

   The advantage of such a tightly restricted system is that it provides

efficient estimates of the minimum set of parameters required to estimate

the extent to which fluctuations in the (observable) real exchange rate

mirror fluctuations in the (unobservable) ex ante real interest


                                       5
differential as opposed to shifts in the (unobservable) expected long-run

real exchange rate. By using the short-term real differential we avoid

the problem of employing proxies for long-run inflation expectations.

The parameter estimates take account of the sampling error associated

with estimating the ex ante differential from the ex post differential,

and allow for covariance between shifts in the expected long-run real

exchange rate and innovations in the ex ante differential.

      Our basic findings, presented in detail in Section 5, are easily

summarized: since 1980, movements in the dollar real exchange rate have

been dominated by unanticipated shifts in the expected long-run dollar

exchange rate. Ex ante real interest differentials have simply not been

persistent enough, and their innovation variance simply not large enough,

to account for a substantial fraction of the variation in the dollar real

exchange rate over this period.

   We also find that the covarjance between innovations in real interest

differentials and in the long run equilibrium exchange rate has been

positive in the 1979-86 period. That is, shocks which have increased

real interest rates in the U.S. relative to foreign countries have also

appreciated the long-run equilibrium real exchange rate and the current

real exchange rate. This is precisely the pattern that we model

theoretically in Section 2.

   In Section 6 we relate our results to other recent empirical research

on real exchange rates and interest rates, and we discuss current

conjectures about the sources of the real dollar depreciation which has

occurred since early 1985.




                                     6
2. Autonomous Sendinp Shifts and the Long-Run Real Exchange Rate

   In the simple textbook Mundell-Flemming world, a permanent autonomous

increase in spending on domestic goods results in a permanent decline in

the relative price of imports (a permanent real appreciation) and a

sustained current account deficit. Current account deficits which result

from autonomous expenditure shifts redistribute wealth away from the

deficit country to the rest of the world. While the Mundell-Flemming

model ignores the effects of this wealth transfer, a number of recent

models of current account and exchange rate dynamics imply that the

decline in domestic wealth reduces domestic absorption relative to

national product, induces a real depreciation with an accompanying real

interest differential, and gradually eliminates the current account

deficit (see Mussa (1984) for a survey and extension of the literature).

   It is sometimes claimed that the deterioration of a country's net

foreign asset position resulting from an autonomous increase in spending

requires a long-run real depreciation which more than offsets the initial

real appreciation. The reasoning behind this argument is straight-

forward: the exchange rate must depreciate in real terms relative to its

initial equilibrium to generate the trade-balance surpluses necessary to

service the interest payments on the economy's accumulated stock of net

foreign debt. To evaluate this claim, we investigate the stationary-

state properties of Mussa's (1984) rational expectations model of the

current account and the real exchange rate.

   Consider an open economy which produces a fixed quantity of a

tradeable good (the domestic good), consumes the domestic as well as a

foreign good, and trades a single real asset (denominated in foreign


                                      7
goods) with the rest of the world. The rate of return on this asset, r,

is assumed constant and the net stock held by domestic residents, a, may

be positive or negative. Foreign residents are willing to exchange

foreign goods for real assets at the prevailing rate of return r, but

their demand for domestic goods in exchange for foreign goods is less

than perfectly elastic with respect to the relative price of foreign

goods in terms of domestic goods, the real exchange rate. Let q denote

the logarithm of the real exchange rate.

   Spending on domestic goods by domestic residents depends upon the real

exchange rate, the desired level of total spending on both domestic and

foreign goods by domestic residents, and an autonomous component of total

domestic spending which is assumed to fall exclusively on domestic goods.

The sum of the excess demands of domestic and foreign residents for

domestic goods (in terms of foreign goods) is assumed to be given by

                         h—s(y-x)+q+x;                                  (1)

where y is the excess of the desired level of total domestic spending on

both domestic and foreign goods over the value of domestically produced

goods (both measured in terms of foreign goods), s is the marginal

expenditure share of total desired domestic spending which falls on

domestic goods, and x is an autonomous component of domestic spending

which falls exclusively on domestic goods.

   An increase in the excess of total desired domestic spending over the

value of domestic production increases the excess demand for domestic

goods by the share of such spending, s, which falls on domestic goods in

the absence of exchange rate changes. A rise in q represents a real

exchange rate depreciation (an increase in the relative price of imports)


                                      8
which shifts both domestic and foreign spending to domestic goods.

Finally, an increase in autonomous spending on domestic goods, x, leaves

the difference (y -   x)   unaffected (because desired total spending

increases one for one with autonomous spending) but increases the excess

demand for domestic goods.

   In equilibrium, the sum of the excess demands of domestic and foreign

residents for domestic production must equal zero. Setting h            0 in

equation (1) and rearranging terms we obtain the following condition for

equilibrium in the market for domestic goods:

                               y    -v(q + (1   -
                                                    s)x);                      (2)

where v    1/s. Equation (2) states that, for any given level of

autonomous spending, an increase in the desired excess of total domestic

spending over the value of domestic product requires a real appreciation

of the domestic currency to restore equilibrium in the market for

domestic goods. Furthermore, as shown in Mussa (1984, p.29), given the

value of y, equilibrium in the domestic goods market implies that the

domestic excess demand for foreign goods is zero.

   The determinants of desired total spending by domestic residents are

assumed to be the domestic real interest rate (relative to the world real

interest rate), the stock of net foreign assets, the difference between

net foreign assets and their target level, and an autonomous component.

Specifically, desired saving -     the   difference between national income

(including interest income) and total desired spending -       is   assumed to be

given by

                  ra-y=(R-r)+u(A-a)-x                                            (3)

where R is the domestic real interest rate, A is the target level of


                                            9
assets, and u is a partial adjustment parameter such that 0 < u < 1.     An

increase in the domestic real interest rate is assumed to increase

desired saving and thus to depress the excess of desired total spending

over the value of national product. Similarly, the larger is the

difference between actual and target assets, the smaller is desired total

spending and the larger is desired saving. Finally, an autonomous

increase in desired spending, x, represents an autonomous decrease in

desired saving and, if x is permanent, an autonomous decrease in the

target level of assets.

   The domestic real interest rate depends on the world interest rate, r,

and the expected rate of change of the relative price of foreign goods

E[D(q)J:

                                     R =   r+     sE[D(q)];            (4)

where D is the forward difference operator. If the relative price of

foreign goods in terms of domestic goods is expected to increase, then an

asset that pays a rate of return r in foreign goods has a rate of return

R in terms of the domestic consumption basket which exceeds r by E[D(q)]

weighted by the marginal expenditure share s devoted to domestic goods.

   As a matter of accounting, the current account surplus corresponds to

the rate of accumulation of net foreign assets, and is equal to the

excess of national income (including interest income) over total spending

by domestic residents. Using the equilibrium condition (2) for the

market for domestic product, the accumualtion of net foreign assets can

be written

             D(A) =   v(q   +   (1    -
                                          s)x))   +   ra.               (5)

  The current account surplus must also, in equilibrium, equal desired


                                                      10
 saving. Substituting (4) into (3) and equating to (5), we obtain

         v((1 -   s)x   +   q) + ra — sE[D(q)] + u(A   -
                                                           a)   -   x.   (6)

     Equations (5) and (6) represent a system of forward looking difference

 equations which jointly determine the time paths of the real exchange

 rate, q, and net foreign assets, a, conditional on the initial stock of

 foreign assets and the expected future path of autonomous spending. The

general solution for this model is provided by Mussa, and is investigated

further by Mussa and Frenkel (1985). For the special case in which

shifts in autonomous spending are expected to be permanent (so that x(t)
=
    E[x(t+j)J     x) a number of concrete results are obtained which we now

summarize.

    The first and most basic set of results is that a permanent,

autonomous increase in spending on domestic goods induces a jump real

appreciation, an increase in real interest rates at home relative to

those abroad (a fall in the real interest differential), and a current

account deficit. The increase in home real interest rates dampens, but

does not reverse, the excess of total spending by domestic residents over

national income which is created by the autonomous spending increase.

Similarly, the real appreciation shifts a portion of the excess domestic

spending toward foreign goods as domestic and foreign residents find

foreign substitutes relatively less expensive.

    In subsequent periods, the excess of total spending by domestic

residents over national income (the current account deficit) narrows as

the wealth effect of a declining stock of net foreign assets reduces

total domestic spending. As spending falls, the home currency

depreciates; indeed, it is the expectation of this subsequent


                                            11
depreciation which induces the initially high level of domestic real

interest rates. A noteworthy feature of the model's rational expectati-

ons equilibrium is that the ex ante real interest differential follows an

AR(l) process, so that the difference between the current log level of

the real exchange rate and its expected long-run equilibrium value is

always proportional to the current one-period ex ante real interest

differential. We examine an empirical specification of this type in

Section 4. Unfortunately, as is so often the case in empirical

macroeconomics, this result does not generalize to more general

specifications for the forcing variables, in this case autonomous

spending.

   The rational expectations equilibrium paths for the real exchange

rate, the real interest differential, and the current account converge to

a stationary state in which the real interest differential is zero, the

current account is in balance, and the real exchange rate is constant.

From equation (3) we see that the stationary-state level of net foreign

assets is given by a — A      -
                                  x/u   which we shall assume, without any loss of

generality, is negative. In the stationary state, the excess of national

product over desired spending must be sufficient to service the interest

on the accumulated stock of foreign debt. Does this in itself imply that

the home currency must depreciate in the long run by more than the

initial appreciation? The stationary-state condition for a balanced

current account is obtained by substituting a = A            -
                                                                 x/u   in equation (5)

and setting the right-hand-side to zero:

              -r(A -   x/u)       =   v((l   -
                                                 s)x + q).                        (7)

A bit of algebra reveals that the necessary and sufficient condition for


                                                   12
a long-run real appreciation in response to a permanent increase in

autonomous spending is

                         1/s > (1 +    r/u).                              (8)

Recall that u is the partial adjustment parameter and that r is the world

real rate of interest. For plausible parameter values, the ratio r/u is

most likely less than 1/4. Thus, a value of s < .8 would insure that the

long-run real exchange rate would appreciate in response to a permanent

increase in autonomous spending.

   Equation (8) nicely summarizes the two counteracting influences of a

permanent increase in autonomous spending on the long-run real exchange

rate. Autonomous spending which falls on domestic goods requires a real

appreciation which shifts spending away from domestic goods which are in

excess demand. However, permanent increases in autonomous spending can

reverse the country's net foreign asset position to that of a substantial

net debtor. The interest on this debt must be met by an export surplus

which, ceterus paribus, requires a real depreciation which shifts

spending towards domestic goods. Thus, the higher the world real

interest rate and the smaller the rate at which saving adjusts, the

larger is foreign debt and debt service in the stationary-state and the

more likely it is that the real exchange rate must depreciate. However,

so long as the ratio 1/s exceeds 1 +   r/u,    this effect is outweighed and

the long-run real exchange rate appreciates despite a potentially

substantial accumulation of foreign debt in the stationary state.

   For example, suppose that in the initial stationary state autonomous

spending is zero, net foreign assets are positive, and that u         .20, r =

.04, and s = .80.   Consider now a shift in autonomous spending equal to


                                        13
initial foreign assets. From equations (7) and (8), we see that in the

new stationary state, the long-run equilibrium exchange rate appreciates

because (1/.80) > 1 +   (.04/.20).   Yet, the stock of foreign debt in the

new stationary state is four times the stock of foreign assets in the

original stationary state (since by assumption x = A and net foreign

assets in the new stationary state are given by A -   x/u).
   The above model, while simple, usefully illustrates several key

properties of the real exchange rate. First, the current level of the

real exchange rate depends upon the expected level of the long-run real

exchange rate which is consistent with a balanced current account.

Second, autonomous spending disturbances will be expected to shift the

long-run real exchange rate. Third, if autonomous spending falls on

domestic goods, there is a presumption that the real exchange rate will

initially appreciate even if in the long run it must depreciate. Fourth,

the fact that the current account deficits associated with an autonomous

spending increase can result in a potentially large stock of foreign debt

does not necessarily imply that the long run real exchange rate must

depreciate relative to its initial equilibrium.

   In sum, autonomous expenditure shifts will in general change the

expected long-run level of the real exchange rate. Shifts in autononmous

expenditure which are perceived to be permanent and which fall on

domestic goods will induce a real appreciation on impact, and may induce

a long-run real appreciation even if the current account adjustment

mechanism entails the accumulation of a substantial stock of foreign

debt.




                                       14
3. Empirical Evidence on the Long Run Real Exchange Rate

   One influential view of exchange rate behavior in the 1980's stresses

the importance of tight monetary policy during 1980-1982. This view uses

Dornbusch's (1976) overshooting model with sluggish price adjustment to

account for both the real dollar appreciation and high U.S. real interest

rates in the early 1980's. It gives no important role to shifts in the

long-run equilibrium real exchange rate.         Sachs (1985) and Frankel

(1985) present empirical evidence supporting the notion that very little

of the real appreciation of the dollar between 1980 and early 1985 was

due to a shift in the expected long-run real exchange rate. Their

approach is to use proxies for ex ante real interest differentials on

long-term bonds to make inferences about the expected cumulative real

appreciation of the dollar over the life of the bonds. If uncovered

interest parity holds, then the market's expectation of the cumulative

real appreciation of the dollar against a particular foreign currency is

just nDnt   nE (r
              t f,n,t
                        -   rus,n,t ),   where n is the number of years until

the bonds mature and         is the ex post real yield to maturity on n year

bonds denominated in the currency of country j. In practice, the

expected real yield differential          is unobservable, and a proxy for the

average expected annual inflation differential over the n year interval

must be subtracted from the nominal yield differential to obtain a proxy

for the ex ante real yield differential.

   Table 1 presents Frankel's (1985) estimates of the ex ante real

interest rate differential as of February 1985 on 10 year government

bonds in the U.S. and a weighted average of the other G7 countries.

Three proxies for the expected annual average inflation rate over the


                                           15
next 10 years are used, one year lagged inflation, three year distributed

lagged inflation, and a DRI forecast of inflation. As of February 1985,

nominal yields in the U.S. were 237 basis points higher than the weighted

average of foreign yields, so the nominal yield differential stood at

-237 basis points; the estimated real differential ranges from -270 to

-346 basis points. Assuming that the market expected the real exchange

rate to reach long-run equilibrium within 10 years, the real value of the

dollar relative to the other G7 countries as of February 1985 was,

according to Frankel's estimates, some 24 to 35% above its long-run real

equilibrium. Frankel concludes that, "compared with the 33 percent

logarithmic real appreciation that the weighted dollar has experienced

relative to its 1973-1979 average, .     .    . most   of the real appreciation is

attributable to an increase in the real interest differential.

Relatively little seems attributable to a change in the long-run

equilibrium exchange rate (Frankel (1985), p.202)." Using a somewhat

different proxy - a two-year centered moving average of actual inflation

rates -   for   expected inflation over a ten year period, Sachs (1985)

reaches much the same conclusion with regards to the the real

overvaluation of the dollar relative to the mark as of the end of 1984.

   These calculations are especially sensitive to errors in the measurem-

ent of the expected annual average inflation rate over the life of the

bonds. To assess the potential magnitude of this measurement error, we

recompute Frankel's estimate of the real long-term interest differential

as of February 1985 using Richard Hoey's survey of ten year U.S.

inflation expectations of financial market participants as of that date.

The results are presented in the bottom row of Table 1. According to


                                         16
Hoey's survey, U.S. financial market participants were expecting an

average annual inflation rate of 5.49% as February 1985. This is 1.33

percentage points higher than Frankel's estimate of expected U.S.

inflation using the DRI forecast and 1.95 percantage points higher than

his estimate using one-year lagged inflation. The implied ex ante real

yield on 10 year U.S. government bonds using the Hoey survey results is

6.21% compared with Frankel's estimates of between 7.54% and 8.16%. How

much of a difference does this make in calculating the overvaluation of

the dollar as of February 1985? A lower bound on the extent of

overvaluation can be obtained by subtracting Frankel's highest estimate

of the weighted average foreign real 10 year yield, 5.25%, from the U.S.

rate implied by Hoey's estimate and multiplying by 10. The result is an

estimated overvaluation of only 9.6% as of February 1985.

   Thus, depending on the measure of inflationary expectations used, the

dollar was overvalued in real terms as of February 1985 by less than 10%

or more than 30%. The point of these calculations is not to criticize

any particular choice of proxies for long-term inflationary expectations,

but just to illustrate how sensitive any computation based upon expected

long-term real interest rates is to the proxy chosen. Because of this

sensitivity, no clear consensus has emerged on the extent of dollar

overvaluation in early 1985. For example, Obstfeld argued in April 1985

that

        At present, long-term nominal interest differentials
        between the U.S. and West Germany are roughly 200 basis
        points above short-term differentials. Under the
        expectations theory, this implies an expected rise in
        the U.S. - West German short-term real interest differential,
        an expected future increase in relative U.S. inflation, or
        some of each. Given the probable future evolution of
        fiscal positions within the OECD, I find the expected

                                     17
         inflation explanation of the current international term
         structure most plausible. While the real value of the
         dollar should be expected to fall, I am not convinced
         that markets expect it to fall as far as its 1977 level
         (Obstfeld comment on Sachs (1985)).

Clearly there is much to be gained from an alternative way to estimate

the long-run equilibrium exchange rate.



4. An Econometric Framework

   In this section we develop an econometric framework which can be used

to estimate and interpret (i) the contemporaneous correlation between the

real exchange rate and the ex ante short-term real interest differential;

and (ii) the extent to which fluctuations in the real exchange rate

reflect shifts in the expected long-run real exchange rate. The

framework also provides an estimate of the correlation between

innovations in the long-run real exchange rate and in the ex ante short-

term real interest differential.

   We begin with the following basic relationship:


                =
                    E[q}     + E[d] + k.                                (9)



Here     is the natural log of the real exchange rate at the start of

period t, defined as the nominal exchange rate divided by the ratio of

the U.S. and foreign price levels. When the dollar appreciates in real

terms,     falls. dt    rf
                              -   r   is the ex post short-term real

interest differential, the ex post one-period real interest rate realized

on foreign assets in period t, less the ex post one-period real rate on

U.S. assets. Finally, kt is a risk premium which separates the expected

rate of real appreciation of the dollar from the ex ante real interest


                                       18
 differential. When       0, equation (9) follows immediately from the

 logarithmic approximation to the uncovered interest parity condition

 (Cumby and Obstfeld (1984)).

    Solving equation (9) forward, we obtain


                      w + E E[d+.] + E E[k÷.],                       (10)


where w is the limit as i approaches infinity of             the

expectation at time t of the long-run log real exchange rate. We assume

that this limit exists (which requires, for example, that ex post real

interest differentials follow a stationary stochastic process with mean

zero). Equation (10) expresses the difference between the current and

long-run log level of the real exchange rate as the undiscounted sum of

current and expected future one-period real interest differentials plus

the undiscounted sum of current and expected future risk premia.

   Absent restrictions on the time series properties of
                                                          w, Et[dJ, and
kt, equation (10) is virtually devoid of empirical content. One approach

employed by Shafer and Loopesko (1983) and Sachs (1985) is to assume that

   is constant, kt — 0 for all t, and that a proxy for the ex ante long-

term real interest differential, Dt, exactly incorporates the

undiscounted sum of current and future short-term real interest

differentials. Under these assumptions, the following regression should
         2
have an R of 1:


                      = w +                                             (11)


As discussed in detail in the previous two sections, it is quite likely

that any proxies for expected inflation used to construct the long-term


                                     19
real interest differentials are subject to measurement error and perhaps

even bias. Furthermore, on both theoretical and empirical grounds, it is

desirable to allow for shifts in the expected long-run real exchange

rate. If fluctuations in w are correlated with the real differential,

then the regression given by equation (11) cannot be used to interpret

the correlation between the the real exchange rate and the real interest

differential.

   Our approach is to parameterize the dynamics of the variables in (10),

without assuming that they are observable. With parsimony in mind, we

impose the following restrictions on the unobservables w, E[d], and

the forecast error e d -       E[d]:
                E[d] =   pE1[dti]      + v                            (12)

                                                                      (13)
                        v Ae1 + u1
                        e u2                                          (14)

                           —
                               w1   + u3                              (15)

                E[uukl 0; i,j           1,2,3; k > 1                  (16)


Equation (12) restricts the ex ante one-period real differential to be a

zero mean AR(l) process with parameter p. Equation (13) expresses the

innovation to this process from the beginning of period t-1 to the

beginning of period t as the sum of two terms, a multiple .X of the

inflation surprise realized in period t-l, and an independent error u1.

Equation (14) is just the rational expectations restriction that the

inflation surprise (the difference between the ex post and ex ante real

interest differential) is white noise. Equation (15) imposes the

restriction that changes in the expected long-run real exchange rate are


                                       20
unforecastable. The innovation in w could in general depend on ei, as

the innovation in Et[dt] does, without violating this restriction (since

etl is not known until the start of period t). However for simplicity

we exclude such a correlation. (When we estimated a model leaving this

correlation free, we found little increase in likelihood, and

qualitatively similar estimates to those reported.) Finally, equation

(16) states that the vector [u1 u2 u3]' is white noise.

   It should be said at the outset that the motivation for the AR(l)

specification for the ex ante real interest differential is its empirical

tractability. First, the AR(l) specification implies that the ex post

real interest differential is an ARMA(l,l) process. The parameter p is

identified from the autocorrelations of the ex post differential alone

(it is the rate at which higher-order autocorrelations decay). Second,

the AR(l) specification implies that, in the absence of a risk premium


                         (l/(l-p))Et[dt] +   w.                     (17)

That is, the observable real exchange rate is a simple linear combination

of the unobservable ex ante real interest differential and the

unobservable expected long-run real exchange rate. The more persistent

is the AR(l) process for the ex ante differential, the bigger the effect

of the differential on the real exchange rate.

   The AR(l) specification for the real interest differential can also be

motivated theoretically. In a world in which permanent, nominal shocks

are predominant, Dornbusch's overshooting analysis implies the

relationship given in equation (17). Furthermore, as shown in Section 2,

permanent real shocks can lead to the same linear relationship between


                                     21
the real exchange rate and the short-term real interest differential.

However, if real shocks are predominant, shifts in the expected long run

real exchange rate will also account for fluctuations in cl.

   With this background, consider the following state-space model

comprised of two measurement equations




                      q4 =       l/(l-p)          0   1
                                                           E[d]
                                     1            1   0

                                                            wt
and three transition equations



                                 A       0
              Et[d]          p                     Et1{diP           u1
                                                                 +
                e            0   0       0
                                                      ei             u2
                w            0   0       1
                                                      w1             u3

The measurement equations express the vector of two observable variables,

the real exchange rate and the ex post real interest differential, as a

linear transformation of the vector of three unobservable variables, the

ex ante real interest differential, the error in forecasting inflation

differentials, and the expected long-run real exchange rate. The

transition equations provide the law of motion for the vector of unobser-

vable variables. As discussed above, the vector of disturbances to the

transition equations is assumed to be serially uncorrelated. The three

errors have standard deviations a1, a2 and a3. The contemporaneous

covariances a12 and a23 are zero by the property of rational forecast

errors. a13 is the contemporaneous covariance between innovations in the


                                             22
expected long-run real exchange rate and innovations, unrelated to

inflation surprises, in the ex ante real interest differential; it is

left unrestricted.

   The method of Kalman filtering can be used to estimate the parameters

of the state-space model. In the absence of a risk premium, there are

only two free parameters in the measurement and transition matrices, p

and A. There are four free parameters in the variance-covariance matrix

of the transition equation innovations, the three variances and the

covariance

   A number of empirical studies have uncovered a time-varying risk

premium in the foreign exchange market (see Cumby (1985) for a useful

survey and extension of the literature; see Campbell and Clarida (1987)

for a recent investigation of risk premia in Euromarket term structures).

Within the context of our state-space framework, it is straightforward to

introduce an unobservable time-varying risk premium of the following

form:


                               —
                                   kE[d].                              (18)



Equation (18) says that the risk premium, which separates the expected

rate of real appreciation from the real interest differential in favor of

foreign assets, is proportional to the ex ante real differential. As

such, it makes no statement about causality, but is merely a (very tight)

restriction on the covariance between two endogenous, unobservable

variables. Note that in the presence of a risk premium, the ex ante real

interest differential is a biased predictor of the expected rate of real

depreciation. Substituting (18) into (11),


                                      23
                        - E[q1]     aE[dt],                         (19)



where a      1 +   k.
   By assuming that the risk premium is perfectly correlated with the ex

ante real interest differential, we maintain the tractability of our

approach while allowing the real interest differential to be a biased

predictor of the expected rate of change of the real exchange rate. In

particular, maintaining our restriction that the real interest different-

ial is AR(1), equation (19) implies


                             =                  +
                                 (a/(lp))E[d]       w.             (20)


The requisite modification to the measurement equation is apparent.



5. Data and Empirical Results

   Data on one month Eurodeposit rates and spot exchange rates against

the dollar were obtained for the U.S., Canada, the United Kingdom,

Germany, and Japan from the Harris Bank tape. Consumer price indexes for

these countries were obtained from the IFS tape. The sample period

studied was November 1979 through March 1986. Exchange rates and

interest rates were sampled on the last Friday of each month.

   Real exchange rates were constructed as

                                                                   (21)
                                  1tft"us,t
where s is the nominal exchange rate in units of foreign currency per

dollar and                is the ratio of foreign to U.S. CPI's. Ex post real

interest differentials were constructed by subtracting the actual

inflation differential (as measured by logarithmic changes in the country


                                          24
CPI's) over the following month from nominal one-month interest differen-

tial as of the last Friday of the preceding month. All results are

reported in units of percent per month at an annualized rate.

   Table 2 displays some summary statistics for our data over the period

1979:10-1986:3. The first four columns describe the Canadian, British,

German and Japanese data respectively; the last column describes an

average formed using 1980 trade weights (Canada 46.35%, United Kingdom

12.43%, Germany 12.69% and Japan 28.53%).

   The first two rows of Table 2 give the sample means and standard

deviations of real exchange rate changes over the period. The sample

means are negative, corresponding to real dollar appreciation, for all

countries except Japan. The standard deviation for Canada is about 15%

per month at an annualized rate, while for the other countries it exceeds

40%.

   The next two rows of the table give the same statistics for ex post

real interest differentials. Sample means are negative for all

countries, indicating that real interest rates were higher on average in

the U.S. than abroad. Sample standard deviations range from 3% to 8%.

   These statistics emphasize that real exchange rate changes have been

much more volatile than even ex post real interest differentials. A

fortiori, they have been much more volatile than ex ante differentials.

If real interest rate movements are to explain exchange rates, they must

be highly persistent so that they have a magnified effect on the exchange

rate (equation (17)), or there must be a very large risk premium effect

(equation (20)).

  At the bottom of Table 2, the first six autocorrelations of the ex


                                     25
post real interest differential are reported. These were computed

assuming that the true mean of the real interest differential is zero (as

discussed in the previous section, this is an implication of our exchange

rate model and is also assumed when we estimate our state-space

representation). Similar but slightly smaller numbers are obtained when

one assumes that the sample mean differential is the true mean.

   The largest autocorrelations occur for the German data. These

autocorrelations die off smoothly so that the German ex post real

interest differential looks much like an AR(l) process with coefficient

0.5 or 0.6. This is striking since we model the ex ante differential as

an AR(l) process so we expect to find more complex ARMA(l,l) behavior of

the ex post differential. The autocorrelations are smaller for the other

countries, starting at 0.25 for the U.K., 0.17 for Canada and 0.03 for

Japan. They also have a less regular pattern.

   In Tables 3 - 7 we estimate the state space model described in the

previous section, for each currency and the trade-weighted average. In

each table we report results for a model assuming uncovered interest

parity, and for the linear risk premium model of equations (18)-(20). We

report the coefficients a, p and ) with asymptotic standard errors, the

standard deviations ,        and   of the three error terms, and the
                        c2
correlation a13/c1C3. We also report some implications of these numbers:

the fractions of the variance of the ex post real interest differential

which are due to the variance of the ex ante differential and the

variance of the inflation forecast error; the fractions of the innovation

variance of the real exchange rate which are due to the innovation

variance of the ex ante differential, the innovation variance of the


                                      26
long-run equilibrium real exchange rate and the innovation covariance

between these variables; the correlation between real exchange rate

innovations and innovations in the ex ante differential and the long-run

equilibrium exchange rate; and finally, the correlation between

innovations in the ex ante differential and innovations in the long-run

equilibrium exchange rate.

   The most striking feature of the results, which is robust across

currencies and the presence of a linear risk premium, is how little of

the variance of real exchange rate innovations is accounted for by

innovations in the ex ante real interest differential. When uncovered

interest parity is assumed, the estimates of the share of the ex ante

differential in real exchange rate innovation variance are particularly

small: they never exceed 9%, while the long-run equilibrium exchange rate

accounts for at least 79% and the covariance between components accounts

for the rest of the variance.

   In the linear risk premium model, the ex ante differential plays a

somewhat larger role because the coefficient a is estimated larger than

one in absolute value for all countries except Japan. Thus the risk

premium amplifies the effect of the differential on the exchange rate.

Even in the risk premium model, however, the largest share of the ex ante

differential in real exchange rate innovation variance is 42% for the

trade-weighted average. The estimates for individual currencies are all

less than 27%.

   The reason why we obtain these results is that we do not estimate

enough persistence in the ex ante real interest differential to overcome

the low standard deviation of the differential relative to the change in


                                     27
the exchange rate. Our estimates of p range from 0.35 to 0.81, and

higher estimates tend to be associated with a smaller share of the ex

ante differential in the variance of the ex post differential. (The ex

ante differential accounts for less than 50% of the variance of the ex

post differential except in Germany, where as noted above an AR(l) model

rather than an ARMA(l,l) model fits the ex post differential quite well).

   A second striking feature of our results is that the correlation

between innovations in the long-run equilibrium real exchange rate and

innovations in the ex ante real interest differential is almost always

estimated to be positive. The one exception to this statement is the

uncovered interest parity model for Germany, which has a tiny negative

correlation of -0.04. The positive correlation implies that shocks that

have caused the expected long-run real exchange rate to appreciate have

also increased real interest rates in the U.S. relative to those abroad.

As we showed in Section 2, this pattern could result from permanent

shocks to the demand for domestic goods.

   In the uncovered interest parity models, a positive shock to the ex

ante real interest differential raises the real exchange rate. In these

models, therefore, the correlation between shocks to the long-run

exchange rate and the real interest differential increases the variance

of real exchange rate innovations.

   In the linear risk premium models, on the other hand, the coefficient

a is estimated to be negative for all currencies except the Canadian

dollar and the Japanese yen. A negative a corresponds to a negative

coefficient k, of absolute magnitude greater than one, in equation (18).

In words, the ex ante real interest differential and the risk premium


                                     28
move inversely, and the risk premium has a larger variance. This is

consistent with Fama's (1984) findings on the relationship between the

nominal forward premium and the risk premium. When c is negative, a

positive shock to the real differential causes the real exchange rate to

fall, so the correlation between shocks to the long-run exchange rate and

the differential reduces the variance of real exchange rate innovations.

However the real exchange rate still moves in the same direction as the

long-run equilibrium exchange rate in all the models we estimate.

   Our approach relies on the assumption that the stochastic processes

driving interest rates and exchange rates are stable through time.

However changes in monetary and fiscal policies will in general alter

these processes. Clarida and Friedman (1984) have documented a shift in

the process for nominal U.S. Treasury bill rates after October 1979,

while Huizinga and Mishkin (1985) have isolated changes in the real

interest rate process in the U.S. in October 1979 and October 1982. Our

sample period starts in October 1979, so the shift at that date does not

contaminate our results. The October 1982 change is potentially more of

a problem, but when we estimate our model for the trade-weighted average

data in the post-October 1982 period, we find similar results to those

reported in the tables. The uncovered interest parity model attributes

over 95% of the variance of real exchange rate innovations to innovations

in the long-run equilibrium rate. In the linear risk premium model, the

innovations in the real interest differential and the long-run

equilibrium rate are estimated to be almost perfectly correlated.

   It is well known that real exchange rate changes are largely

unpredictable (Cumby and Obstfeld (1984)), and a skeptic may argue that


                                     29
we have stacked the deck in favor of finding little explanatory power for

the ex ante real interest differential by assuming that the expected

long-run real exchange rate is a random walk. This is not the case:

observations on the ex post real interest differential, along with our

restrictions on the time series properties of the ex ante real

differential, provide independent information on the persistence and

variability of ex ante real interest differentials (Fama and Gibbons

(1982)). The Kalman filtering procedure efficiently incorporates this

information in estimating the parameters of the state-space model

(Hamilton (1985)). We conclude that over the last seven years, ex ante

real interest differentials have simply not been persistent enough, and

their innovation variance just not large enough to account for much of

the fluctuation in the dollar's real exchange rate.



6. Assessments and Conclusions

   Although the methodologies and interpretations differ somewhat, our

findings are consistent with recent work by several authors. For

example, Meese and Rogoff (1985) use an instrumental variables procedure

to estimate an unrestricted version of equation (11) in difference form.

They conclude that changes in short-term real interest differentials are

not particularly successful in accounting for changes in real exchange

rates.

   Our findings are also consistent with Mark's (1986) results on the

cointegration of bilateral nominal exchange rates and relative national

price levels. Mark shows that if departures from relative purchasing

power parity are transitory, then the log of the nominal exchange rate


                                     30
and the log of the ratio of the corresponding national price levels are

cointegrated. In other words, they share a common stochastic trend so

that fluctuations in the real exchange rate do not represent shifts in

the long-run real exchange rate. Using monthly data for the period June

1973 through June 1985, Mark finds no evidence of cointegration between

seven bilateral dollar exchange rates and relative national price levels.

He concludes that his evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that

permanent real shocks have accounted for much of the variability in real

exchange rates.

      Our findings are also in accord with those reported by Huizinga

(1987) in this volume. In a decomposition of real exchange rate

movements into permanent and transitory components, Huizinga finds that

the permanent component accounts for between 52% and 77% of the variance

of the actual change in the real exchange rate for the bilateral exchange

rates studied in this paper. While these estimates are somewhat lower

than those reported in this paper (because Huizinga does not attempt to

identify the transitory component with real interest differentials as we

do), the results of these two papers, when taken together, provide solid

evidence that fluctuations in real exchange rates in recent years have

been dominated by shifts in the expected long-run real exchange rate.

   Our results have some important implications for the analysis of

economic policy. A first set of implications concerns the decline of the

real foreign exchange value of the dollar during this decade. A second

set of implications concerns the much greater volatility of real exchange

rates since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970's.

   If one accepts that much of the real appreciation of the dollar during


                                     31
the first half of this decade was perceived as permanent by the foreign

exchange markets, it follows that the dollar's real depreciation over the

last two years has been largely unexpected. (In fact the depreciation

has been rapid enough to surprise even someone who believed that the

dollar was substantially overvalued in early 1985; the estimates reported

by Frankel (1985) and Sachs (1985), for example, implied a gradual seven

to ten year real depreciation of the dollar at a rate of roughly three

percent per year.) Explanations of the depreciation (which continues as

of this writing) must therefore focus on previously unanticipated shifts

in policy and economic performance which have occurred over this period.

   Three major shifts in U.S. policy have occurred over the last two

years. The first is a much more rapid expansion of monetary aggregates

by the Federal Reserve since early 1985. The second is the passage of

the Gramm-Rudnian-Hollings deficit reduction legislation in late 1985.

The third is the enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Each one of

these policy changes has been cited as a source of the dollar's real

depreciation. We now consider each in turn.

   The shift in U.S. monetary policy since early 1985 is often cited as

the principal source of the dollar's real depreciation over the last two

years, especially given its conjunction with the slowdown in real GNP

growth since the second quarter of 1984. According to the monetary-asset

market approach to exchange rate determination, a shift to more rapid

growth of the money supply relative to money demand would be expected to

induce a nominal and, in the presence of sluggish price level adjustment,

a real depreciation of the currency. The mechanism through which this

would occur is a shift in inflationary expectations. Especially in light


                                     32
of the association of the "weak" dollar during the late 1970s with

inflationary monetary policy, and the association of real appreciation

with disinflationary monetary policy during the early 1980s, the appeal

of this explanation is obvious.

   However, this explanation of the dollar's real depreciation over the

last two years suffers from an important shortcoming: apart from the

depreciation of the dollar itself, there is little evidence that the

financial markets expect a resurgence in U.S. inflation. The velocity of

money has declined dramatically in tandem with the surge in money growth.

A substantial increase in money demand relative to income is not the

outcome which would be expected if inflation were anticipated to

accelerate significantly in the U.S. as a result of the monetary policy

currently being pursued. Furthermore, Hoey's survey results indicate

that long-term inflation expectations have declined steadily over the

last two years, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than the fall in long-

term U.S. interest rates and the slope of the term structure.   Indeed,

as of November of 1986, the average inflation rate expected over the next

ten years by the respondents to Hoey's survey fell below 5% for the first

time since the survey began in 1978. In sum, while a sustained increase

in money growth would, on the basis of both theoretical research and

historical experience, be expected to result in a real depreciation of

the dollar, the behavior of velocity, long-term interest rates, and

surveys of long-term inflation expectations cast doubt on this as the

sole explanation of the dollar's real depreciation since early 1985.

  The link between budget deficits and the real exchange rate is perhaps

the most disputed policy question of the decade. In 1983 and 1984, the


                                     33
federal government ran record peacetime budget deficits and the dollar

appreciated in real terms. In 1985 and 1986, the budget deficits

exceeded those recorded in 1983 and 1984 and the dollar depreciated in

real terms back to its 1982 level. Of course, the exchange rate is an

asset price which reflects not only current, but prospective, budget

deficits as well as the means by which they are to be financed. We have

already discussed the evidence against the view that the real

depreciation of the dollar reflects the expectation of a resurgence in

U.S. inflation resulting from monetization. An alternative to this view

is that the passage of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings legislation in late 1985

signaled to the financial markets the prospect of significant deficit

reduction by the end of the decade. According to this argument, the

dollar depreciated because of the expectation of deficit reduction and a

decline in government spending on domestic goods in the future, despite

record budget deficits in the present.

  A potential shortcoming with this argument is that the empirical

results presented in Section 5 show a positive correlation between the

current and long-run real exchange rate. Such a correlation is not

consistent with the budget deficit account of the dollar's real

appreciation if deficits were perceived to be transitory during the first

half of the decade. In the simple theoretical model outlined in Section

2, a transitory fiscal deficit -   in   the absence of offsetting increases

in private saving - can be shown to result in a long-run real

depreciation. This is because, in the absence of a permanent autonomous

increase in demand for domestic goods, the export surplus required to

service the outstanding stock of foreign debt accumulated during the


                                         34
current account adjustment process requires a long-run real depreciation

which shifts foreign demand toward domestic goods which are in excess

supply. This point is discussed in more detail in Obstfeld (1985).

   If budget deficits were perceived to be permanent in the early 1980's,

this objection does not apply. The theoretical model outlined in Section

2 is too simple to be used to assess this possibility formally because it

abstracts from economic growth, and thus the possibility of stabilizing

the debt to output ratio in the context of a permanent fiscal deficit.

Nevertheless, the budget deficit-real exchange rate link cannot be ruled

out as one potential source of the dollar's real depreciation over the

last two years.

   The final major shift in U.S. policy since early 1985 is the enactment

of the Tax Reform Act in 1986. According to estimates compiled by the

Council of Economic Advisers (1987), tax reform, on net, will increase

the cost of capital despite a lowering of the corporate tax rate,

primarily because of the elimination of the investment tax credit. It

has been argued that the surge in investment spending during the first

three years of the current economic expansion and the appreciation of the

dollar which occured through early 1985 were largely due to the increase

in the after-tax profitability of investment resulting from the Economic

Recovery Tax Act of 1981. The appreciation of the long-run real exchange

rate during the first half of the decade is consistent with this view and

the theoretical model model presented in Section 2. According to the

logic of this argument, an increase in the cost of capital resulting from

tax reform would be expected to reduce investment spending and depreciate

both the current and long-run equilibrium level of the real exchange


                                     35
rate. Again this is consistent with the empirical results and the

theoretical discussion.

   The second implication of the results of this paper concerns the

increase in real exchange rate volatility since the collapse of fixed

exchange rates in the early 1970s. Mussa (1986) documents that, for

pairs of countries with similar and moderate inflation rates, the real

exchange rate typically shows much more short term volatility under

floating rates than under fixed rates.

   Mussa's interpretation of this result is that commitment to policies

consistent with the maintenance of fixed nominal exchange rates plays a

critical role in stabilizing the behavior of real exchange rates under

the fixed-rate regime. According to this view, so long as agents believe

that this commitment will be fulfilled, they need not worry about the

implications of short-run variations in policy variables or other

economic disturbances for the appropriate level of the nominal exchange

rate. By contrast, under floating rates agents must continually revise

their expectations of the future behavior of government policy in forming

their expectations. The continual revision of expectations imparts to

the nominal exchange rate its asset price properties. If national price

levels respond less rapidly to new information than do nominal exchange

rates, the volatility of the latter is transmitted to the real exchange

rate.

   The findings of this paper broaden our understanding of this result.

For if real exchange rates are not only more volatile, but if their

movements are largely expected to be permanent, then fluctuations in real

exchange rates under a floating exchange rate regime are potentially more


                                     36
costly to private agents than would be the case if large fluctuations

were rationally expected to be soon reversed.




                                     37
                                   References

Blanchard, 0. and L. Summers, "Perspectives on High World Real Interest
Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:273-324, 1984.

Blinder, A., ttThe Policy Mix: Lessons from the Recent Past," Economic
Outlook, 1:3-9, 1986.

Branson. W. , "Causes of Appreciation and Volatility of the Dollar," in
The U.S. Dollar - Recent Developments, Outlook. and Policy Options,
Kansas City: The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1985.

Campbell, J. and R. Clarida, "The Term Structure of Euromarket Interest
Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1987, forthcoming.

Clarida, R. and B. Friedman, "The Behavior of Short Term Interest Rates
Since 1979", Journal of Finance, 39:671-682, 1984.

Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President, 1985,
1986 and 1987.

Cumby, R., "Is it Risk? Explaining Deviations from Interest Parity," New
York University, Graduate School of Business Discussion Paper, 1985.

Cumby, R. and M. Obstfeld, "International Interest Rate and Price Level
Linkages under Flexible Exchange Rates," in J. Bilson and R. Marston,
eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1984.

Dornbusch, R., "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Economy, 84:1161-1176, 1976.

Fama, E., "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 14:319-338, 1984.

Farna, E. and M. Gibbons, "Inflation, Real Returns, and Capital
Investment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 9:297-323, 1982.

Frankel, J., "The Dazzling Dollar," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activjy, 1:199-217, 1985.

Hamilton, J., "Uncovering Financial Market Expectations of Inflation,"
Journal of Political Economy, 93:1224-1241, 1985.

Hoey, R., "Decision Makers Poll," Drexel Burnham Lambert, September 1986.

Huizinga, J., "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of
Real Exchange Rates", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 1987.




                                     38
Huizinga, J. and F. Mishkin, "Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and the
Unusual Behavior of Real Interest Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 1985.

Mark, N., "Real and Nominal Exchange Rates in the Short Run and The Long
Run," Department of Economics Working Paper, Ohio State University, July
1986.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff, "Was it Real? The Exchange Rate-Interest
Differential Relation, 1973-1984", National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 1732, 1985.

Mussa, M., "The Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," in J. Bilson and
R. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1984.

Mussa, M., "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real
Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications", Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 1986.

Mussa, M. and J. Frenkel, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates, and the Balance
of Payments," in R. Jones and P. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International
Economics Vol. II, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.

Obstfeld, M., "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:369-450, 1985.

Obstfeld, M., "Comment on Sachs," Brookings Payers on Economic Activity,
1:190-195, 1985.

Poole, W., "Overview," in The U.S. Dollar - Recent Developments. Outlook,
and Policy Options, Kansas City: The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, 1985.

Sachs, J., "The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1:117-197, 1985.

Shafer, J. and B. Loopesko, "Floating Exchange Rates After Ten Years,"
Brookings Payers on Economic Activity, 1:1-70, 1983.




                                     39
                                     Table 1

         Estimates of Real Long-Term Interest Differentials -   February 1985

                                    Weighted - average of
  Item                U.S.          other G7 countries      Differential

Long- term
govt. bond rate       11.70                 9.33                   -2.37

one-year lagged        3.54                 4.07
inflation
est. real rate         8.16                 5.25                   -2.90

distrib. lag of        3.83                 4.92
inflation
est. real rate         7.87                 4.41                   -3.46

DRI forecast          4.16                  4.49
inflation
est. real rate        7.54                  4.84                   -2.70

Hoey survey of        5.49
inflation
est. real rate        6.21                  5.25*                 -0.96*



All but the last two rows of table are from Frankel (1985), P. 200. The
survey of ten year U.S. inflation expectations are from Hoey (1986).

*Frankel's maximum estimate of the average long-term real rate in the
other G7 countries. Thus the difference between the U.S. real rate
implied by Hoey's survey, 6.21, and Frankel's maximum average foreign
rate, 5.25, gives a lower bound of 0.96 on the absolute value of the real
differential in February 1985.




                                       40
                                      Table 2

                     Summary Statistics, 1979:10-1986:3

Statistic                                  Country

                    Canada    U.K.       Germany      Japan   Trade-Weighted
                                                                 Average

Mean
change in real
exchange rate       -1.380   -3.823       -5.200      1.542      -1.335

Standard
deviation of
change in real
exchange rate       15.197   44.909      42.783      43.954      23.139

Mean real
interest
differential        -0.890   -1.233       -2.390     -1.793      -1.381

Standard
deviation of
ex post real
interest
differential         4.522    7.503       3.609       8.167       3.592

Correlation of
change in real
exchange rate and
ex post real
interest
differential      -0.191     -0.172      0.004       -0.112      -0.069

Auto correlations
of ex post real
interest
differential:

   1                0.165    0.251        0.657      0.034       0.329

   2                -0.105   0.034        0.388      -0.169      0.111

   3                0.028    0.052        0.233      -0.123      -0.001

   4                0.144    -0.054       0.075      0.133       0.035

   5                0.035    0.033        0.165      0.174       0.278

   6                -0.047   0.036        0.278      0.176       0.353


                                          41
                                   Table 3

 Real Interest Differentials and Exchange Rates - Canada 1979:10-1986:3


Uncovered interest parity model:

Log likelihood 544.33
Parameters a     1.00 (fixed)
            p    0.35 (0.45)
             A   -0.10   (0.31)
                  2.85
           a1
                  3.34
           a2
                 13.64
           a3
                  0.11
     a13,'a1a3

Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                         45.7%
    Inflation innovations                                      54.3%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential           9.0%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate          84.7%
    Covariance                                                  6.3%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                 0.40
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate            0.95
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate          0.11


Linear risk premium model:

Log likelihood 544.37
Parameters a     1.61 (1.57)
            p    0.35 (0.45)
            A   -0.04 (0.20)
                 2.35
           a1
                 3.77
           a2
                12.64
           a3
                 0.13
     a13/c1a3
Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                           30.8%
    Inflation innovations                                        69.2%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential            15.9%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate            75.1%
    Covariance                                                    8.9%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                   0.51
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate              0.92
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate            0.13


                                       42
                                   Table 4

   Real Interest Differentials and Exchange Rates - U.K. 1979:10-1986:3


Uncovered interest parity model:

Log likelihood 425.25
Parameters a     1.00 (fixed)
            p    0.69 (0.22)
            A   -0.49 (0.65)
                 2.74
           01
           02
           03
                40.03
     013/10103
                  0.37
Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                           49.1%
    Inflation innovations                                        50.9%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential             7.5%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate            79.3%
    Covariance                                                   13.2%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                  0.52
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate             0.96
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate           0.27


Linear risk premium model:

Log likelihood 426.39
Parameters a    -2.41 (2.77)
            p    0.81 (0.21)
            A    0.09 (0.13)
                 1.48
           02
                  7.10
           03
                 62.06
                 1.00
     013/0103
Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                          13.1%
    Inflation innovations                                       86.9%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential           21.4%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate          197.8%
    Covariance                                               -119.2%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                  0.83
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate             0.98
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate           0.92


                                      43
                                   Table 5

 Real Interest Differentials and Exchange Rates - Germany 1979:10-1986:3


Uncovered interest parity model:

Log likelihood 488.52
Parameters a     1.00 (fixed)
            p    0.58 (0.12)
            A    8.48 (****)
                 0.26
           a1
                 0.40
           a2
                42.92
           a3
                -0.59

Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                           99.1%
    Inflation innovations                                         0.9%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential             3.5%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate            98.2%
    Covariance                                                   -1.6%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                   0.14
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate              0.98
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate           -0.04


Linear risk premium model:

Log likelihood 491.49
Parameters a    -3.26 (1.61)
            p    0.51 (0.15)
            A    1.07 (0.53)
                 2.21
           a1
                 2.13
           a2
                46.07
           a3
                 0.65
     a13/a1a3
Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                          75.0%
    Inflation innovations                                       25.0%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential           26.7%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate          125.9%
    Covariance                                                 -52.6%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                 -0.01
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate             0.89
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate           0.45


                                       44
                                   Table 6

  Real Interest Differentials and Exchange Rates - Japan 1979:10-1986:3


Uncovered interest parity model:

Log likelihood 415.98
Parameters a     1.00 (fixed)
            p    0.73 (0.34)
            A   -0.18 (0.29)
                 1.94
                 7.58
           a2
                39.41
                 0.50

Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                           17.3%
    Inflation innovations                                        82.7%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential             4.0%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate            81.1%
    Covariance                                                   14.8%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                   0.57
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate              0.98
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate            0.41


Linear risk premium model:

Log likelihood 416.14
Parameters a     0.41 (2.15)
            p    0.77 (0.35)
            A   -0.49 (3.69)
                 0.97
                 6.56
           02
                41.50
                 1.00

Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                         38.3%
    Inflation innovations                                      61.7%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential           1.8%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate          90.8%
    Covariance                                                  7.4%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                 0.41
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate            0.99
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate          0.29


                                       45
                                   Table 7

 Real Interest Differentials and Exchange Rates - Trade Weighted Average
                              1979:10-1986:3

Uncovered interest parity model:

Log likelihood 527.31
Parameters a     1.00 (fixed)
            p    0.66 (0.23)
            A   -0.18 (0.45)
                 1.80
           a1
                 2.79
           a2
                21.27
            a3
     c113,'a1a3
                   0.24
Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                           44.3%
    Inflation innovations                                        55.7%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential             5.6%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate            84.2%
    Covariance                                                   10.2%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                   0.45
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate              0.97
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate            0.23


Linear risk premium model:

Log likelihood 529.23
Parameters a    -2.72 (1.74)
            p    0.79 (0.20)
             A     0.09   (0.12)
                   1.09
            a1
                   3.33
            a2
                  30.73
            a3
                   0.76

Variance decomposition for ex post real interest differential:
    Ex ante real interest differential                          23.3%
    Inflation innovations                                       76.7%
Variance decomposition for real exchange rate innovations:
    Innovations in ex ante real interest differential           42.2%
    Innovations in long-run equilibrium exchange rate          187.6%
    Covariance                                               -129. 7%
Correlation between innovations in:
    Real exchange rate and ex ante differential                  0.35
    Real exchange rate and long-run equilibrium rate             0.90
    Ex ante differential and long-run equilibrium rate           0.73


                                       46
