NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF SOCIALIZED MEDICINE:
THE IMPACT OF UNIVERSAL PRIMARY HEALTHCARE PROVISION
ON MORTALITY RATES IN TURKEY
Resul Cesur
Pınar Mine Güneş
Erdal Tekin
Aydogan Ulker
Working Paper 21510
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21510

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015, Revised May 2017

Previously circulated as "The Value of Socialized Medicine: The Impact of Universal Primary
Healthcare Provision on Birth and Mortality Rates in Turkey." We thank Dr. Emel Ergu n Seyit
for providing insights about the operational details of the family medicine program. We also
thank Bulent Anil and seminar participants at the University of Connecticut, University of
Alberta, University of Manitoba, University of South Florida, Yasar University, Izmir University
of Economics, Ghent University, European Society for Population Economics in Turkey,
TUSIAD-KOC ERF Conference on Health, Education and Worker Productivity in Turkey,
Western Economic Association International Conference in Singapore, Association for Public
Policy Analysis and Management Conference in United Kingdom for their helpful comments and
suggestions. Erdal Tekin gratefully acknowledges support from the Gary and Stacey Jacobs
Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Resul Cesur, Pınar Mine Güneş, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Socialized Medicine: The Impact of Universal Primary Healthcare Provision
on Mortality Rates in Turkey
Resul Cesur, Pınar Mine Güneş, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker
NBER Working Paper No. 21510
August 2015, Revised May 2017
JEL No. I0,I1,I11,I13,I14,I18,J13,J14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of universal, free, and easily accessible primary healthcare on
population health as measured by age-specific mortality rates, focusing on a nationwide
socialized medicine program implemented in Turkey. The Family Medicine Program (FMP),
launched in 2005, assigns each Turkish citizen to a specific state-employed family physician who
offers a wide range of primary healthcare services that are free-of-charge. Furthermore, these
services are provided at family health centers, which operate on a walk-in basis and are located
within the neighborhoods in close proximity to the patients. To identify the causal impact of the
FMP, we exploit the variation in its introduction across provinces and over time. Our estimates
indicate that the FMP caused the mortality rate to decrease by 25.6% among infants, 7.7% among
the elderly, and 22.9% among children ages 1-4. These estimates translate into 2.6, 1.29, and 0.13
fewer deaths among infants, the elderly, and children ages 1-4, respectively. Furthermore, the
effects appear to strengthen over time. We also show evidence to suggest that the FMP has
contributed to an equalization of mortality across provinces. Finally, our calculations indicate that
each family physician saves about 0.15, 0.46, and 0.005 lives among infants, the elderly, and
children ages 1- 4 per province every year.
Resul Cesur
University of Connecticut
School of Business
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
and NBER
cesur@uconn.edu
Pınar Mine Güneş
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
9-10 HM Tory
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H4
gunes@ualberta.ca

Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu
Aydogan Ulker
Department of Economics
Deakin University
221 Burwood Highway
Burwood VIC, 3125
Australia
ulker@deakin.edu.au

“I regard universal health coverage as the single most powerful concept that public
health has to offer. It is inclusive. It unifies services and delivers them in a
comprehensive and integrated way, based on primary healthcare.”
-Dr. Margaret Chan, WHO Director-General, December 20121
1. Introduction
One of the most daunting challenges faced by governments around the world is
the provision of basic, accessible, and affordable healthcare services to their citizens.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there are about 1.3 billion people in
the world lacking effective and affordable medical care.2 The majority of these people
live in developing countries, which confront especially steep challenges due to shortages
of trained healthcare personnel, infrastructure, and financial resources necessary to
establish a universal healthcare system.3
Despite these challenges, a growing number of low- and middle-income countries
have undertaken significant health interventions aimed at improving the delivery of basic
healthcare care services, expanding access, and reducing health disparities, and ultimately
improving public health. To this end, the most commonly adopted approaches are
primarily demand-side measures, such as expanding public health insurance to previously
uninsured individuals (typically low-income households), reducing user fees and out-ofpocket expenditures (or means testing to enhance affordability), and conditional cash
transfers.4 Previous studies find evidence that these interventions are usually effective at

1

Opening remarks at a member state consultation on health in the post-2015 development agenda Geneva,
Switzerland. See http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2012/mdgs_post2015/en/ for the full speech (last
accessed on March 10, 2017).
2
See http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/86/11/07-049387/en/ (last accessed on March 10, 2017).
3
Recognizing this challenge, the member states of WHO passed a resolution in 2005, encouraging
countries to reform their health-financing systems with the goal of achieving universal coverage (WHO,
2005).
4
See Arroyave et al. (2013), Bernal et al. (2016), Bitrán et al. (2010), Camacho and Conover (2013),
Cercone et al. (2010), Cheng and Chiang (1997), Dow and Schmeer (2003), Ekman et al. (2008), Gruber et

2

extending coverage of public health insurance and increasing healthcare utilization, at
least among targeted groups.5 However, the evidence on whether these interventions
promote affordable, high-quality health services, and improve health outcomes is
relatively mixed and inconclusive.6 A potential explanation for this conclusion is that
expanding coverage—not surprisingly—would increase patient-doctor contact, but
without provisions to ensure affordability and efficacy of treatments, it is possible that
patients might be recommended services that are unaffordable, as well as medically
unnecessary or even inappropriate (Miller et al., 2013; Limwattananon al., 2015).
Consequently, demand-side reforms alone may not be effective in promoting affordable
healthcare and expanding utilization unless they are accompanied by supply-side
measures such as public provision of healthcare or incentives for providers to deliver
cost-effective care. Accordingly, several recent studies have emphasized the role of
supply-side interventions as a complement to demand-side reforms in countries like
Brazil (e.g., Rocha and Soares, 2010; Reis, 2014), Colombia (e.g., Camacho and
Conover, 2013; Miller et al., 2013), Peru (Bernal et al., 2016), and Thailand (e.g., Gruber
et al., 2014; Limwattananon et al., 2015). The emerging consensus from these studies is

al. (2014), Kondo and Shigeoka (2013), Limwattananon et al. (2015), Mensah et al. (2010), Miller et al.
(2013), Paim et al. (2011), Peabody et al. (2014), Pfutze (2014), Reis (2014), Rocha and Soares (2010),
Ruiz et al. (2007), Somanathan et al. (2013), Sosa-Rubi et al. (2009), Thornton et al. (2010), Wagstaff
(2007), and Wagstaff et al. (2009).
5
It is important to note that health insurance schemes in the classic sense (i.e., premium based and pooling
of risk) typically fail in low- and middle-income countries (e.g., Dreschsler and Jutting, 2007), and the
health insurance schemes in most of the developing countries listed here are entitlement programs (i.e., tax
financed with no or little premiums or user fees). To be fair, some include highly subsidized contributory
options for `non-poor’ target populations, but these options usually account for a very minor segment of the
program beneficiaries.
6
See Giedion and Diaz (2010) and Nicholson et al. (2015) for a discussion.

3

that healthcare interventions integrated with supply-side instruments typically improve
both medical care utilization and public health.7
In this paper, we study the impact of a primarily supply-side healthcare
intervention implemented in Turkey on outcomes of age-specific mortality rates. The
Family Medicine Program – called FMP hereafter – extended basic healthcare services to
the entire Turkish population under a free-of-charge and single-payer system that is fully
financed and administered by the central government. The key operational feature of the
FMP is the assignment of each Turkish citizen to a specific family physician, who offers
a wide range of basic healthcare services in easily accessible walk-in clinics called
Family Health Centers. The program was first initiated as a pilot in 2005 in the province
of Duzce, and gradually expanded to cover the entire population in all 81 provinces by
the end of 2010.8 In 2013, there were over 21,000 family physicians – all public
employees – in 6768 and 971 family and community health centers, respectively.9
There are a number of factors motivating our investigation. First, there is
descriptive evidence crediting the FMP with increased patient satisfaction and healthcare
utilization (Baris et al., 2011; WHO, 2008), but there has been no rigorous evaluation of
the impact of the program on measures of public health outcomes.10 This is despite the
universal scope and scale of the Turkish program that makes it arguably one of the most

7

Note that there is a wide spectrum of health outcomes considered in the literature ranging from chronic
conditions to self-reported health, to patient satisfaction to mortality. Therefore, the findings from one
particular study may not be generalizable to other outcomes. Furthermore, given the relative paucity of
studies focusing on primarily supply-side reforms, the debate surrounding the impact of these reforms is
not yet settled.
8
Law No. 5258 on Family Medicine Pilot Implementation.
9
See http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr (last accessed on March 10, 2017)
10
It could also be very informative to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of the FMP on
utilization levels. Unfortunately, we cannot perform such an analysis due to a lack of data on province level
utilization levels.

4

ambitious and comprehensive efforts to achieve universal health coverage in a
developing country setting.
Second, there are a number of distinct features that distinguishes the FMP from
most other interventions. Perhaps the most unique component of the program is the
assignment of every Turkish citizen, regardless of income, to a designated family
physician who works as a public employee and provides a wide range of primary care
services free-of-charge. This feature constitutes the backbone of the Turkish reform that
separates it from most supply-side measures implemented elsewhere. Our paper presents
the first evidence of the impact on mortality of entitlement to free basic healthcare
coverage granted to the entire population using a publicly funded and operated system.
The universal and free aspect of the FMP deserve further highlighting because
there appears to be a growing conviction among leading global health organizations,
policymakers, and practitioners about the importance of achieving universal health
coverage, i.e., ensuring basic and affordable healthcare services to whole citizens
irrespective of their ability to pay (Nicholson et al., 2015; Rottingen et al., 2014; United
Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2014; Wagstaff, 2014; WHO,
2014a). According to this view, a key step towards universal coverage is to extend an
affordable and basic package of healthcare services to all citizens—as opposed to an
approach that prioritizes specific target populations (e.g., the poorest in the society or
people in informal employment)—that includes a broad range of basic services
(Nicholson et al., 2015; Rottingen et al., 2014). However, this endorsement mainly comes
from the mixed success of insurance-based interventions in achieving universal coverage
or improving health. Therefore, the Turkish FMP presents a valuable opportunity to

5

provide fresh insights into the impact of a nationwide and predominantly supply-side
intervention on population health.
Finally, we also consider our analysis as a contribution to the broader literature on
the relationship between income and mortality. Mortality, especially among infants, has
fallen in many developing countries with the rise in income over the past several decades.
However, it is not clear the extent to which this decrease has been due to increased
income versus public provision of healthcare services from reforms similar to the one
implemented in Turkey.
Exploiting the staggered program rollout across provinces and over time in a
difference-in-differences empirical design, we find that the FMP led to considerable
reductions in age-specific mortality rates. Our estimates indicate that on average the FMP
reduced mortality rates by 25.6% among infants, 7.7% among the elderly, and 22.9%
among children ages 1-4. The estimates appear to be small initially and to grow over
time. This is consistent with the notion that the program has become more effective over
time, possibly due to an increasing number of citizens establishing contact with their
family physician and utilizing healthcare services. Furthermore, the results are suggestive
that the program has also contributed towards reducing the disparity in mortality rates
across provinces. Finally, our calculations indicate that an additional family physician
saves about 0.15, 0.46, and 0.005 lives among infants, the elderly, and children ages 1-4
per year.
2. Literature
There is a large literature examining various aspects of healthcare reforms
implemented in low- and middle-income countries. Although the majority of these

6

reforms consist of primarily demand-side measures such as expanding public health
insurance coverage, many of them are also accompanied by supply-side ingredients
aimed at expanding coverage through public provision of services and thereby enhancing
affordability, especially among the poor, and promoting cost-efficient, high-quality care
through incentive-based payment mechanisms. In this literature review, we deliberately
limit our discussion to relatively recent studies that consider reforms with pre-dominantly
supply-side measures, as we believe these are the most relevant from the perspective of
the Turkish program.11
One notable example is Thailand’s 30 Baht Program (or Universal Coverage
Scheme), which was launched in 2001 as one of the largest and most ambitious health
reforms ever undertaken in a developing country at the time. With the goal of reducing
geographical disparities in the provision of public healthcare, the 30 Baht Program
significantly increased payments to hospitals and decreased co-payments to improve
access to medical care for the poor. Gruber et al. (2014) examined the impact of the
program employing a difference-in-differences estimator for identification by comparing
the outcomes of the previously uninsured and underinsured populations to those who had
insurance coverage prior to the reform. The authors found that the reform led to increased
healthcare utilization with more pronounced effects among the poor, including a
significant decrease in infant mortality, leading to a reduction in disparities of mortality
across provinces. More recently, Limwattananon et al. (2015) employed a similar
empirical strategy to examine the impact of the Thai reform on out-of-pocket medical

11

Therefore, this is not an exhaustive list of the studies in the literature.

7

expenditures and utilization, and found that the reform reduced these expenditures while
also raising utilization of both inpatient and ambulatory care.
Another relevant example with clear supply-side components is Colombia’s
Subsidized Regime, which was introduced in 1993 in the form of publicly-financed
health insurance for the poor. The reform also introduced new payment contracts between
insurers and provider organizations with a goal of creating incentives for providers to
reallocate spending from primary to preventive care (Miller et al., 2013). In a recent
study, Camacho and Conover (2013) used program eligibility as an instrumental variable
to examine the effect of the program on access to medical care and birth outcomes, and
found that receiving subsidized health insurance increased the likelihood of medical care
utilization and reduced the incidence of low birth weight. Relatedly, using a fuzzy
regression discontinuity design, Miller et al. (2013) found that the program protected the
poor from financial risks associated with unexpected medical costs while increasing the
use of traditionally-underutilized preventive services, resulting in health gains.
Peru’s public health insurance program (Seguro Integral de Salud) is another
large-scale reform with supply side incentives. Introduced in 2001, the program offered
free (no co-payments, coinsurance, deductibles, or other fees) access to basic services
through a network of healthcare centers and hospitals. Bernal et al. (2016) used the
program’s income eligibility thresholds in a sharp regression discontinuity design to
examine the program’s effect on utilization, healthcare expenditures, and health
outcomes. They found strong positive effects on healthcare utilization, including
receiving surgery, doctor visits, and receiving medication. However, with the exception
of pregnancy care, they obtained weak or no effects on preventive-care outcomes such as

8

receiving iron supplements, ultrasounds, and lab tests. Interestingly, they also found that
the program increased healthcare expenditures, but mostly at the high end of the income
distribution, with no clear effects on self-reported health overall. Taken together, the
authors interpreted these findings as evidence that an initial contact with a provider might
lead to greater awareness about health problems, which might in turn trigger supplierinduced demand, and thus cause an increase in out-of-pocket spending for services not
covered by the program.
Brazil’s Programa Saùde de Familia (PSF) is another large-scale healthcare
reform that deserves our attention. As one of the earlier reforms in the developing world,
the PSF was launched in 1994 with the goal of promoting preventative and basic
healthcare through the use of professional healthcare teams directly intervening at the
family and community level. Rocha and Soares (2010) examined the impact of the PSF
on a wide range of outcomes including mortality, child labor, schooling, employment,
and fertility using both municipality and household data. Controlling for location fixed
effects to account for the endogeneity of the program implementation, the authors found
that the PSF reduced infant mortality, lowered fertility, increased the labor supply of
adults, and boosted school enrollment in the North and Northeast regions of Brazil.
It is important to note that a key aspect of the PSF is the deployment of
professional community healthcare teams, which are responsible for the delivery of
primary healthcare (Rocha and Soares, 2010). This resembles the role of family
physicians in the FMP who are responsible for providing basic healthcare services to the
citizens assigned to them. But unlike the Turkish reform, participation in the PSF is
voluntary at the municipality level and requires the coordination among all three layers of

9

government at the federal, state, and municipal levels (Rocha and Soares, 2010).
Consequently, it took over a decade, starting in 1994, for most municipalities to
implement the policy, and the policy was not uniformly adopted as jurisdictions had
discretion in its implementation. Financial constraints, technological challenges, funding
and physician shortages, and the lack of political will to help people in rural areas also
slowed down the expansion of the PSF in certain areas (Macinko and Harris, 2015;
Noronha, 2010; WHO, 2008).12 While the slow roll out of the policy may be problematic
for several reasons, one particular concern is the endogeneity of the timing of the policy
due to its voluntary nature. Moreover, there is also evidence that the initial focus of the
program was poorer-than-average municipalities, so the roll out of the program was not
random (Macinko and Harris, 2015; WHO, 2008). As a result, the expansion of the
program to upper income groups, or even the middle-class, has been relatively slow. The
FMP in Turkey, therefore, represents an ideal opportunity to overcome several of the
endogeneity concerns affecting previous studies, thereby gaining greater precision in
terms of the effects of supply-side healthcare reforms.
Another key difference between the two reforms is that in Brazil one of the tasks
of health-care teams is to establish links between patients and other social programs such
as conditional cash transfer programs, water and sanitation services, law enforcement,

12

One potentially satisfactory way to deal with these issues could be to adopt a more flexible functional
form within a difference-in-differences strategy, for example, by relaxing the “parallel trends” assumption
between the treated and control municipalities via time trends. Rocha and Soares (2010) state that they
could not implement this type of a sensitivity analysis due to the significant loss in the degrees of freedom,
given that their data include a large number of municipalities. Instead, they allow for state-specific year
dummies. Recently, Reis (2014) deals with these selection issues exploiting variation in the PSF’s
availability across siblings in order to account for unobserved family as well as municipality level factors
that are constant over time. Unlike Rocha and Soares (2010), they find only weak evidence that the
availability of the program at the municipality level is related to better health indicators of children in
Brazil.

10

and schools (Macinko and Harris, 2015), whereas there is no such role assigned to family
physicians in the Turkish program. Furthermore, the Brazilian program relies heavily on
home visits initiated by health agents who are responsible for proactively identifying
individuals within communities with healthcare needs and to reach out to them before
they seek out care at clinics (Macinko and Harris, 2015). This process of linking patients
with healthcare specialists in a proactive manner is likely to be endogenous, and may lead
one to overestimate any positive impact of the program. In contrast, the FMP of Turkey is
fully funded through general tax revenues, and provides primary healthcare services to all
Turkish citizens, regardless of income, in Family Health Centers located within their
local neighborhoods. Finally, the Brazilian program exhibits much wider variation in
terms of quality and capacity of services provided, and only recently introduced a payfor-performance scheme which has been a key component of the Turkish reform from the
beginning.
While valuable lessons have been gained from the aforementioned reforms,
several distinguishing characteristics of the FMP set it apart as a significant supply-side
reform to study. To our knowledge, this paper constitutes the first evaluation of the
impact of the FMP on health outcomes, measured by age-specific mortality rates. In the
subsequent section, we describe the important features of the FMP in more detail.
3. The Family Medicine Program
The FMP was launched by the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Turkey, first
as a pilot in the province of Duzce in 2005 and then gradually expanded to all 81
provinces by the end of 2010 (See Appendix Table 1 for a list of all provinces with their
respective implementation dates). The program operates by assigning each Turkish

11

citizen to a specific family physician who offers a wide range of primary healthcare
services free-of-charge. This is the key operational feature of the FMP, and has been
instrumental in the initial contact and the continuity of care as well as satisfaction and
trust between the physicians and the patients (Baris et al., 2011; Worldbank, 2012; WHO,
2014b). Importantly, all family physicians are public employees. In terms of
administration, the Public Health Institution of Turkey (PHIT) is responsible for the
oversight and broad management of the FMP. Moreover, in each province, the PHIT has
a Public Healthcare Directorate responsible for operations at the local level (OECD,
2014).
The family physicians are recruited from several sources including the existing
pool of general practitioners, specialists within both the private and public sectors, and
recent graduates from medical schools. Specialists within both the public and private
sectors are allowed to join the FMP and those in the public sector could also exercise a
leave of absence from their current position for a period of two years to work as a family
physician (Worldbank, 2013b). With respect to new graduates, almost every medical
school in Turkey established departments of family medicine that offer a three-year
specialty training program (OECD, 2014). In order to meet a certain threshold of quality
standard, existing general practitioners and recent graduates of medical schools interested
in joining the FMP are required to complete a two-phased training program, including a
ten-day orientation administered in person, followed by a one-year distance-learning
program administered while working (OECD 2008, 2014; WHO 2012a). Between 2005
and 2011, approximately 45,000 GPs joined the FMP by going through these training
programs (Akdag, 2011).

12

The compensation package established as part of the FMP was also designed to
recruit high-quality physicians. For example, a capitation plus performance-based
payment system was introduced at the beginning of the program in order to allow family
medicine physicians to raise their salary by between 150 and 800% (Akdag, 2011).13
Furthermore, family physicians are required to meet pre-determined performance targets
in maternal and child health with regards to immunization, antenatal care, and follow-up
visits of registered new born babies.14 Failure to meet these targets can result in a salary
deduction of up to 20%, and repeated failures could result in contract termination. In
addition, an internet-based platform was established for family physicians to provide data
on maternal and child health activities, such as vaccinations and antenatal care to the
health information systems directorate at the Ministry of Health, which then provides
feedback on the target thresholds. Additionally, contracts include a point-based warning
and admonition system for violations of 35 pre-defined indicators, such as abiding with
working hours, and maintenance and security of patient health records. Family physicians
with penalty points exceeding 100 within a contract period have their contracts
terminated and are not allowed to apply for a new contract. Auditors from Community
Health Centers assess compliance and quality of service of Family Health Centers at least
once every six months, and a group of family physicians are randomly selected for
performance audits every month. Finally, in order to provide ongoing training, an
internet-based open platform was established for physicians to interact with each other

13

Also see http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/sk-sorulan-sorular/personel-cin.html ( last accessed on March 10,
2017).
14
Additionally, a set of performance indicators for chronic and non-communicable diseases, such as
screening for hypertension, obesity, and cancers, and control of blood pressure in hypertensive patients
have been moderately integrated into the performance-based payment scheme over time (Worldbank,
2013b).

13

and to facilitate peer-to-peer learning, which has served to improve quality of services
(Worldbank, 2013b).
In terms of coverage of medications, patients are responsible for a 20%
copayment for out-patient pharmaceuticals.15 The copay is 10% for retirees. However, the
cost is fully covered if the price is less than the reimbursement limit (capped at 22% over
the least expensive brand), implying that most generics are fully covered, with patients
paying the difference between the actual cost and the cap if they choose brand-name
drugs. Furthermore, in-patient pharmaceuticals and medications for patients with
(physician confirmed) chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes, hypertension, cancer) are fully
covered (Celik and Seiter, 2008; Tatar et al., 2011). Contraceptives, such as birth control
pills and condoms are provided free-of-charge, whereas intrauterine devices are provided
at a subsidized price (Bernar-Dilbaz, 2010; Karaguzel, 2006).
The FMP services are delivered through two primary channels: Family Health
Centers (FHCs) and Community Health Centers (CHCs). The FHCs staff family health
teams formed by at least one family physician and an equal number of family health
personnel including nurses and midwives. Basically, the FHCs are the clinics where
patient-specific preventive care services (immunization and monitoring of pregnant
women and infants) and diagnostic, curative, rehabilitative, and counseling services at the

15

Prescription drugs and medical supplies are primarily purchased from nearby pharmacies as in most
developed countries. Establishing a pharmacy requires licensing by the government, and officials allocate a
larger share of new licenses in areas with relatively low concentration of pharmacies on a per capita basis
(Celik and Seiter, 2008; Tekiner, 2013). On average, there is one pharmacy per 3000 people (Celik and
Seiter, 2008; Tekiner, 2013). In remote and rural areas, where it is commercially less attractive and viable
to establish a pharmacy, mobile pharmacies are set up by the government to make it easier for citizens to
access to medications (Turkish Ministry of Health, 2010). Moreover, the Turkish Pharmaceutical Trackand-Trace System (ITS) monitors the pharmaceutical market to ensure reliable supply of drugs to patients
(Unal, 2016). Family physicians are also able to provide pharmaceuticals in their own facilities in the case
of emergencies, as well as vaccinations for infants and children, which are provided free-of-charge by
family physicians (Turkish Ministry of Health 2010).

14

primary care level are provided. These centers serve as easily accessible walk-in clinics
as they are located within the neighborhoods where assigned citizens reside. Services can
be obtained by simply presenting an identification card without having to make an
appointment or to present any form of health insurance.
The CHCs, on the other hand, are established to provide logistical support to
family physicians for public health services such as vaccination campaigns, health
promotion and education services, and environmental and occupational health services.
Moreover, the CHCs collect statistical data on public health services, and monitor and
evaluate the effectiveness of health services provided by the FHCs. Both the FHCs and
CHCs operate under the supervision of the Provincial Health Directorates that are
responsible for planning and provision of health services at provincial level and
accountable to the PHIT.
Prior to the FMP, the delivery of primary healthcare services had been managed
through a highly hierarchical and fragmented system, which was difficult for patients to
understand and navigate through.16 Launched in 1992, the Green Card—the “Yesil
Kart”—program was the flagship social protection mechanism that targeted the poor. The
Green Card program, a means-tested, noncontributory national health insurance scheme
for the poor, covered only inpatient treatment costs of the eligible beneficiaries in public

16

Under the Green Card Program, Turkish citizens living within the borders of the Republic of Turkey
could be eligible if i) they were not covered by any social security schemes and ii) they have per capita
household incomes of less than one-third of the gross minimum wage (except for taxes and social security
premiums). Moreover, pensioners over 65 years old and people with chronic illnesses could be eligible,
regardless of their household incomes (Worldbank, 2013a). The benefits of the program were expanded
under the FMP: outpatient services (in 2004) and prescription drugs (as of January 2005) in public facilities
were included in the benefits package. In 2012, the Green Card program was integrated into the universal
health insurance scheme (Worldbank, 2013a). Limiting the analysis sample to 2001-2012 or 2001-2011
produces a similar pattern of results. The nationwide expansion of the benefits over time improved
utilization of healthcare services among the poor. Note that our paper controls for common trends in order
to identify the effect of the FMP.

15

facilities until 2004. Among the non-poor, health insurance was publicly provided based
on occupational type. Among these disparate insurance plans, there was significant
variation with respect to coverage and price of health services, the types of healthcare
providers that were allowed to cover, and payment programs including co-payments and
other fees (Atun, 2015; Robila, 2013). Moreover, even when individuals had nominal
health insurance, many lacked access to healthcare providers and dispensaries,
particularly in rural areas, and healthcare providers also lacked staff and operational
resources (OECD, 2008). Accordingly, there were wide disparities in access and quality
of primary healthcare services. The FMP harmonized the coverage of healthcare services
to all citizens regardless of occupation or income, which were all provided free-ofcharge, under the unified Social Security Institute (SSI). The primary healthcare benefits
package includes a wide range of primary healthcare services with a particular focus on
maternal and child health, and the elderly (WHO, 2012a; WHO, 2012b).17
Many individuals relied on hospitals as their source of primary care prior to the
FMP, and this has been shown to overburden hospitals generating over-crowding and
long-waiting times (Baris et al, 2011; OECD, 2008; Tatar et al., 2011). While reducing
waiting times at secondary-level facilities was not a major goal of the program, the FMP
directly encouraged greater utilization of primary care facilities as a first point of contact,
thereby reducing pressure on secondary-level facilities. For example, the FMP waived
co-payments at secondary-level facilities only if patients had a referral from their primary
care family physician (OECD, 2008; Tatar et al., 2011). There is qualitative evidence to
suggest that the introduction of the FMP led to better access and shorter waiting times

17

Also see http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/aile-hekimlii/aile-hekimliinin-tanm.html (last accessed on March 10,
2017).

16

among those seeking primary care services, while at the same time improving the quality
of care by providing a relief on overburdened hospitals (Akdag, 2008; Dagdeviren and
Akturk, 2004; OECD, 2008; Vujicic et al., 2009; WHO 2012a). Consequently, outcome
quality for hospital care as measured by patient satisfaction increased substantially
between 2003 and 2010 from 39.5% to 73.1% (Tatar et al. 2011).
The FMP also included health services aimed at prevention, early detection, and
management of non-communicable diseases (NCDs).18 Prior to the FMP, health services
related to prevention and management of NCDs were only provided at hospitals, and high
co-payments were often a barrier (OECD, 2008). Cancer and hypertension screening,
blood pressure control in hypertensive patients, and blood glucose control in diabetic
patients are provided free-of-charge by family physicians. Moreover, family physicians
are allowed to prescribe anti-hypertensive drugs (except for angiotensin receptor
blockers), anti-diabetic drugs (except for insulin), and cholesterol lowering drugs (after
specialist recommendation), which are also free-of-charge (WHO, 2014b).
Finally, family physicians may also change health behaviors of mothers by
providing information to mothers concerning the importance of hygiene, and encourage
basic sanitation techniques to prevent infectious diseases. They can also provide parents
with information about how to treat and prevent diarrhea using simple methods, which
may help reduce mortality, especially among infants (Gürel, 2009; Hisar and Hisar, 2012;
Suluhan et al., 2014).19

18

NCDs accounted for approximately 86% of all mortalities in Turkey in 2012, mainly due to
cardiovascular diseases (47%) and cancers (22%) (WHO, 2014c).
19
Given the reduced-form research design of our analysis, we are not able to identify the exact channels
through which the FMP influences mortality rates.

17

4. Data
We gathered data from several sources to examine the effect of the FMP on agespecific mortality rates between 2001 and 2014. Information on the FMP was obtained
from the PHIT. Our treatment variable is constructed in a number of alternative ways.
First, we generate a binary indicator for the presence of the FMP in a particular province
in a given year. Next, we employ a continuous measure defined as the number of years
since the implementation of the FMP in order to explore any dynamic patterns in the
relationship between the program and the outcome measures. Finally, we consider a nonparametric relationship between the FMP and mortality by employing separate binary
indicators for post-implementation years from 1 to 5 and beyond. In Appendix Table 1,
we present the year of implementation of the FMP as well as the number of citizens per
family physicians for year 2013. The PHIT aims to provide one family physician for
about every 3500 persons in a province, and the evidence suggests that this goal has been
achieved rather rapidly following the introduction of the program (Dogac et al., 2014;
Öcek, 2014; Tirpan, 2010; Worldbank, 2013c).20
Data on age-specific mortality rates come from the Turkish Statistical Institute
(TurkStat). All-age mortality rate (AMR) represents the number of deaths per 1000
people. Infant mortality rate (IMR) reflects the number of deaths among infants up to 12
months of age per 1000 live births. Child mortality rate (CMR) pertains to the number of
deaths per 1000 children between the ages 1 and 4. Finally, the elderly mortality rate
(EMR) represents the number of deaths per 1000 people among those who are at least 55
years of age.

20

See also http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/sk-sorulan-sorular/personel-cin.html (last accessed on March 10,
2017).

18

We account for several time-varying determinants of mortality measured either at
the province or sub-regional level in the analysis. Note that Turkey is classified into 12
regions and 26 sub-regions in addition to 81 provinces by TurkStat. These control
variables represent characteristics that may affect mortality either directly or may be
correlated with other factors that may influence mortality.21 The full list includes the
number of students per teacher in primary schools, the number of motor vehicles per
1000 persons, the unemployment rate, income per capita, the percentage of population
with at least a high school degree, and the percentage of population with at least a college
degree.22 In addition, we also control for the percentage share of seats controlled by the
governing party in the parliament for each province to account for the possibility that the
FMP might have expanded across provinces in a way that is correlated with the timing of
other investments by the government.23 Information on age-specific province populations
comes from the TurkStat. Finally, we include in our analysis binary indicators

21

Income and related indicators of socio-economic development and urbanization have been shown to be
related to population health including mortality (e.g., Cutler et al., 2006; Gerdtham and Ruhm, 2006). The
underlying theory of the role of education and income in the health production process developed in the
seminal work by Grossman posits that increased educational attainment and income related characteristics
improve individual health through greater productive efficiency (Grossman, 1972). In other words,
domestic product per capita (representing income) and education variables serve to shift the total product
curve for medical care upward, so that at each level of medical care, more health (less mortality) is
achieved.
22
Among these variables, the first two are measured at the province level and the rest are only available at
the sub-regional level. For variables that are measured at the sub-regional level, we use the same value for
every province within the same sub-region. Therefore, there can be a maximum of 364 unique values for
each year for each of these variables. These regional and sub-regional classifications are generated for
statistical purposes based on geographic proximity and socio-economic similarities within the associated
region. The TurkStat collects and processes data from different sources on a variety of topics including
demographic characteristics and health. See http://www.turkstat.gov.tr for more information.
23
Between 2001 and 2013, Turkey had three general elections (2002, 2007, and 2011), in which the members
of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey were elected.

19

representing missing observations for each covariate. Our analysis sample consists of
1134 province-year observations between 2001 and 2014.24
It is well-known that official statistics on mortality from developing countries,
especially those on infant mortality, suffer from considerable measurement error
(Anthopoulos and Becker, 2010; Cesur, Tekin, and Ulker, 2016, 2017; Gruber et al.,
2014). This measurement error is typically caused by factors such as difficulties in
obtaining an accurate count of deaths due to religious and cultural practices observed in
the burials of the dead, and the large number of births delivered at non-hospital settings.
Therefore, the official statistics on infant mortality tend to under-represent the actual
number of deaths. Recognizing the measurement error in the official data, international
organizations like the United Nations and the WHO adjust for under-reporting by
employing information from various sources such as official vital registries, census data,
and demographic surveys (Gruber et al., 2014). This usually results in a discrepancy
between the official mortality data released by national statistical agencies and
international organizations.
In the present study, we only use data obtained from TurkStat because province
level mortality statistics are not available from other sources. As demonstrated in Cesur,
Tekin, and Ulker (2017), the trends in national infant mortality rates obtained from
TurkStat data and the data from the United Nations and the WHO follow each other very
closely. For example, the pairwise correlations in the infant mortality rate between
TurkStat data and the series from the United Nations and the WHO are both 97%. The

24

The numbers of missing observations are 243 for unemployment rate, percentage of population with a
high school degree, and percentage of population with a college degree, 486 for income per capita, and 81
for number of students per teacher.

20

availability of FMP may cause a shift in deliveries from homes towards hospitals, which
may then result in a decrease in infant mortality. This can be interpreted as a program
effect. At the same time, such a shift from home births towards hospital deliveries may
improve the accuracy of accounting in the number of infant deaths. In this case, one may
still obtain an effect on infant mortality simply due to less under-reporting in infant
deaths even if the FMP had no real impact on infant mortality. It is important to note that
such bias would go against finding a negative impact of the FMP on mortality, especially
for infants.25
Descriptive statistics on age-specific mortality rates and the control variables are
presented in Panel A and Panel B of Table 1, respectively. As displayed in Panel A, the
mortality rates are 10.6 and 0.6 per 1000 for infants and children between ages 1-4,
respectively. The mortality rate for those aged 55 and older is 20.1 per 1000. A
comparison between the subsample of observations with and without the FMP reveals
that mortality rates are higher in the FMP provinces for all age categories.
As shown in Panel B of Table 1, the time-variant province characteristics also
vary considerably between province-year observations with and without the FMP. For
example, observations with the FMP appear to have a higher number of motor vehicles
per 1000 persons, higher income and education, and smaller classrooms at schools. The
pattern in these differences is consistent with the view that the pace by which the FMP
has expanded might have been positively associated with a higher level of urbanization
and economic development.

25

Random measurement error in any of our outcome variables would lead to imprecision in our estimates.

21

5. Econometric Framework
Our approach to obtaining the causal impact of the FMP on mortality outcomes is
to implement a difference-in-differences estimation strategy, taking advantage of the fact
that the program was rolled out in a staggered basis across provinces and over time. In
doing so, we compare the differences in the outcome variables in provinces before and
after the FMP implementation net of those provinces without the FMP in place. This
empirical strategy can be expressed by the following equation:
Yrpt = β0 + Xrptβ1 + β2 FMP0rpt + β3 FMP+rpt + δrt + λp + φp t + φp t2 + εrpt,

(1)

where Yrpt is the logarithm of one of the age-specific mortality rates measured in
province p in region r in year t. The vector Xrpt represents time-varying province level
characteristics. The FMP implementation is represented by two separate variables in Eq.
(1). The FMP0rpt and FMP+rpt are binary indicators representing the year of
implementation and all years following the year of implementation, respectively. This
approach assumes that the impact of the FMP in the year of implementation may be
different from subsequent years. The program impact in the year of implementation is
expected to be smaller than all the subsequent years for two reasons. First, unless the
program is launched on the first day of the year in every province, the length of time the
FMP is in effect in the first year is a fraction of a full year. Accordingly, we expect the
program impact to be a fraction of a full-year effect in the first year. Second, it would
likely take some time for all program components to become fully operational, and for all
citizens to identify and register with their designated family physicians. Based on this
formulation, any program impact in the year of implementation is captured by the
coefficient on FMP0rpt and the program effect in all the subsequent years is represented

22

by the coefficient on FMP+rpt.26 As discussed, we will further relax the pattern in the
relationship between the FMP and mortality by allowing for a more flexible specification.
The variable δrt is a set of region-by-year fixed effects. This is included in the
model in an attempt to control for common trends and shocks to mortality that might be
correlated with health investments including the FMP at the regional level. The regionby-year fixed effects would also account for time trends that are common across all
provinces. Accounting for such trends is important because there have been a number of
other health- and non-health related initiatives implemented during our analysis period,
including the introduction of mobile pharmacy and helicopter-based emergency medical
services to improve access to healthcare in rural areas. However, since these policies
became effective nationwide concurrently, their effects should be captured by region-byyear fixed effects. The variable λp represents province fixed effects accounting for
permanent differences across provinces such as poverty as well as cultural and traditional
practices, which likely remained time-invariant during the analysis period. The terms, φp t
and φp t2, represent linear and quadratic province-specific time trends, respectively. These
trends would capture the influence of difficult-to-measure factors at the province level
that trend either linearly or quadratically over time. Finally, εrpt is the idiosyncratic error
term. The parameters of interest in Eq. (1) are β2 and β3, which, respectively, represent the
average change in the outcome of interest during and after the year of implementation of
the FMP, net of any change in the outcome variable in control provinces.
26

An alternative approach could be to define the treatment variable as a fraction of a binary indicator in the
first year based on the month of implementation and assign a binary indicator for all other years.
Unfortunately, we do not have information on the exact date of implementation of the FMP in each
province. Our approach has been used previously to study program impacts in similar contexts. For
example, see Courtemanche and Zapata (2014), and Kolstad and Kowalski (2012) as two recent
applications in which the authors split the treatment indicator to separate its effects during implementation
and afterwards in studying the impact of the Massachusetts healthcare reform.

23

The key identifying assumption in the difference-in-differences method is that in
the absence of the FMP implementation, any mortality differences between the treatment
and the control provinces would continue along the same trend. However, it is plausible
that the provinces that are early adopters of the FMP began investing on health
infrastructure on the years prior to the FMP implementation. In this scenario, these preexisting trends could cause spurious positive correlation between the treatment and
mortality. We relax the parallel trends assumption by successively including province
specific linear and quadratic trends in Eq. (1). Controlling for these trends could serve a
particularly important function by gauging these pre-existing differences in mortality
trends across provinces.
If the set of fixed effects and province-specific trends described above do in fact
capture the unobserved characteristics that may be correlated with both the FMP and
mortality rates, then we would expect the time-varying characteristics included in
specification (1) to be inconsequential in terms of influencing the effect of the FMP. One
indirect way to test this is to consider the pairwise correlations between an indicator
representing the presence of the FMP and these characteristics, and examine how these
correlations change as we sequentially add the fixed effects and the trend terms. To do
this, we regress time-varying province characteristics on a binary indicator variable for
the presence of the FMP at the province level using various specifications. The estimates
from these regressions are presented in Table 2A. Note that each cell in this table
corresponds to an estimate from a separate regression. As shown in column (1) of Table
2A, there is considerable variation between provinces with and without the FMP as they
differ along all of the observable characteristics including unemployment rate, number of

24

vehicles per 1000 persons, per capita income, percent of population with a high school
degree, and number of students per teacher. The evidence from Table 2A suggests that
having the FMP at the province level is positively associated with characteristics that
capture various dimensions associated with being more urban and socio-economically
developed.27 However, much of these differences disappear once we control for the timevarying differences across regions in column (2). However, it is really when we control
for permanent differences across provinces through province level fixed effects, in
column (3), all of the observable differences between the two types of provinces become
unrelated to the FMP. In fact, none of the estimates in column (3) are economically or
statistically significant. This pattern remains preserved when we add province-specific
linear and quadratic time trends in columns (4) and (5), respectively.
Next, we repeat the same exercise by replacing the binary treatment indicator with
a continuous variable representing the number of years lapsed since the FMP
implementation. Estimates from these regressions, which are displayed in Table 2B, paint
a picture similar to the one displayed in Table 2A. Specifically, province characteristics
are significantly and sizably related to the number of years that the program has been in
place in a province, suggesting a more rapid adoption of the FMP in provinces that are

27

Although the program roll out does not appear to be random with respect to province characteristics, the
FMP was introduced by the central government with the mandate to establish universal coverage
eventually. Accordingly, the differences in the timing of implementation across provinces and over time
primarily have to do with logistical and staffing considerations. In the end, all of the 81 provinces in
Turkey had implemented the FMP during the analysis period. Therefore, there is no concern over selection
bias that could be caused by certain provinces with a particular set of characteristics never getting the
treatment. Furthermore, even if the implementation of the FMP appears to be non-random, any resulting
bias could be eliminated by controlling for province fixed effects to the extent that the pattern of the roll out
is only correlated with the pre-existing differences across provinces that are time-invariant (Rocha and
Soares, 2010).

25

more urban and economically developed than other provinces. But again, this pattern
disappears once we control for fixed effects and trends.28
The empirical model specified in Eq. (1) constrains the impact of the FMP on
mortality to be homogenous in all years following its implementation. Accordingly, the
results from this model may mask important differences in the dynamics regarding the
evolution of the program impacts if the underlying relationships between the FMP and
outcomes in consideration are not constant over time. As mentioned above, it may take
some time for the FMP to become fully operational and effective since some citizens may
not be aware of the program in the beginning, or may be reluctant to switch from their
existing practices initially. It may also take a while before citizens identify their
designated family physicians, learn about and get familiarized with the healthcare
services available to them, and begin utilizing these services. Accordingly, the program
effects may be felt gradually over an extended period of time. Regardless, this is a
question that can ultimately be answered by modifying Eq. (1) in ways that would allow
for a more flexible relationship between the FMP and the outcome measures. We
consider two flexible specifications. First, we replace the binary treatment variable with a
continuous measure defined as the number of years since the implementation of the FMP:
Yrpt = β0 + Xrptβ1 + β2 Years_since_FMPrpt + δrt + λp + φp t + φp t2 + εrpt.

(2)

Second, we consider a flexible non-parametric specification, in which we include
separate dummy variables for various years since the implementation of the FMP:
28

To gain additional insights about the pattern in which the FMP has expanded across provinces and over
time, we also estimate the binary FMP indicator and the number of years since the FMP implementation
measures on jointly specified time-varying province characteristics. This analysis indicates that province
characteristics are initially significantly related to the FMP implementation even with all these
characteristics entered into the model jointly. However, none of the estimates remain significant in both the
statistical and the practical sense once we control for province fixed effects and province-specific trends.
Full results from this analysis are available from the authors upon request.

26

Yrpt = β0 + Xrptβ1 +

"#
$%& 𝛽$

k_years_since_FMP456 + δrt + λp + φp t + φp t2 + εrpt. (3)

We estimate all of our models using weighted regressions with province
population for the relevant age category used as a weight.29 Finally, we present standard
errors that are robust to clustering at the province level, making statistical inference
robust to arbitrary forms of both heteroskedasticity and serial correlation within
provinces over time (Bertrand et al., 2004).
6. Results
We begin by presenting the estimates on the impact of the FMP indicators on the
logarithm of age-specific mortality rates in Table 3. We report the mortality estimates for
various age categories arrayed in columns (1) through (4) including all-age mortality rate,
the infant mortality rate, the mortality rate for children ages 1-4, and the mortality rate
among the elderly (age 55 and older). Focusing on Panel A of Table 3, in which we only
control for province fixed effects and region-by-year fixed effects, we observe that the
FMP is not significantly associated with any of the four measures of mortality during the
year in which the program is launched. Furthermore, the estimates are all small in
magnitude. As discussed above, this is not surprising since the FMP is in operation for
only a fraction of a full year in its first year of implementation. While the FMP does not
influence mortality in the year of adoption, it has a negative effect in all subsequent

29

The results from unweighted regressions are very similar to those presented in this paper, though the
coefficients are somewhat less precisely estimated. This is not surprising because there are several very
low-densely populated provinces (these are provinces with fewer than 300,000 persons representing around
5% of all the country) for which the impact of the FMP is not representative of the program effect more
generally. This is because the key operational feature of the FMP entails an initial contact between a family
physician and each citizen, which presumably progresses into a continuous and long-term relationship with
regular checkups at conveniently located neighborhood clinics. This relationship is likely to be more
challenging to establish in these sparsely populated provinces. Therefore, not employing population
weights would give undue influence to these small provinces in estimating the average effect of the FMP
on the population. In fact, when we exclude these sparsely populated provinces from the analysis, the
estimates become robust to not using weights.

27

years. As shown in the first row of Panel A, all four coefficients are negative and
statistically significant. In panels B and C, we successively add province-specific linear
and quadratic trends to the specification. As we control for province-specific linear trends
in Panel B and quadratic trends in Panel C, the estimates on the FMP impact on the year
of implementation remains small and statistically insignificant, but importantly changes
sign with the exception of child mortality. Note that these trend variables would capture
the influence of difficult-to-measure time-varying differences or differences in preexisting trends across provinces. To the extent that these factors are correlated with the
timing of a province implementing the FMP, the change in the sign of the treatment
indicator in the year of implementation is not surprising. Regarding the program effect
on all subsequent years, the estimates continue to remain negative and highly significant
after accounting for these trends. Finally, Panel D adds time-varying characteristics
measured at the province or sub-region level as described in Section 3. As expected, our
estimates are robust to controlling for these observable characteristics. Focusing on point
estimates for the program effect in the years following the year of implementation, the
FMP is associated with an 11% (e-0.112-1) decrease in the overall mortality rate. With a
mean mortality rate of 2.95 per 1000 persons for the sub-sample without an FMP, this
estimate implies that the FMP reduced mortality by about 0.32 per 1000 persons. Turning
to age-specific mortality estimates, the impact of the FMP on infant mortality is 25.6% (e0.296

-1), while the effect on the elderly mortality rate is 7.7% (e-0.080-1). With the sample

mean for infant mortality at 10.16 per 1000 infants and for the elderly at 16.70 per 1000
elderly persons, these estimates translate to reductions of mortality by 2.6 per 1000
among infants and 1.29 per 1000 among the elderly. Finally, the estimate of the impact

28

of the FMP on child mortality rate is 0.260 per 1000, which is equivalent to a marginal
effect of 22.9%. Despite the marginal effect being sizeable, the number of lives saved
among children ages 1-4 is only 0.13 per 1000 due to the small number of deaths among
this group in the baseline.
The results in Table 3 are derived from a specification that constraints the
estimate of the impact of FMP on mortality to be the same in all years after the year of
program implementation. This is a restrictive assumption if the FMP effect becomes
more pronounced over time for the reasons described in the previous section. To explore
any dynamic relationship between the FMP and mortality rates, we next turn to results
from the estimation of the models specified in Eqs. (2) and (3). As shown in the top panel
of Table 4, the impact of the FMP on mortality rate is statistically significant, negative,
and increasing in absolute terms over time for all outcomes. In particular, each additional
year of FMP implementation reduces the mortality rate by 23.7% (e-0.271-1) among
infants, by 24.8% (e-0.286-1) among children ages 1-4, and by 7.7% (e-0.080-1) among the
elderly. Although the largest estimate is for the mortality rate among children ages 1-4,
the actual lives saved by the FMP is again the lowest for this group of children due to a
very small baseline mortality rate among them.
The dynamic nature of the relationship between the FMP and the mortality rate is
more apparent in the bottom panel of Table 4, which shows results from a more flexible
specification. These estimates indicate a strong and negative relationship between the
FMP and mortality for all age groups. Furthermore, the effect appears to be persistent and
accumulating over time, consistent with the notion that the program saves more lives the
longer it is in effect.

29

The estimates presented in Tables 3 and 4 are based on specifications, which
control for any unobservable province-level characteristics, and investments in healthcare
that are trending linearly or quadratically over time. If these province-specific trends
sufficiently capture pre-existing differences in mortality rates, then we should see no
discernable impact of the FMP in the years prior to its implementation. One way to test
whether this condition is satisfied is to conduct an event-study analysis, which allows us
to trace out differences in mortality rates between treatment and control provinces in the
periods leading up to and following the implementation of the FMP.30 The results from
this analysis are presented graphically in Fig. 1, and numerically in Table 5. For ease of
illustration, estimates from the bottom panel of Table 4 are also presented alongside the
event-study estimates in Table 5. As shown in Fig. 1 and the even-numbered columns of
Table 5, the placebo effects – the estimates representing the periods prior to the FMP
implementation - are all statistically insignificant, suggesting no evidence of differences
in pre-existing trends in mortality rates across provinces once we account for provincespecific trends in the regressions. It is also reassuring that, following the implementation
of the FMP, the estimates of the impact of the FMP on mortality becomes stronger over
time. This pattern is consistent with the estimates shown in Table 4. In fact, a
comparison between the sets of estimates shown side-by-side in Table 5 suggests that
they are largely in line with each other, especially after the second year of
implementation of the FMP. Again, we ascribe this pattern to the notion that it takes
some time for the positive program effects to emerge.

30

See Cesur, Tekin, and Ulker (2017), Currie, Greenstone, and Walker (2015), Gershenson and Tekin (In
press), and Hoynes, Miller, and Simon (2015) for recent examples of studies with an event-study analysis.

30

To gain further insights into the exact nature of the differences in pre-existing
trends in mortality rates across the treatment and control provinces, we performed a series
of sensitivity analyses. In particular, we obtained event-study estimates using several
specifications, each of which assumes that the pre-existing trends follow a different
structure. The results from these analyses are presented separately for each of the four
mortality outcomes in Appendix Tables 2A-2D. For the sake of consistency with Table 5,
we begin by showing estimates from a specification that imposes the treatment effect to
be zero for all the time periods prior to the FMP implementation (column 1). Next, we
present the estimates from a specification that allows for pre-existing trends to differ at
the regional level by controlling for region-by-year fixed effects (column 2), followed by
a specification that captures province-specific linear trends (column 3), and both linear
and quadratic trends (column 4). In all of these specifications, we also account for
permanent differences across provinces through province fixed effects, as well as timevarying characteristics either measured at the province or sub-regional levels. As
indicated by the estimates in columns 2 and 3 of Appendix Table 2A, there appears to be
pre-existing trends in all-age mortality rate that are not fully captured by region-by-year
fixed effects or province-specific linear trends. It is only after we account for provincespecific quadratic trends in column 4 that these pre-treatment trends become
indistinguishable from zero. As shown in Appendix Tables 2B-2D, this pattern is similar
for infant, child, and elderly mortality rates. The evidence from this exercise suggests that
there are indeed differences in mortality rates across provinces that are time-varying and
trending quadratically. We view this as evidence that, in order to obtain credible

31

estimates of the impact of FMP on mortality, it is important to account for these
differences in the analyses.
The results discussed so far assume that the impact of the FMP on mortality rates
does not depend on initial levels of mortality. However, as the program allowed all
citizens to gain access to free public healthcare regardless of their current insurance status
or ability-to-pay for care it is possible that even small improvements in access to
healthcare could generate meaningful health benefits among provinces with poorer initial
health conditions. To test whether the effect of the FMP differs by baseline mortality
levels, we estimated the specifications shown in Tables 3 and 4 separately for provinces
with mortality rates above and then below the median. As shown in Table 6, the results
from this analysis indicate that the overall patterns in the estimate of the impact of the
FMP on age-specific mortality rates are similar between the two types of provinces.
However, the estimates are larger and more precisely estimated for provinces with
mortality rates above the median, as shown in Panel A. Not only are the program effects
more acute for high-mortality provinces, they also set in more quickly. As shown by the
estimates from the non-parametric specification in Panel A, the FMP effect becomes
statistically significant in the second year following the introduction of the FMP for all
four measures of mortality rates. Moreover, it sets in even quicker in the case of infant
and elderly mortality where the estimate on the FMP indicator is negative and statistically
significant in the first year after implementation. In contrast, the corresponding estimates
for provinces with mortality rates below the median are smaller and do not become
significant before either the third or fourth year after the introduction of the program for
the all-age mortality rate and the mortality rates among infants and the elderly, and the

32

fifth year for the mortality rate among children ages 1-4. One implication of the results
presented in Table 6 is that mortality rates may be converging as a result of the FMP.
This finding is consistent with Gruber et al. (2014), who showed reduced geographical
disparities in infant mortality following the health reform in Thailand.
As stated earlier, a key innovation of the FMP is the assignment of every Turkish
citizen to a specific family physician. We therefore estimate marginal productivity of
each additional family physician in terms of lives saved. To this end, we regress mortality
rates on the number of family physicians per province, along with other control variables
specified in Eq. (1). One potential problem with this approach is that the actual number of
physicians is likely to be endogenous to mortality and health outcomes. For example,
according to the policy rules outlined by the PHIT, the target is to assign about 3500
citizens to every family physician. As shown in Appendix Table 1, this target appears to
have been achieved in 2013. Specifically, there were 3493 citizens per family physician
on average in 2013 strikingly close to the target rate. That being said, there is still
considerable variation across provinces with the number of citizens served by a physician
higher than the target figure of 3500 in many of the urban and developed provinces (e.g.,
Ankara, Antalya, Bursa, Istanbul, and Yalova) and considerably lower in some rural
provinces (e.g., Bayburt, Bartin, Hakkari, Yozgat). This is not surprising since citizens
typically have more options (e.g., public and private hospitals, polyclinics, doctors’
offices) in urban areas compared to rural areas where options are more limited and
distantly located. Furthermore, more doctors are needed to overcome access challenges
in rural areas where many people live in sparsely populated settlement areas that are often
distant from each other. That being said, some of the provinces in the Southwestern

33

region of Turkey (e.g., Diyarbakir, Mardin, Sirnak, Siirt, Hakkari) appear to have fallen
short of the target rate despite their rural locations. This is likely due, at least in part, to
security concerns related to terrorism and civil unrest in those areas. In sum, the number
of family physicians per capita is likely to be determined by a variety of factors, some of
which are potentially endogenous to mortality.
To overcome these endogeneity concerns, we adopt a two-stage least squares
regression approach in which the target rate for family physicians per capita is used as an
instrumental variable (IV) for the actual number of doctors per capita. The advantage of
this approach is that the measure for each province is only a function of the exogenously
determined program rule. We then use the predicted number of physicians in the secondstage mortality regressions. The results from the first stage model in which we regress
the actual number of doctors on the target number of doctors dictated FMP
(population/3500 citizens) along with other variables in Eq. (1) are shown in Table 7A.
The point estimate in Table 7A indicates that each additional 3500 citizens generates
another 0.937 additional family physician, a figure very close to the target rate of one
doctor per 3500 persons. Given the central role that family physicians play in the FMP,
and the emphasis placed on achieving the specified target rate since the beginning, it is
not surprising that the coefficient in the first stage is highly precisely estimated. The IV
estimates are displayed in Table 7B. We present estimates for the marginal impact of a
family physician on each of the three age-specific mortality rates in Panel A. All three
estimates are negative and statistically significant ranging from 0.01 to 0.03%, indicating
that an additional family physician lowers the mortality rate for each age category.

34

To put these estimates into further context, we next present results from an
instrumental variables regression, in which we replaced the rates of mortality with the
number of deaths for each age category in Panel B. The advantage of this specification is
that it approximates the marginal product of an additional family physician in terms of
number of lives saved. These estimates indicate that an additional family physician
lowers the number of deaths among infants by 0.15, among the elderly by 0.46, and
among children ages 1-4 by 0.005, respectively. Assuming a constant marginal product of
physicians, a back of the envelope calculation obtained by multiplying these effect sizes
with the total number of family physicians (21,384 in 2013) in Turkey reveals that the
lives of 3101 infants, 9922 elderly citizens, and 107 children ages 1-4 saved by family
physicians in 2013 alone.
Finally, we perform a similar analysis to investigate the role of family health
centers in reducing mortality. Note that these centers serve as clinics for family
physicians where they offer healthcare services to citizens on a walk-in-basis. To test
whether an increase in the density of family health centers translates into reduced
mortality rates, we gathered data on the annual number of family health centers for each
province and constructed a density measure as defined by the number of centers per 100
km2 (equivalent to about 38.6 miles2). As shown in Table 8, the results from this analysis
indicate that each family health center within a 100 km2 lowers the rate of mortality by
3.7% among infants, 3.5% among children ages 1-4, and by 2.5% among the elderly.
These results are informative in illustrating the importance of easily accessible and
conveniently located services within local neighborhoods. However, similar to the
assignment of the number of family physicians, the number of family health centers in a

35

province is likely to be endogenously determined. Unlike the case for the number of
family physicians, we do not have a policy rule that specifies a target level, which can
then be leveraged to construct an exogenous measure. Therefore, we caution the reader
against making causal inferences using these estimates.
6.1. Robustness Analyses
One way to gain further confidence in our results is to identify a set of outcomes
for which the FMP should have no impact, and then conduct a placebo analysis using
these outcomes. One set of potentially good candidates for this purpose is the outcomes
related to injury and death rates associated with traffic accidents. To perform this
analysis, we gathered data on province-specific annual rates of traffic accidents, accident
deaths and injuries from TurkStat. Then we estimated our regressions for these outcome
variables using our most comprehensive specification. The results from this placebo
analysis are presented in Appendix Table 3. As shown in Panels A-C, regardless of how
we define the treatment variable, the impact of the FMP on these three outcomes appear
to be indistinguishable from zero with all estimates being statistically insignificant. The
only exception is a coefficient on the year-two indicator in Panel C for traffic accident
deaths. In Panels D and E of Appendix Table 3, we show placebo estimates for the
models of the predicted number of family physicians and family health centers. As
expected, neither family physicians nor family health centers appear to have any impact
on traffic accidents, nor do they reduce injuries or deaths associated with these accidents.
Taken together, the evidence presented in Appendix Table 3 lessens concerns over bias
from potential endogeneity, and lends further support to the hypothesis that the FMP had
a causal negative impact on age-specific mortality rates.

36

Next, we assess the sensitivity of our results to changes in reporting of the
outcome values over time. If, for example, the FMP influences internal migration
decisions, then the denominator in the outcome variables would be affected, which might
in turn cause our estimates to be biased. To assess the sensitivity of our results to
potential changes in the outcome variables due to factors correlated with the FMP, we
estimated our models using the populations at the base period denominator and
logarithms of the total number of deaths for the associated age category. The implications
of our primary results remained identical to these robustness analyses. The estimates
from the analysis using population at the baseline in the denominator are shown in
Appendix Table 4.31
Recall that the end points in the pre- and post-implementation periods in our nonparametric specification are ≥5+ years and ≤-5 years. Accordingly, the number of
observations for which these indicators take on the value of one varies by province since
provinces implemented the FMP at different times during the analysis period. In our final
robustness analysis, we estimate our models using a much more conservative sample
defined by imposing the condition that every province has exactly five years of data prior
to and following the FMP implementation by eliminating observations for any province
beyond five years on either end. By doing this, we get a sense of whether our estimates
are dominated by these observations at either end points of the analysis period. The
results from this exercise are presented in Appendix Table 5. Although the coefficients
are less precisely estimated due to significant reductions in sample size, the overall
evidence points to a negative effect of the FMP on all four mortality outcomes, regardless

31

In the interest of space, we do not show results from the analysis using the numerator values. These
results are available from the authors upon request.

37

of the way the treatment measure is constructed. Furthermore, the estimates indicate that
the program effect gets stronger over time, again a pattern consistent with our earlier
results. Finally, in the bottom two panels of the table, we present estimates from the
models for the marginal effect of a family physician and a family health center using a
balanced sample. Again, despite a reduction in sample size, these estimates are still
negative and statistically significant. The only exception is the estimate of the impact of
FMP on mortality among children ages 1-4, for which the estimate is negative but
imprecisely estimated. Note that in addition to the reduced sample size, the variation in
the child mortality rate is quite low to begin with due to a very smaller number of deaths
among this group.
7. Conclusions
Over the past decade, the Turkish healthcare system has undergone a major
transformation marked by significant investments in infrastructure, education of
healthcare personnel, modernization of patient tracking and payment systems, and most
importantly, the launching of the Family Medicine Program (FMP). With the introduction
of the FMP in 2005, Turkey has essentially established a socialized healthcare system for
primary healthcare service under which every Turkish citizen is ensured a comprehensive
package of healthcare services free-of-charge irrespective of the citizens’ income or
ability to pay. In addition to being a publicly funded program with universal coverage,
the FMP contains a few other components that make it a particularly interesting and
unique case to study. First and foremost, the key operational feature of the reform is the
assignment of every Turkish citizen to a designated family physician who offers a wide
range of healthcare services to the public in easily accessible neighborhood clinics.

38

Second, the program established a capitation plus performance-based compensation
system designed to improve the quality of care.
This paper provides the first comprehensive analysis of the impact of the FMP on
the outcomes of age-specific mortality rates using province level data between 2001 and
2014. To identify the causal effect of the FMP, we exploit the variation in program
implementation across provinces and over time using a difference-in-differences
estimation strategy. Our results indicate that the FMP has a significant negative impact on
mortality rates for all age groups considered. According to our point estimates, the
program reduces mortality by 11% among the all-age category, 25.6% among infants,
22.9% among children ages 1-4 and 7.7% among the elderly. These estimates translate
into reductions in mortality by 2.6 infants per 1000, 1.29 elderly persons per 1000, and
0.13 children ages 1-4 per 1000. According to our analysis for the marginal productivity
of a family physician, each physician saves 0.15 infants, 0.46 elderly persons and 0.005
children per province. Furthermore, the effect of the FMP appears to be strongest among
provinces with a higher baseline mortality, suggesting that the program might also have
contributed to an equalization of mortality across provinces over time.
Supply-side approaches aimed at achieving universal coverage, while ensuring
affordability through public provision, and coupled with provider incentives to improve
quality and control costs, are becoming of increasing interest to governments and
international health organizations (United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions
Network, 2014; WHO, 2014a). Evidence from several recent studies using credible
research designs highlights the importance of some of these supply-side measures in
improving public health, and reducing disparities in health outcomes in countries like

39

Brazil and Thailand. The current study builds upon this growing strand of literature by
providing insights into the effectiveness of a supply-side intervention in Turkey where
the entire population became entitled to free and easily accessible basic healthcare
financed and delivered by the government. The findings in this paper serve as further
compelling evidence in favor of the view that healthcare reforms employing strong
supply-side instruments can generate significant health benefits by reducing mortality
especially among infants and the elderly.

40

References
Anthopolos, R. and Becker, C.M. (2010). Global infant mortality: Correcting for undercounting.
World Development, vol. 38(4), pp. 467-81.
Akdag, R. (2008). Progress report 2008 health transformation programme, Ministry of Health,
Ankara.
Akdag, R. (2011). Turkey Health Transformation Program, Evaluation Report (2003-2010),
Ministry of Health, Turkey.
Arroyave I., D. Cardona, A. Burdorf, and M. Avendano (2013). The impact of increasing health
insurance coverage on disparities in mortality: Healthcare reform in Colombia, 1998–
2007. American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 3, pp. e100-e106.
Atun, Rifat (2015). Transforming Turkey’s health system—lessons for universal coverage. The
New England Journal of Medicine, 373; 14.
Baris, E., S. Mollahaliloglu and S. Aydin (2011). Healthcare in Turkey: From Laggard to Leader.
British Medical Journal, Vol. 342, p. c7456.
Bernal, N., Carpio, M.A. and Klein, T.J., 2016. The Effects of Access to Health Insurance:
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design in Peru. Retrieved on 02/10/2017 from
http://tilburgeconomics.nl/seg/images/kleintob/BCK20160218.pdf.
Bernar-Dilbaz, Berna (2010). FIGO working group on prevention of unsafe abortion: Turkey
situational analysis. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO)
Report, International Gynecology and Obstetrics, 110: S20-S24.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). How Much Can We Trust
Differences in Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:1, 249–275.
Bitrán, Ricardo, Rodrigo Muñóz, and Lorena Prieto (2010). Health insurance and access to
health services, health services use, and health status in Peru. Escobar/Griffin/Shaw: 106.
Camacho, A., and Conover, E. (2013). Effects of subsidized health insurance on newborn health
in a developing country. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 61(3): 633-658.
Celik, Y. and Seiter, A. (2008). Turkey: Pharmacitucal Sector Analysis. Ankara, Turkey, World
Bank Report.
Cercone, J., Etoile P., J.P. Jimenez, and R. Briceno. (2010). Impact of health insurance on
access, use, and health status in Costa Rica."Escobar/Griffin/Shaw: 89.

41

Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker (2016). "Can Natural Gas Save Lives? Evidence
from the Deployment of a Fuel Delivery System in a Developing Country" National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 22522.
Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker (2017) "Air pollution and infant mortality:
evidence from the expansion of natural gas infrastructure." The Economic Journal
127(600): 330-362.
Cheng SH and Chiang TL. (1997). The effect of universal health insurance on healthcare
utilization in Taiwan. JAMA, 278(2):89–93.
Courtemanche, C.J. and Zapata, D., 2014. Does universal coverage improve health? The
Massachusetts experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1), pp.36-69.
Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M. and Walker, R., (2015). Environmental health risks and
housing values: evidence from 1,600 toxic plant openings and closings. The American
economic review, 105(2), pp.678-709.
Cutler, D., Deaton, A. and Lleras-Muney, A., 2006. The determinants of mortality. The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 20(3), pp.97-120.
Dagdeviren, N. and Akturk, Z. (2004). An evaluation of patient satisfaction in Turkey with
EUROPEP instrument, Yonsei Medical Journal, Vol. 45., pp. 23-28.fmil
Dogac, A., Yuksel, M., Ertürkmen, G.L., Kabak, Y., Namli, T., Yıldız, M.H., Ay, Y., Ceyhan,
B., Hülür, Ü., Öztürk, H. and Atbakan, E., 2014. Healthcare information technology
infrastructures in Turkey. Yearbook of medical informatics, 9(1), p.228.
Dow, W. H., and Schmeer, K.K. (2003). Health insurance and child mortality in Costa Rica.
Social Science and Medicine, 57:975-986.
Drechsler, D. and Jutting, J. (2007). Different Countries, Different Needs: The Role of Private
Health Insurance in Developing Countries. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law,
vol. 32, no. 3.
Ekman, B., Liem N.T., Duc H.A., and Axelson, H. (2008). Health insurance reform in Vietnam:
A review of recent developments and future challenges. Health Policy and Planning,
23(4):252-263.
Gerdtham, U.G. and Ruhm, C.J., 2006. Deaths rise in good economic times: evidence from the
OECD. Economics & Human Biology, 4(3), pp.298-316.
Gershenson, S. and Tekin, E., In Press. The effect of community traumatic events on student
achievement: Evidence from the beltway sniper attacks. Forthcoming in Education
Finance and Policy

42

Giedion, U. and Diaz, B. Y. (2010). A review of the evidence. In M.-L.Escober, C. C. Griffin,
and P. R. Shaw (Eds.), The impact of health insurance in low- and middle-income
countries (pp. 13–32). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Grossman, M., (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
Political Economy, 80(2), pp.223-255.
Gruber, J., Hendren N., and Towsend R. M.(2014).The great equalizer: Health care access and
infant mortality in Thailand. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,6(1):91107.
Gürel, Pinar Pekel (2009). Polikliginimize Basvuran 6 ay-12 ay arasi annelerinin; Anne sutu ile
beslenme ve emzirme konusunda bilgi duzeyinin ve uygulamalarinin degerlendirilmesi.
Uzmanlik Tezi. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://www.istanbulsaglik.gov.tr/w/tez/pdf/cocuk_sagligi/dr_pinar_peker_gurel.pdf.
Hisar, F. and Hisar, K.M., 2012. Hand-Washing Practices of Women; a Qualitative Study. TAF
Preventive Medicine Bulletin, 11(5), pp.537-544.
Hoynes, H., Miller, D. and Simon, D., 2015. Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant
health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), pp.172-211.
Karaguzel, Nejda (2006). Fertil cagdaki kadinlarda kontraseptif yontemler ve anemi iliskisi.
Ministry of Health, Istanbul. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://www.istanbulsaglik.gov.tr/w/tez/tez_ailehekimi.asp.
Kolstad, J., & Kowalski, A. (2012a). The impact of health care reform on hospital and preventive
care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 909–929.
Kondo, A., and Shigeoka, H. (2013). Effects of universal health insurance on health care
utilization, and supply-side responses: evidence from Japan. Journal of Public
Economics, 99 (2013): 1-23.
Limwattananon, S., Neelsen, S., O'Donnell, O., Prakongsai, P., Tangcharoensathien, V., Van
Doorslaer, E. and Vongmongkol, V., 2015. Universal coverage with supply-side reform:
The impact on medical expenditure risk and utilization in Thailand. Journal of Public
Economics, 121, pp.79-94.
Macinko, J. and Harris, M.J. (2015). Brazil's family health strategy—delivering communitybased primary care in a universal health system. New England Journal of Medicine,
372(23), pp.2177-2181.
Mensah, J., Oppong, J.R. and Schmidt, C.M. 2010. “Ghana’s National Health Insurance Scheme
in the Context of the Health MDGs: An Empirical Evaluation Using Propensity Score
Matching.” Health Economics 19: 95–106.

43

Miller, G., Pinto, D. and Vera-Hernández, M., 2013. Risk protection, service use, and health
outcomes under Colombia's health insurance program for the poor. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4), pp.61-91.
Nicholson, D. R. Yates, W. Warburton, G. Fontana. (2015). Delivering Universal Health
Coverage: A Guide for Policymakers. Report of the WISH Universal Health Coverage
Forum. World Innovation Summit for Healthcare, Qatar.
Noronha, J. (2010). Brazil’s march towards universal coverage. Bull World Health Organ, 88,
646-647.
OECD (2008). OECD Reviews of health systems: Turkey 2008. OECD and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank.
OECD (2014). OECD Reviews of Health Care Quality: Turkey 2014 Raising Standards.
Öcek, Z.A., Çiçeklioğlu, M., Yücel, U. and Özdemir, R., 2014. Family medicine model in
Turkey: a qualitative assessment from the perspectives of primary care workers. BMC
family practice, 15(1), p.38.
Paim, J., Travassos, C., Almedia C., Bahia L., and Macinko J. (2011). The Brazilian health
system: history, advances, and challenges. Lancet, 377(9779): 1778-1797.
Peabody, J.W., Shimkhada, R., Quimbo, S., Solon, O., Javier, X. and McCulloch, C., (2014).
The impact of performance incentives on child health outcomes: results from a cluster
randomized controlled trial in the Philippines. Health Policy and Planning, 29(5),
pp.615-621.
Pfutze, T. (2014).The effects of Mexico’s Seguro Popular health insurance on infant mortality:
An estimation with selection on the outcome variable. World Development, 59,pp.475486.
Reis, M. (2014). Public primary health care and children’s health in Brazil: Evidence from
siblings. Journal of Population Economics, 27:421-445.
Robila, M. ed. (2013). Handbook of family policies across the globe. New York, NY: Springer.
Rocha R and Soares R (2010) Evaluating the impact of community-based health interventions:
evidence from Brazil’s Family Health Program. Health Economics, 19(S1):S126–S158.
Rottingen JA et al. (2014). Shared responsibilities for health: A coherent global framework for
health financing. Final report of the Centre on Global Health Security Working Group on
Health Financing. London: Chatham House.
Ruiz F, Amaya L, Venegas S. (2007). Progressive segmented health insurance: Colombian health
reform and access to health services. Health Econ,16(1):3–18.

44

Sosa-Rubi, S. G., Galarraga, O., and Harris, J. E. (2009). Heterogeneous impact of the “Seguro
Popular” program on the utilization of obstetrical services in Mexico, 2001–2006: a
multinomial probit model with a discrete endogenous variable. Journal of Health
Economics, 28(1), 20-34.
Somanathan, A., Dao, H. L., and Tien, T. V. (2013). Integrating the poor into universal health
coverage in Vietnam. Universal Health Coverage (UNICO) studies series; no.24.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Suluhan, D., Yıldız, D. and Fidancı, B.E., 2014. Uluslararası Bir Görevdeki Çocuk Hemşiresinin
Eğitici Rolü: 0-6 Aylık Bebeğin Beslenmesinde Anne Eğitimi Deneyimimiz. TAF
Preventive Medicine Bulletin, 13(3).
Tatar, M., Mollahaliloglu, S., Sahin, B., Aydin, S., Maresso, A., and Hernandez-Quevedo (2011).
Turkey Health System Review, Health Systems in Transition, Vol. 13, No. 6.
Tekiner, H. (2014). Pharmacy in Turkey: past, present, and future. Pharmazie: 69(6):477-80.
Thornton, R., L. Hatt, E. Field, M. Islam, F. Solis Dias, and M. Gonzales (2010). Social security
health insurance for the informal sector in Nicaragua: A randomized evaluation. Health
Economics 19, 181–206.
Tirpan, K. 2010.Birinci Basamak ve Geriatri Iliskisi. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://www.akademikgeriatri.org/files/Akademik_Geriatri_2010/Konusma_Metinleri/5.p
df.
Turkish Ministry of Health (2010). Progress Report, Health Transformation Program in Turkey,
Turkish Ministry of Health. Retrieved on 02/05/2017 from
http://sbu.saglik.gov.tr/Ekutuphane/kitaplar/TurkeySPDEng.pdf.
Unal (2016). Government initiatives, Turkey in GS1 Healthcare Reference Book 2015-2016:
Successful implementations of GS1 standards: 46-49.
United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network. (2014) Health in the framework of
sustainable development. Health thematic report. United Nations.
Vujicic, M., Sparkes, S., and Mollahaliloğlu, S. (2009). Health workforce policy in Turkey:
Recent reforms and issues for future, HNP Discussion Paper: 49484
Wagstaff, Adam (2007) Policy Research Paper Series Working Paper 4134. World Bank. Health
Insurance for the Poor: Initial Impacts of Vietnam’s Health Care Fund for the Poor.
Wagstaff A. (2014). We just learned a whole lot more about achieving universal health coverage.
World Bank. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://blogs.worldbank.org/developmenttalk/we-just-learned-whole-lot-more-about-

45

achieving-universal-health-coverage.
Wagstaff A., Magnus L., Gao J., Xu L., and Qian J. (2009). Extending health insurance to the
rural population: An impact evaluation of China’s new cooperative medical scheme.
Journal of Health Economics, 28(1), 1-19.
World Health Organization (2005). Sustainable health financing, universal coverage and social
health insurance [A58/33]. Geneva. Retrieved on 02/15/2017 from
http://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/cov-wharesolution5833/en/.
World Health Organization (2008), Evaluation of the Organizational Model of Primary Care in
Turkey, WHO Regional Office for Europe, Copenhagen. Retrieved on 02/20/2017 from
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/Health-systems/primary-healthcare/publications/pre-2009/evaluation-of-the-organizational-model-of-primary-care-inturkey-a-survey-based-project-in-two-provinces-of-turkey,-whoeurope-2008.
World Health Organization (2012a). Successful Health System Reforms: The Case of Turkey. A
report by WHO Regional Office for Europe, Denmark. Retrieved on 02/20/2017 from
http://disab.saglik.gov.tr/Eklenti/2106,successful-health-system-reforms-the-case-ofturkeypdf.pdf?0.
World Health Organization (2012b). Turkey Health System Performance Assessment 2011. A
report by WHO Regional Office for Europe, Denmark. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/165109/e95429.pdf.
World Health Organization (2014a). Making fair choices on the path to universal health
coverage. Final report of the WHO Consultative Group on Equity and Universal Health
Coverage. The World Health Organization. Retrieved on 02/18/2017 from
http://www.who.int/choice/documents/making_fair_choices/en/.
World Health Organization (2014b). Better non-communicable disease outcomes: challenges and
opportunities for health systems: Turkey country assessment. No.2, World Health
Organization. Retrieved on 03/10/2017 from
http://www.euro.who.int/en/countries/turkey/publications/better-noncommunicabledisease-outcomes-challenges-and-opportunities-for-health-systems.-turkey-countryassessment-2014.
World Health Organization (2014c). Noncommunicable diseases country profiles: Turkey.
Retrieved on 12/20/2016 from http://www.who.int/nmh/countries/tur_en.pdf.
Worldbank (2012). Turkey Health System Performance Assessment 2011.
Worldbank(2013a). Toward universal coverage: Turkey’s green card program for the poor.
World Bank UNICO Studies Series No. 18, 75012.

46

Worldbank (2013b). Turkey performance—based contracting scheme in family medicine—
design and achievements. Technical report, 77029-TR.
Worldbank. 2013c. Human Development Sector Unit Europe and Central Asia Region: Report.
Turkey Performance-Based Contracting Scheme in Family Medicine – Design and
Achievements., USA: The World Bank.

47

Figure 1: Event Study Estimates of the Family Medicine Program on Mortality
Rates
Log All Age Mortality Rate

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

-1.4 -1.2 -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.8

.6

Log Child Mortality Rate

<=-5
(-3 and -4)
-2
1
2
(3 and 4)
>=5
Years Prior to and After the Family Medicine Program Implementation Year

<=-5
(-3 and -4)
-2
1
2
(3 and 4)
>=5
Years Prior to and After the Family Medicine Program Implementation Year

Log Infant Mortality Rate

-.6

-1.2 -1

-.4

-.2

-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.6

.4

.8

Log Elderly Mortality Rate

<=-5
(-3 and -4)
-2
1
2
(3 and 4)
>=5
Years Prior to and After the Family Medicine Program Implementation Year

<=-5
(-3 and -4)
-2
1
2
(3 and 4)
>=5
Years Prior to and After the Family Medicine Program Implementation Year

Notes: The figures display the estimates and 95% confidence intervals. The reference category is “one year prior to the
implementation of the FMP.”

48

Table 1. Summary Statistics by Family Medicine Program Implementation Status
Panel A: Mortality Rates

All Age Mortality (AMR)
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Child Mortality Rate (CMR)
Elderly Mortality Rate (EMR)

Panel B: Time Varying Control Variables
Unemployment Rate

GDP Per Capita in Turkish Lira
Number of Vehicles Per 1000 persons
Percent High School
Percent College
Students Per Teacher
Percent Share of Governing Party
Seats in the Parliament
Observations

Full
Sample

FMP
Medicine = 1

Non-FMP
Medicine = 0

3.77
(1.68)
[1134]
10.68
(5.23)
[1122]
0.62
(0.43)
[1080]
20.11
(7.16)
[1134]

4.94
(1.38)
[493]
11.44
(3.32)
[491]
0.72
(0.45)
[486]
24.77
(3.95)
[493]

2.95
(1.36)
[641]
10.16
(6.15)
[631]
0.55
(0.41)
[594]
16.70
(7.06)
[641]

10.89
(3.66)
[891]
11063.92
(5011.23)
[648]
181.58
(0.08)
[1134]
18.52
(4.52)
[891]
9.41
(4.24)
[891]
17.22
(3.78)
[1035]
0.62
(0.17)
[1134]

10.40
(3.59)
[398]
13494.96
(5058.41)
[398]
221.35
(0.08)
[493]
19.07
(4.76)
[398]
10.94
(4.19)
[398]
16.37
(3.37)
[560]
0.60
(0.17)
[493]

11.44
(3.67)
[493]
9775.16
(4484.65)
[250]
153.67
(0.07)
[641]
17.91
(4.16)
[493]
7.72
(3.62)
[493]
17.89
(3.95)
[493]
0.64
(0.17)
[641]

Notes: Standard deviations are in parenthesis. Number of observations is in brackets. In Panel A, mean
values are weighted by the associated mean population for the relevant age group. In Panel B, mean values
are weighted by province population.

49

Table 2A: Estimates of Province and Region Level Time Varying Characteristics on
Family Medicine Program Indicator
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.128***
(0.038)
[891]

0.037
(0.060)
[891]

-0.063
(0.067)
[891]

-0.062
(0.069)
[891]

-0.051
(0.059)
[891]

Log Vehicles per 1000 persons

0.441***
(0.043)
[1134]

0.106
(0.080)
[1134]

-0.022
(0.023)
[1134]

-0.013
(0.019)
[1134]

-0.020
(0.016)
[1134]

Log Per-capita GDP

0.403***
(0.068)
[648]

0.086
(0.053)
[648]

-0.003
(0.010)
[648]

-0.002
(0.006)
[648]

0.001
(0.008)
[648]

0.049*
(0.027)
[891]

0.120**
(0.048)
[891]

0.004
(0.038)
[891]

0.000
(0.032)
[891]

-0.010
(0.053)
[891]

Log Percent College

0.406***
(0.058)
[891]

0.194*
(0.098)
[891]

0.060
(0.060)
[891]

0.054
(0.069)
[891]

0.031
(0.048)
[891]

Log Students Per Teacher

-0.107***
(0.012)
[1053]

-0.109**
(0.047)
[1053]

-0.017
(0.012)
[1053]

-0.012
(0.013)
[1053]

0.007
(0.015)
[1053]

Log Percent Share of Governing
Party Seats in Parliament

-0.105**
(0.045)
[1134]

-0.112
(0.147)
[1134]

-0.138
(0.101)
[1134]

-0.143
(0.113)
[1134]

-0.082
(0.164)
[1134]

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Dependent Variable
Log Unemployment Rate

Log Percent High School

Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on
Family Medicine Program Indicator conditional on control variables as indicated above. Models also
control for a family medicine program year of adoption indicator. Regressions are weighted with mean
province populations. Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

50

Table 2B: Estimates of Province and Region Level Time Varying Characteristics on
Years since the Family Medicine Program Implementation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.031***
(0.011)
[891]

0.020
(0.029)
[891]

-0.015
(0.022)
[891]

-0.022
(0.038)
[891]

-0.017
(0.028)
[891]

Log Per-capita Vehicles

0.095***
(0.009)
[1134]

0.034
(0.023)
[1134]

-0.006
(0.016)
[1134]

-0.008
(0.011)
[1134]

-0.010
(0.011)
[1134]

Log Per-capita GDP

0.124***
(0.024)
[648]

0.026
(0.016)
[648]

-0.005
(0.005)
[648]

-0.007
(0.005)
[648]

-0.004
(0.006)
[648]

Log Percent High School

0.018***
(0.006)
[891]

0.038**
(0.016)
[891]

0.014
(0.015)
[891]

-0.002
(0.021)
[891]

-0.007
(0.017)
[891]

Log Percent College

0.087***
(0.012)
[891]

0.047*
(0.024)
[891]

0.003
(0.017)
[891]

0.014
(0.040)
[891]

-0.005
(0.043)
[891]

Log Students Per Teacher

-0.030***
(0.003)
[1053]

-0.035***
(0.012)
[1053]

-0.014***
(0.005)
[1053]

0.005
(0.008)
[1053]

0.014
(0.010)
[1053]

Log Percent Share of Governing
Party Seats in Parliament

-0.021**
(0.010)
[1134]

0.002
(0.047)
[1134]

0.009
(0.025)
[1134]

-0.034
(0.091)
[1134]

-0.034
(0.102)
[1134]

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Dependent Variable
Log Unemployment Rate

Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Years
Since Family Medicine Program Implementation conditional on control variables as indicated above.
Regressions are weighted with mean province populations. Standard errors clustered at the province level
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

51

Table 3. The Impact of the Family Medicine Program on Mortality Rates
(1)
AMR

(2)
IMR

(3)
CMR

(4)
EMR

Panel A. Controls for Province Fixed Effects and Region-by-year Fixed Effects
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
-0.154*** -0.309*** -0.308*** -0.108***
(0.045)
(0.104)
(0.098)
(0.038)
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
0.012
0.047
0.149
0.002
(0.045)
(0.084)
(0.095)
(0.040)
Panel B: Controls for Panel A + Province-Specific Linear Trends
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
-0.075**
-0.164**
(0.032)
(0.074)
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
0.021
0.039
(0.039)
(0.082)

-0.149*
(0.085)
0.153*
(0.090)

-0.046*
(0.027)
0.011
(0.035)

Panel C: Controls for Panel B + Province-Specific Quadratic Trends
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
-0.124*** -0.314**
(0.045)
(0.128)
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
-0.006
-0.049
(0.035)
(0.066)

-0.286**
(0.120)
0.072
(0.079)

-0.089**
(0.040)
-0.012
(0.031)

Panel D: Controls for Panel C + Time Varying Province Characteristics
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
-0.112**
-0.296**
(0.048)
(0.125)
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
-0.001
-0.043
(0.036)
(0.068)

-0.260**
(0.121)
0.087
(0.080)

-0.080*
(0.042)
-0.008
(0.033)

1080

1134

Observations

1134

1122

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. AMR: All age mortality
rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4. EMR: Elderly mortality
rate. All dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

52

Table 4. The Impact of the Family Medicine Program on Mortality Rates
Allowing for a Dynamics Relationship
Variable

(1)
AMR

(2)
IMR

Panel A. Estimates of Mortality on Year Since FMP Implementation
Years Since FMP Implemented
-0.103**
-0.271**
(0.049)
(0.114)

(3)
CMR

(4)
EMR

-0.286***
(0.106)

-0.080*
(0.045)

Panel B. Estimates of Mortality on Binary Years Since FMP Implementation Indicators
FMP Year 1
-0.050**
-0.176***
-0.027
(0.024)
(0.066)
(0.072)
FMP Year 2
-0.116**
-0.336**
-0.297**
(0.052)
(0.141)
(0.135)
FMP Year 3 & 4
-0.246**
-0.638***
-0.551**
(0.096)
(0.230)
(0.224)
FMP Year >=5
-0.284**
-0.799***
-0.684**
(0.130)
(0.296)
(0.300)
Observations

1134

1122

1080

-0.048**
(0.023)
-0.083*
(0.045)
-0.193**
(0.088)
-0.224*
(0.119)
1134

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province fixed
effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying province
characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita
GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools.
AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4.
EMR: Elderly mortality rate. All dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

53

Table 5. Estimates from the Event–Study Analysis for Mortality Rates
Variable

(1)
AMR

(2)
AMR

-0.050**
(0.024)
-0.116**
(0.052)
-0.246**
(0.096)
-0.284**
(0.130)

-0.032
(0.101)
-0.029
(0.073)
-0.069
(0.047)
-0.076**
(0.031)
-0.136**
(0.061)
-0.260***
(0.079)
-0.295***
(0.092)

FMP Year <=-5
FMP Year -3 & -4
FMP Year -2
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3 & 4
FMP Year >=5

(3)
IMR

(4)
IMR

-0.176***
(0.066)
-0.336**
(0.141)
-0.638***
(0.230)
-0.799***
(0.296)

-0.240
(0.227)
-0.078
(0.165)
-0.026
(0.125)
-0.103
(0.081)
-0.223
(0.139)
-0.464**
(0.185)
-0.577**
(0.219)

(5)
CMR

(6)
CMR

-0.027
(0.072)
-0.297**
(0.135)
-0.551**
(0.224)
-0.684**
(0.300)

-0.206
(0.296)
-0.178
(0.203)
-0.203
(0.132)
-0.069
(0.091)
-0.289
(0.177)
-0.493**
(0.227)
-0.582*
(0.294)

(7)
EMR

(8)
EMR

-0.048**
(0.023)
-0.083*
(0.045)
-0.193**
(0.088)
-0.224*
(0.119)

-0.039
(0.092)
-0.034
(0.066)
-0.055
(0.043)
-0.063**
(0.029)
-0.090
(0.055)
-0.192**
(0.074)
-0.215**
(0.086)

Observations
1134
1134
1122
1122
1080
1080
1134
1134
Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province fixed
effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying province
characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita
GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools.
AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4.
EMR: Elderly mortality rate. All dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

54

Table 6. The Impact of the Family Medicine Program on Mortality Rates Separately
Baseline Mortality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Variable
AMR
IMR
CMR
EMR
Panel A: The impact of FMP on Mortality Rates in Provinces with Above Median Mortality Rates
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator

FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year >=3 & <=4
FMP Year >=5
Observations

-0.159***
(0.043)
0.022
(0.045)

-0.390***
(0.114)
-0.062
(0.094)

-0.337**
(0.137)
0.042
(0.145)

-0.130***
(0.040)
0.021
(0.040)

-0.058
(0.034)
-0.196***
(0.053)
-0.367***
(0.094)
-0.477***
(0.125)

-0.222**
(0.094)
-0.481***
(0.124)
-0.808***
(0.202)
-1.067***
(0.246)

-0.104
(0.117)
-0.432***
(0.151)
-0.714***
(0.223)
-0.959***
(0.333)

-0.053*
(0.031)
-0.164***
(0.050)
-0.322***
(0.088)
-0.417***
(0.119)

560

557

547

560

Panel B: The impact of FMP on Mortality Rates in Provinces with Below Median Mortality Rates
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator

FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year >=3 & <=4
FMP Year >=5
Observations

-0.105
(0.087)
0.044
(0.054)

-0.225
(0.228)
0.105
(0.128)

-0.131
(0.183)
0.310**
(0.135)

-0.074
(0.082)
0.023
(0.046)

-0.032
(0.038)
-0.141
(0.097)
-0.285**
(0.140)
-0.389**
(0.183)

-0.094
(0.126)
-0.297
(0.264)
-0.680*
(0.386)
-0.914*
(0.498)

0.133
(0.115)
-0.225
(0.208)
-0.519
(0.324)
-0.778*
(0.433)

-0.031
(0.036)
-0.109
(0.087)
-0.212*
(0.119)
-0.303*
(0.155)

574

565

533

574

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. AMR: All age mortality
rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4. EMR: Elderly mortality rate.
All dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

55

Table 7A. The Impact of Predicted Family Physicians on Family Physicians (First
Stage Estimates)
(1)
Variable
# of Family Physicians
Predicted # of Family Physicians
0.937***
(0.004)
Observations
Note: See the notes in Table 7B.

1134

56

Table 7B. Marginal Product of a Family Physician
(Instrumental Variable Estimates)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: The IV Estimates of the Impact of an Additional Family Physician on Mortality Rates
AMR
IMR
CMR
EMR
# of Family Physicians
-0.0002***
-0.0003***
-0.0003***
-0.0001***
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0000)
Panel B: The IV Estimates of the Impact of an Additional Family Physician on # of Deaths
Total Deaths Infant Deaths Child Deaths Elderly Deaths
# of Family Physicians
-1.273***
-0.145***
-0.005**
-0.464***
(0.126)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.098)
First Stage F-test
First State F-test P-value

62178
0.00

41509
0.00

42001
0.00

72553
0.00

Observations

1134

1122

1080

1134

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province fixed
effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying province
characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita
GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools.
AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4.
EMR: Elderly mortality rate. In Table 7B, all dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

57

Table 8. The Impact of Family Health Center Density on Mortality Rates
Variable
Family Health Center Density
Observations

(1)
AMR

(2)
IMR

(3)
CMR

(4)
EMR

-0.026***
(0.003)

-0.037***
(0.009)

-0.035***
(0.010)

-0.025***
(0.003)

1134

1122

1080

1134

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province fixed
effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying province
characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita
GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools.
Family Health Center Density is defined as the number of Family Health Centers per 100-kilometer square.
AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4.
EMR: Elderly mortality rate. All the dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

58

Appendix Table 1. Family Medicine Program Implementation Year and Population
Per Family Physician in 2013
Provinces by Region
Aegean Region
Afyonkarahisar
Aydin
Denizli
Izmir
Kutahya
Manisa
Mugla
Usak
Central Anatolia Region
Aksaray
Kayseri
Kirikkale
Kirsehir
Nevsehir
Nigde
Sivas
Yozgat
Central East Anatolia
Region
Bingol
Bitlis
Elazig
Hakkari
Malatya
Mus
Tunceli
Van
East Black Sea Region
Artvin
Giresun
Gumushane
Ordu
Rize
Trabzon
East Marmara Region
Bilecik
Bolu
Bursa
Duzce
Eskisehir
Kocaeli
Sakarya
Yalova

Year of
Implementation

Population
Per Family
Physician

Provinces by Region

Year of
Implementation

Mediterranean Region
Adana
Antalya
Burdur
Hatay
Isparta
Kahramanmaras
Mersin
Osmaniye
Northeast Anatolia Region
2010
3484
Agri
2008
3436
Ardahan
2008
3236
Bayburt
2008
3021
Erzincan
2010
3322
Erzurum
2010
3367
Igdir
2010
3521
Kars
2010
3311
Southeast Anatolia Region
Adiyaman
2010
3356
Batman
2010
3704
Diyarbakir
2007
3289
Gaziantep
2010
4274
Kilis
2010
3356
Mardin
2010
3690
Sanliurfa
2008
3413
Siirt
2010
3788
Sirnak
West Anatolia Region
2010
3322
Ankara
2010
3484
Karaman
2006
3367
Konya
2010
3731
West Black Sea Region
2009
3460
Amasya
2009
3257
Bartin
Cankiri
2008
3311
Corum
2006
3257
Karabuk
2009
3636
Kastamonu
2005
3623
Samsun
2006
3571
Sinop
2010
3584
Tokat
2010
3559
Zonguldak
2008
4000
West Marmara & Istanbul
Regions
Balikesir
Canakkale
Edirne
Istanbul
Kirklareli
Tekirdag
Note: Information on the FMP is obtained from the Public Health Institution of Turkey.
2010
2010
2006
2007
2010
2008
2010
2009

3448
3534
3497
3571
3236
3401
3521
3205

59

Population
Per Family
Physician

2008
2010
2008
2010
2007
2010
2010
2008

3534
3745
3215
3690
3215
3472
3497
3436

2010
2010
2008
2010
2008
2010
2010

3717
3311
2907
3145
3205
3521
3497

2006
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010

3623
3584
3788
3759
3571
3937
3623
3690
3623

2010
2008
2010

3802
3135
3584

2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2008
2007
2007
2010
2010

3185
3155
3891
3145
3390
3534
3497
3521
3436
3472

2010
2010
2006
2010
2010
2010

3546
3717
3460
3891
3546
3623

Appendix Table 2A. Event-Study Estimates for Overall Mortality Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.042
(0.030)
-0.126**
(0.050)
-0.302***
(0.095)
-0.463***
(0.167)

-0.067
(0.111)
-0.043
(0.066)
-0.078*
(0.044)
-0.071**
(0.029)
-0.146***
(0.053)
-0.315***
(0.083)
-0.466***
(0.135)

-0.128
(0.083)
-0.089
(0.061)
-0.094**
(0.044)
-0.048**
(0.023)
-0.082**
(0.040)
-0.172***
(0.052)
-0.180***
(0.067)

-0.032
(0.101)
-0.029
(0.073)
-0.069
(0.047)
-0.076**
(0.031)
-0.136**
(0.061)
-0.260***
(0.079)
-0.295***
(0.092)

1134

1134

1134

1134

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

FMP Year <=-5
FMP Year -3 & -4
FMP Year -2
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3 & 4
FMP Year >=5
Observations
Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Time Varying Province Characteristics
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. Dependent variable is
expressed in natural logarithm.

60

Appendix Table 2B. Event-Study Estimates for Infant Mortality Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.122*
(0.065)
-0.303***
(0.107)
-0.676***
(0.197)
-1.155***
(0.326)

-0.436**
(0.209)
-0.162
(0.137)
-0.056
(0.113)
-0.082
(0.075)
-0.214*
(0.120)
-0.515***
(0.183)
-0.874***
(0.276)

-0.473**
(0.211)
-0.225
(0.149)
-0.086
(0.121)
-0.035
(0.071)
-0.100
(0.095)
-0.262**
(0.117)
-0.325**
(0.140)

-0.240
(0.227)
-0.078
(0.165)
-0.026
(0.125)
-0.103
(0.081)
-0.223
(0.139)
-0.464**
(0.185)
-0.577**
(0.219)

1122

1122

1122

1122

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

FMP Year <=-5
FMP Year -3 & -4
FMP Year -2
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3 & 4
FMP Year >=5
Observations
Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Time Varying Province Characteristics
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. Dependent variable is
expressed in natural logarithm.

61

Appendix Table 2C. Event-Study Estimates for Child Mortality Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.000
(0.073)
-0.294***
(0.108)
-0.636***
(0.156)
-1.065***
(0.264)

-0.375
(0.245)
-0.233
(0.159)
-0.227*
(0.119)
-0.076
(0.078)
-0.318***
(0.117)
-0.613***
(0.136)
-0.964***
(0.209)

-0.404
(0.247)
-0.287*
(0.168)
-0.245**
(0.122)
-0.015
(0.068)
-0.192*
(0.105)
-0.334***
(0.084)
-0.388***
(0.110)

-0.206
(0.296)
-0.178
(0.203)
-0.203
(0.132)
-0.069
(0.091)
-0.289
(0.177)
-0.493**
(0.227)
-0.582*
(0.294)

1080

1080

1080

1080

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

FMP Year <=-5
FMP Year -3 & -4
FMP Year -2
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3 & 4
FMP Year >=5
Observations
Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Time Varying Province Characteristics
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. Dependent variable is
expressed in natural logarithm.

62

Appendix Table 2D. Event-Study Estimates for Elderly Mortality Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.029
(0.025)
-0.072*
(0.043)
-0.208**
(0.087)
-0.311**
(0.152)

-0.049
(0.105)
-0.038
(0.060)
-0.062
(0.040)
-0.054**
(0.025)
-0.092*
(0.046)
-0.222***
(0.074)
-0.318***
(0.117)

-0.110
(0.075)
-0.079
(0.054)
-0.074*
(0.040)
-0.042*
(0.022)
-0.048
(0.036)
-0.123**
(0.049)
-0.121*
(0.064)

-0.039
(0.092)
-0.034
(0.066)
-0.055
(0.043)
-0.063**
(0.029)
-0.090
(0.055)
-0.192**
(0.074)
-0.215**
(0.086)

1134

1134

1134

1134

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

FMP Year <=-5
FMP Year -3 & -4
FMP Year -2
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3 & 4
FMP Year >=5
Observations
Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Time Varying Province Characteristics
Province Linear Trends
Province Quadratic Trends

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics
include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent
high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools. Dependent variable is
expressed in natural logarithm.

63

Appendix Table 3: The Impact of Family Medicine Program on Traffic Accidents,
Traffic Accident Deaths, and Traffic Accident Injuries
Variables

Panel A: Binary FMP Indicator
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
Panel B: Years Since FMP Implementation
Years Since FMP Implemented

(1)
Log Traffic
Accident
Rate

(2)
Log Traffic
Accident
Death Rate

(3)
Log Traffic
Accident
Injury Rate

-0.026
(0.021)
-0.021
(0.013)

-0.077
(0.060)
-0.036
(0.051)

-0.013
(0.020)
-0.011
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.014)

-0.041
(0.041)

-0.005
(0.014)

-0.051
(0.055)
-0.116*
(0.061)
-0.099
(0.094)
-0.190
(0.117)

-0.012
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.022)
-0.020
(0.033)
-0.004
(0.044)

0.000001
(0.000006)

-0.000037
(0.000026)

0.0000003
(0.0000072)

62178
0.00

62178
0.00

62178
0.00

0.0011
(0.0012)

-0.0106
(0.0065)

0.0016
(0.0013)

1134

1134

1134

Panel C: Binary Years Since FMP Implementation Indicators
FMP Year 1
-0.020
(0.015)
FMP Year 2
-0.017
(0.022)
FMP Year >=3 & <=4
-0.028
(0.034)
FMP Year >=5
-0.010
(0.043)
Panel D: Predicted # of Family Physicians
# of Family Physicians
First Stage F-test
First State F-test P-value
Panel E: Family Health Center Density
Family Health Center Density
Observations

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province fixed
effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying province
characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of per capita
GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per teacher in primary schools.
Dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

64

Appendix Table 4: The Impact of Family Medicine Program on Mortality Rates
Using Baseline Population Values to Calculate the Mortality Rates
(1)
AMR

(2)
IMR

(3)
CMR

(4)
EMR

-0.114**
(0.048)
-0.004
(0.036)

-0.301**
(0.132)
-0.032
(0.074)

-0.246**
(0.118)
0.091
(0.079)

-0.079*
(0.043)
-0.011
(0.034)

-0.104**
(0.048)

-0.285**
(0.115)

-0.278***
(0.099)

-0.077*
(0.044)

Panel C: Binary Years Since FMP Implementation Indicators
FMP Year 1
-0.053**
(0.024)
FMP Year 2
-0.120**
(0.052)
FMP Year >=3 & <=4
-0.247**
(0.094)
FMP Year >=5
-0.288**
(0.126)

-0.174**
(0.071)
-0.343**
(0.147)
-0.664***
(0.233)
-0.834***
(0.297)

-0.020
(0.072)
-0.283**
(0.133)
-0.528**
(0.211)
-0.660**
(0.284)

-0.049**
(0.024)
-0.082*
(0.046)
-0.187**
(0.087)
-0.216*
(0.117)

-0.0003***
(0.0001)

-0.0001***
(0.0000)

Variables
Panel A: Binary FMP Indicator
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
Panel B: Years Since FMP Implementation
Years Since FMP Implemented

Panel D: Predicted # of Family Physicians
# of Family Physicians

-0.0002*** -0.0003***
(0.0000)
(0.0001)

First Stage F-test
First State F-test P-value
Panel E: Family Health Center Density
Family Health Center Density
Observations

55264
0.00

36081
0.00

36340
0.00

65543
0.00

-0.026***
(0.0045

-0.042***
(0.010)

-0.033***
(0.009)

-0.0250***
(0.003)

1134

1122

1080

1134

Notes: Regressions are weighted with baseline province populations for the associated age group. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. All models control for province
fixed effects, region-by-year fixed effects, province level linear and quadratic trends, and time varying
province characteristics, which include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles per 1000 persons, log of
per capita GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent of college, log of students per teacher in primary
schools. AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR: Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages
1-4. EMR: Elderly mortality rate.

65

Appendix Table 5: The Impact of Family Medicine Program on Mortality
Balanced Sample (-5 years to +5 years)
(1)
AMR

(2)
IMR

(3)
CMR

(4)
EMR

-0.089**
(0.042)
-0.000
(0.028)

-0.194*
(0.104)
-0.047
(0.065)

-0.197*
(0.113)
0.082
(0.069)

-0.063
(0.038)
-0.009
(0.026)

-0.138***
(0.047)

-0.188
(0.125)

-0.307***
(0.099)

-0.106**
(0.042)

Panel C: Binary Years Since FMP Implementation Indicators
FMP Year 1
-0.039
(0.023)
FMP Year 2
-0.108**
(0.051)
FMP Year >=3 & <=4
-0.250***
(0.090)
FMP Year =5
-0.268**
(0.124)

-0.066
(0.061)
-0.159
(0.126)
-0.283
(0.195)
-0.188
(0.280)

0.025
(0.071)
-0.220
(0.138)
-0.425*
(0.225)
-0.443
(0.353)

-0.041*
(0.023)
-0.079*
(0.045)
-0.201**
(0.082)
-0.217*
(0.111)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0001***
(0.0000)

Variables
Panel A: Binary FMP Indicator
FMP post-Implementation Year Indicator
FMP Year of Implementation Indicator
Panel B: Years Since FMP Implementation
Years Since FMP Implemented

Panel D: Predicted # of Family Physicians
# of Family Physicians

-0.0001*** -0.0001***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)

First Stage F-test
First State F-test P-value
Panel E: Family Health Center Density
Family Health Center Density
Observations

67414
0.00

44015
0.00

41991
0.00

78397
0.00

-0.014***
(0.002)

-0.027***
(0.008)

-0.012
(0.012)

-0.015***
(0.002)

809

799

765

809

Notes: Regressions are weighted with mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. AMR: All age mortality rate. IMR:
Infant mortality rate. CMR: Mortality rate among children ages 1-4. EMR: Elderly mortality rate. All
dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm.

66

