NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOL VOUCHERS:
A SURVEY OF THE ECONOMICS LITERATURE
Dennis Epple
Richard E. Romano
Miguel Urquiola
Working Paper 21523
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21523

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

We thank Roger Gordon for his encouragement to undertake this paper, and Janet Currie and Steven
Durlauf for their invaluable support. We are indebted to Thomas Nechyba and four anonymous referees
for their numerous comments. In addition, we received useful comments from Chelsea Coffin and
Jesse Levin. Of course, these individuals bear no responsibility for errors or opinions herein. We are
grateful to Abby Linn for excellent research assistance, and Romano thanks the Institute for Education
Sciences for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Dennis Epple, Richard E. Romano, and Miguel Urquiola. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

School Vouchers: A Survey of the Economics Literature
Dennis Epple, Richard E. Romano, and Miguel Urquiola
NBER Working Paper No. 21523
September 2015
JEL No. H4,I2
ABSTRACT
We review the theoretical, computational, and empirical research on school vouchers, with a focus
on the latter. In this substantial body of work, many studies find insignificant effects of vouchers on
educational outcomes; however, multiple positive findings support continued exploration. Specifically,
the empirical research on small scale programs does not suggest that awarding students a voucher
is a systematically reliable way to improve educational outcomes. Nevertheless, in some settings, or
for some subgroups or outcomes, vouchers can have a substantial positive effect on those who use
them. Studies of large scale voucher programs find student sorting as a result of their implementation,
although of varying magnitude. Evidence on both small scale and large scale programs suggests that
competition induced by vouchers leads public schools to improve. Moreover, research is making progress
on understanding how vouchers may be designed to limit adverse effects from sorting while preserving
positive effects related to competition. Finally, our sense is that work originating in a single case (e.g.,
a given country) or in a single research approach (e.g., experimental designs) will not provide a full
understanding of voucher effects; fairly wide ranging empirical and theoretical work will be necessary
to make progress.

Dennis Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu
Richard E. Romano
University of Florida
Department of Economics
Gainesville
Florida 32611
richard.romano@warrington.ufl.edu

Miguel Urquiola
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msu2101@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
In the past two decades both research and experience have contributed to significant progress
in the understanding of educational vouchers. We review both. For purposes of this review, we
define a voucher to be a government-supplied coupon that is used to offset tuition at an eligible
private school.1 Programs that distribute such vouchers exhibit variation in dimensions including
who is eligible to receive them, their source of funding, and the criteria for private school
participation. For example, vouchers are frequently “targeted” to low-income students, are
sometimes funded privately rather than through tax proceeds, and religious schools may or may
not be eligible to participate.2
The research that has analyzed these programs seeks to answer five fundamental questions:
1. What effects do vouchers have on the students who use them?
2. Do vouchers induce non-random migration of students from public to private schools,
possibly lowering the achievement of students that remain in the public sector via peer
effects or other channels?
3. Do voucher programs pressure public schools to become more efficient, increasing the
achievement of students that remain in the public sector?
4. What is the net effect of vouchers on aggregate educational performance?
5. What political economy factors determine the existence and design of voucher programs?
Research frequently focuses on more specific questions that help to get at these fundamentals.
Our review begins by describing the issues and controversies that frame the research on these
questions (Section 2).

We set out the “for” and “against” positions typically (and at times

informally) cited on vouchers. The brief discussion is sufficient to show that the answers to

1

For other reviews and discussions see Ladd (2002), Neal (2002), McEwan (2004), Gill et.al. (2007), Levin (2008),
and Barrow and Rouse (2009).
2
This program heterogeneity poses a challenge in determining which programs to classify as voucher programs.
From the perspective of this review, the most difficult decision regards whether to include charter schools under the
voucher umbrella. Most charter school advocates would strenuously resist classifying charter schools as voucher
schools, pointing to state-requirements that the former be chartered as public schools, subjected to the oversight of
the state-designated charter authorizer, and bound by constraints on admissions and funding. The counter-argument
is that, in some states, charter schools can be privately owned and operate under constraints on admission and
financing not markedly different from those imposed by some of the more restrictive voucher programs. While there
is merit to both perspectives, we view the distinction between charters and vouchers to be meaningful despite the
fuzzy boundary between the two, in part because all of the voucher programs we review permit use of the voucher in
private schools. Moreover, there is tremendous heterogeneity in charter school characteristics, both across and
within states, making inclusion of charters in this review unwieldy if not unmanageable. Hence, we have chosen not
to include research on charter schools in this review. See Epple, Romano, and Zimmer (2014) for a review of
research on charter schools.

2

questions 1-5 can depend on both the characteristics of the program analyzed and the context
into which it is introduced.
We then summarize the features of voucher programs that have been implemented
throughout the world (Section 3). We make a distinction between two program types. First, by
small scale programs we mean those that place significant restrictions on who can receive
vouchers. The most common restrictions involve income or geography; for instance, vouchers
may be made available only to low income children in a given municipality within a country.
Second, by large scale programs we mean those in which vouchers are distributed countrywide
with minimal restrictions on the type of children who can use them.
We then present a brief synopsis of the theoretical literature (Section 4). It reveals that even
in a qualitative sense the answers to questions 1-5 depend on voucher design.

The main

exception surrounds question 2, where most models suggest that voucher systems will display a
tendency towards stratification by ability and/or income—although this too can be mitigated by
design and depends on context.
Finally, we turn to reviewing the empirical work—the focus of this survey (Section 5). In
terms of question 1, the empirical research does not suggest that awarding students a voucher is a
systematically reliable way to improve their educational outcomes. A perhaps surprisingly large
proportion of the most rigorous studies suggest that being awarded a voucher has an effect that is
statistically indistinguishable from zero.

Nevertheless, there is also evidence that in some

settings, or for some subgroups or specific outcomes, vouchers can have a substantial positive
effect on those who use them. Regarding question 2, there is evidence that large scale voucher
programs lead to sorting, although the magnitude of the effect varies across settings. In terms of
question 3, the literature generally suggests that competition from vouchers leads public schools
to improve.

That said it also makes clear that it is very difficult to isolate the effect of

competition on public sector value added (the object of interest); this reflects that as implied by
the answer to question 2, vouchers typically lead to sorting and can thus affect public schools
through channels other than productivity enhancements. Taken together, these findings point to
an ambiguous answer to question 4 regarding the net effect of vouchers. Finally, empirical work
finds support for theoretical predictions regarding the political economy of voucher adoption.
Our “bottom line” assessment is that those hoping for definitive answers to questions 1-5 will
not find them in the research to date.

In that respect, the effects of vouchers have been

disappointing relative to early views on their promise. That said, our view is also that the record
definitely warrants continued exploration. This assessment reflects three factors. First and as
3

stated, there is evidence that in some cases vouchers can have significant positive effects on
educational performance, or at least produce substantial cost savings. Second, there is some
indication that the prevalence of such results might be increased with improved voucher design.
For instance, the accumulated research has begun to provide guidance regarding how voucher
programs may be formulated to limit adverse effects related to sorting while preserving
achievement-enhancing effects related to competition. Third, there is evidence that the returns to
a well-functioning education system can be large, with the associated implication that a good
understanding of voucher design could be very useful.
A final note is that given the evidence we have reviewed, our sense is that work originating
in a single case (e.g. a given country) or in a single research approach (e.g. randomized control
trials) is unlikely to fully answer questions 1-5. The work on vouchers suggests that educational
markets are complex, and that therefore fairly wide ranging empirical and theoretical work will
be necessary to make progress.

2.

The Issues
To provide perspective for our review, we begin with an overview of the types of issues

theoretical and empirical research on vouchers must address. These issues are complex, in part
because the effect of a voucher program depends on both its design and the institutional and
economic setting in which it is introduced. For instance, the effects may depend on the size of
the program and also on the alternative: What educational provision regime would prevail
without the voucher program? The “effects” that are of interest is itself a fundamental issue.
What is the social objective?
To introduce these issues, we list some classic claims that frame the voucher controversy—
and virtually everything about vouchers remains controversial—without discussing any
literature. This listing will begin to illustrate the challenges that research on voucher faces, and
our hope is that the subsequent review will help to clarify what issues remain the most unsettled.
We begin simply by stating some arguments for and against vouchers, essentially as they are
commonly expressed.
The arguments in favor of vouchers include:

4

•

Vouchers would lead to market or quasi-market provision of education, with competition
among providers and choice by students inducing efficient provision.3 The alternative of
public provision is characterized by weak incentives, both because public providers are
politically managed and monopolized, and because the exercise of student choice is limited.
Thus, both static and dynamic efficiency would be promoted by vouchers, with gains coming
both from private school advantages and a public school response.

•

Market provision would lead to educational variety, better matching preferences to supply.
Diversity would increase with respect to aspects like curricula and teaching methodology, an
improvement over the excessive homogeneity associated with monopolized public provision.

•

While there might be concerns regarding externalities from educational attainment (for
example, a modern democratic society requires citizens literate in a common language),
restrictions on private providers could address these. Similarly, the level of the voucher
would address capital market failures affecting educational investment.4

•

By decoupling residence and school choice, vouchers would increase access to quality
education, especially for students at the low end of the socioeconomic ladder. Stratified
educational provision wherein quality rises with socioeconomic status would be reduced. In
short, vouchers would provide both efficiency and equity gains.5
The arguments against vouchers include:

•

Vouchers would lead to the sorting of students across schools along characteristics like
income and ability (such sorting often referred to as stratification). For example, the private
sector might “cream skim” the highest income or most motivated children away from public
schools. Teachers would sort as well—the most advantaged students would be taught by the
best teachers and the least advantaged by the worst.

•

Such sorting would have negative consequences due to peer effects. These would arise
directly, for example, if the ability to interact with higher achieving peers helps students to
learn or to acquire useful networks. Peer effects could also reflect indirect mechanisms, e.g.,
if school oversight of wealthier parents disciplines school administrators and teachers.

3

In our discussion, we will refer to the student and the student’s household as just the “student.”
If necessary, this could be supplemented with policies supporting educational loans.
5
Additionally, a more philosophical argument for vouchers rests on the substitution of student choice for public
choice. As noted, the traditional economic version of this argument emphasizes better matching of preferences to
educational supply. The non-economic version of the argument places value on freedom of choice per se, while
rejecting the paternalistic alternative. Since the literature we review considers mainly economic outcomes and
considerations, we abstract from such issues.
4

5

•

Even if peer effects do not exist, sorting would adversely affect less advantaged students
through informational channels. For example, being at a “bad” school could stigmatize
students in the labor market, affecting their incentives to study. Further, sorting might be
detrimental if the mixing of students along categories such as race and religion promotes
mutual understanding valuable in a diverse society.

•

If it is more expensive to educate disadvantaged students, then stratification would impose
costs on the public sector. In as much as the public sector continues to serve a segment of
students, political support for funding of public schools would be reduced by vouchers,
compounding the problem.

•

Choice by students who are not well informed about educational quality could lead to poorer
choices than decisions by policy makers. Poor choice could regard the focus of education as
well as the quality.
These “for” and “against” positions make clear that research faces a tall order in

understanding the impact of vouchers. For example, a small scale voucher system might produce
no sorting response, and its evaluation will therefore not address concerns related to
stratification. Similarly, a scheme that does not generate large scale entry of new schools may
not reveal gains from curricular variety.
The usual arguments also implicitly assume “universal vouchers,” which are available to all
students. In many cases, including programs in the U.S., vouchers are “targeted” to poorer
households, meaning available only to students whose household income falls below a threshold.
Income targeting of vouchers is intended to provide access to better educational alternatives to
students who cannot afford to buy expensive housing in neighborhoods with good public
schools, or to pay tuition to attend a private school. Such targeting would seem to weaken both
the “for” and “against” arguments about vouchers, presenting another challenge to research on
vouchers. For example, the net aggregate effect of a targeted voucher program could be very
different from that of a universal voucher program.
Another crucial design feature of voucher programs regards the extent and character of
regulations imposed on schools that accept vouchers.

For example, a school that accepts

voucher-supported students might or might not be required to accept all applicants, or use an
equal-probability lottery when applications exceed slots. Participating schools may or may not
be allowed to charge additional tuition and, if allowed, might be regulated with respect to

6

whether they can price discriminate.6 Any of these traits will influence the type of sorting that
vouchers can generate.7
Other issues concern not the design of the voucher program but the environment into which it
is introduced. For instance, the extent of “take up” of vouchers and the ease of entry of vouchersupported schools will vary with the population’s density and preferences. In addition, the initial
public provision regime may or may not already provide a degree of choice and sorting. For
example, magnet public schools might exist or ability tracking might be practiced in the public
sector. The baseline equilibrium may or may not have substantial Tiebout (1956) sorting by
income and preference for education. Private schools might already attract a substantial number
of students.
The thematic message is that it is an oversimplification to view research on vouchers as a
simple test of market versus nonmarket provision of education.

Nonmarket provision of

education is anything but uniform, and a voucher program need not correspond to a pure market
substitute.

3. Voucher Programs
This section describes the characteristics of existing voucher programs in a total of eight
countries. Given space constraints our aim is not to do full justice to the details of these complex
programs, but rather to provide the reader with useful background and references that will be
relevant in our review of the empirical literature.
As stated we make a distinction between small scale and large scale voucher programs. This
will be relevant in our review of the empirical literature, since each type of program has analytic
advantages and disadvantages for conducting research. We classify voucher programs as small
scale when voucher eligibility is restricted geographically to only part of an education market
(e.g. only the central-city school district in a metropolitan area) or vouchers are targeted based on
individual characteristics (e.g. only low income children are eligible), or based on school
performance (e.g. only students in underperforming schools are eligible). Conversely, large
scale programs are those in which the distribution of vouchers is largely unrestricted within the

6

Of course, admission and tuition restrictions are closely intertwined: Requiring a school to admit all voucher
applicants but letting it discriminate in tuition can render the former restriction moot.
7
Sufficient regulation on voucher-supported providers, such that providers are essentially public, would violate our
definition of a voucher program, though the threshold of regulations is blurry.

7

education market—all children in a country are eligible. A large scale program need not, in
principle, be a nationwide program (e.g., a voucher available to all students in the New York
metropolitan area would be a large program). In practice, however, all large scale programs are
nationwide.

3.1 Small scale programs
We begin by describing the small scale programs in the U.S., the country which has produced
the greatest number. This section also describes small scale programs in Colombia and India.

3.1.1 United States
The U.S. has a highly decentralized education system in which states and districts have
significant control over local schools. This has produced a large number of small scale voucher
programs—about 65 by an admittedly rough count. We do not discuss each in detail; rather we
summarize the characteristics of three types of programs that vary according to how vouchers are
funded:
•

Programs funded by tax revenues. We summarize the characteristics of 9 in this category,
providing additional detail on the largest and oldest, that operating in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

•

Programs funded via tax credits. We summarize the traits of 7 in this group, elaborating
briefly on the largest, that operating in Florida.

•

Programs funded by private foundations. We summarize the typical characteristics of about
50 in this class, highlighting those operated by the Children’s Scholarship Fund.

Distinguishing U.S. programs by their source of funding is for convenience. Nothing suggests
that the source of funding per se will influence program effects, though some program
characteristics tend to vary by funding source, as we discuss. We also provide further detail on
some programs in our discussion of the empirical research in Section 5.8

8

These three categories do not include all small-scale voucher-type public programs. Specifically, since the 1800s
Maine and Vermont have programs that give students in sparsely populated areas an alternative to public provision.
Students can use vouchers to attend a non-religious private school. In Vermont, for example, the voucher is for the
lesser of average public schooling cost or tuition. In 2001-02 there were 90 “tuitioning towns” as they are called,
with 7,147 students participating. There are also programs that target special needs students that, in the interest of
space, we do not discuss here.

8

Tax revenue-funded programs
Table 1 provides a summary of the main tax-funded voucher programs in the U.S.9 All of
these programs apply for grades K-12, and almost all are targeted to students in low-income
households or schools designated as underperforming. Programs vary in age, ranging from
Milwaukee, which started in 1990, to New Orleans, which started in 2008. Programs also vary
substantially in the number of students receiving vouchers. Several programs require that
oversubscribed voucher schools choose students by lottery. Others permit private schools to
apply the same admission criteria for voucher as for non-voucher students. Funding per student
varies across programs, but most provide sufficient resources to attract participation of a
substantial number of private schools. Vouchers may be used in religious schools in all of these
programs. All now require that voucher recipients take the same standardized examinations as
public school students. While not detailed in the table, all programs require participating schools
to meet curricular and other criteria. Some programs (e.g., Milwaukee) require schools to be preaccredited by an approved national agency; some (e.g., Ohio) require that schools obtain a state
charter, and others require annual reporting to an oversight body.
Milwaukee is in many respects the most important voucher program in the U.S. and has
served as a model for others; it therefore merits additional discussion. The Milwaukee Parental
Choice Program was introduced in 1990 in the Milwaukee school district, targeting K-12
students with household income not exceeding 175% of the federal poverty level.

At its

inception, the program was not available to students attending religious schools. That changed in
1998, with students enrolled in religious schools retaining the right to opt out of religious
instruction. The voucher pays the lesser of tuition at a private school and the standard district
allocation, $6,442 in 2010.

Initially, schools could not charge additional tuition. Beginning in

2011, high schools were permitted to charge additional tuition to eligible students above 220% of
the poverty line. Transportation is provided by the district if the student is within a set attendance
area. Participating private schools set the number of available slots for voucher students, and
must accept all students, conducting a lottery if over-subscribed. They must also be accredited
by one of several agencies. Private schools must also meet at least one of the following four
performance standards:10 i) at least 70% of voucher-supported students must advance a grade
level, ii) frequency of attendance by voucher students must be at least 90%, iii) at least 80% of
9

Though we discuss programs in the present tense, the Florida program described in Table 1, known as the Florida
Opportunity Scholarship Program (FOSP), was declared unconstitutional and suspended in 2006.
10
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter PI 35, P. 117.

9

program students must demonstrate significant academic progress, or iv) at least 70% of
voucher-student families must meet parental involvement criteria set by the school.
The income threshold for eligibility has been on an upward trend. It was raised from the
initial 175% of the federal poverty level to 220% in 2005, and 300% more recently. This allowed
the program’s coverage to grow. In 2004 it distributed about 24,000 vouchers, accounting for
about 23% of total district enrollments.

By 2002, 102 private schools were participating,

including 26 schools reported as entering as a result of the voucher program (Carnoy et. al.,
2007).

Tax credit-funded programs
We next turn to tax-credit funded voucher programs, summarized in Table 2.11 The operation
and funding of one of the earliest, the Florida Corporate Income Tax Credit Scholarship Program
(FTC), illustrates similarities and differences between these programs and the tax-funded
programs summarized in Table 1. The FTC was established in 2001 and is financed by corporate
contributions, for which donors get a 100% corporate income tax credit for contributions that do
not exceed 75% of their tax liability. Total contributions are capped at 88 million dollars
currently. Vouchers are for free- or reduced-lunch students and the program is administered by
approved non-profit agencies. In 2012 the FTC awarded about 51,000 vouchers to students
attending about 1,300 schools. This makes it the largest voucher program in the U.S.—roughly
twice the size of Milwaukee, although relative to a much larger population.
As shown in Table 2, the average voucher per student among tax credit-funded programs was
$4,335 in the 2012 school year. Private schools may impose their own admission policies,
restricted only by anti-discrimination statutes, and can charge tuition in addition to the voucher
so long as this is their normal policy.

Privately funded programs

11

The tax-credit funded programs detailed in Table 2 are to be distinguished from state income tax credit and
deduction programs available to households for educational expenses that currently exist in Arizona, Minnesota,
Illinois, and Louisiana. Given restrictions on amounts, eligibility, and state income taxation, these programs have
limited effects. For example, the most recently passed program in Louisiana in 2008, allows taxpayers to deduct
from the state income tax 50% of educational expenses, up to the minimum of $5,000 per child or the total taxable
income of the individual. With the maximum marginal income tax of 6% in Louisiana, the maximum subsidy to
educational expenditure is below $300.

10

Roughly 50 privately funded voucher programs also exist in the U.S.12

The largest

sponsoring organization is the Children’s Scholarship Fund (CSF), and a brief description of its
operation illustrates key characteristics of this type of program. The CSF received a founding
contribution from the Walton Family Foundation and has provided vouchers to low-income
students in numerous municipalities including New York City, Charlotte, Dayton, Baltimore, and
Washington, D.C. In 1999, it received 1.25 million applicants for 40,000 vouchers.
Its Baltimore program is typical. It targets low-income students in grades K-8. In 2008 it
distributed vouchers to 490 students attending 70 private schools, 64 of which were religious.
The average voucher was $1,759 and the maximum was $2,000. Families are required to pay at
least $500 themselves, and their average payment was $2,711. All privately funded programs of
which we are aware are similarly targeted, typically by income, and some to racial/ethnic groups.
Some also target students that are identified as having high academic potential but limited
means.
3.1.2 Colombia13

Small scale voucher programs are much less common outside the U.S., but Colombia
provided a salient if short-lived example. Specifically, in 1992 it began operating the PACES
secondary school voucher program.14 This initiative was launched to increase secondary school
enrollment—the intent was for private participation to help ease public sector capacity
constraints. The vouchers, which were renewable contingent on grade completion, were targeted
at entering students who were: i) residing in low-income neighborhoods,15 ii) attending public
school, and iii) accepted at a participating private school.
The initiative was implemented at the municipal level, with the national government covering
about 80 percent of its cost, and municipalities contributing the remainder. Resource constraints
at both governmental levels resulted in excess demand in most jurisdictions. When this
happened, the vouchers were generally allocated by lottery.16
12

This calculation counts separately programs in different municipalities that are administered by the same
organization.
13
For further reference see King et al. (1997), King et al. (1998), and Angrist et al. (2002), on which this discussion
is based.
14
PACES stands for “program for increasing secondary school enrollment.”
15
Colombia had a scheme by which neighborhoods were classified into six strata depending on income; only
children in the two poorest strata were eligible for vouchers.
16
Angrist et al. (2002) present evidence consistent with these lotteries generating random allocation in the cities of
Bogota and Cali, and use this to evaluate PACES, as discussed below.

11

The voucher covered registration and tuition payments, up to a maximum. Specifically, its
value increased with schools’ fees up to about $150 dollars per year. Angrist et al. (2002) note
this was roughly equivalent to the cost of a low-to-mid price private school, and that it was
common for recipients to supplement this amount. At the program’s inception, any private
school authorized to operate by the Ministry of Education could take vouchers, although more
expensive schools generally did not. Starting in 1996, and following well-publicized reports of
perceived low quality at specific private schools, participation was restricted to not-for-profit
institutions.
By 1995, the year of peak activity, about 90,000 students were using vouchers to attend
roughly 1,800 private voucher schools. These students accounted for about 1 percent of all
secondary-level enrollments in Colombia (King et al., 1997). Subsequent declines reflected
funding constraints that cut both the number of vouchers and their maximum value. The program
was discontinued in 1997.
3.1.3 India17
India provides an interesting example of a small scale voucher experiment that, like many in
the U.S., is privately funded.

Specifically, in 2008 the Azim Premji Foundation began

distributing vouchers in five districts of the state of Andhra Pradesh, focusing on 180 villages
that each contained at least one legally operating private school. Baseline tests were conducted
at all private and public schools in these villages.
All the test takers in public schools were then invited to apply for vouchers, with the
knowledge that these would be allocated randomly. Students and parents were informed that the
vouchers would cover all school fees and materials (e.g. textbooks, uniforms, shoes), but not
transportation costs. Students in public schools are typically of lower socioeconomic status, and
many found this offer attractive.
Private schools were given the option to join the program, with the understanding that the
value of the voucher would be paid directly to them and was equivalent to about the 90th
percentile of the distribution of all private school fees in the 180 villages.18 In joining, private
schools had to specify how many slots they would make available for voucher recipients. The
17

This discussion is based on Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015).
The full voucher amount is paid directly to the school, which is in charge of distributing uniforms, textbooks, and
other materials. Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) state that this arrangement reflects common practice among
private schools in India.
18

12

main condition placed upon these schools related to non-selection. If space permitted they
would have to admit all voucher winners; if they were oversubscribed they had to enroll those
selected via a lottery run by the funder.
This program featured a unique randomization, which took place in two stages. First, 90
villages were randomly selected to receive vouchers, and 90 remained in a control group.
Second, within the 90 treatment villages, about 3,000 households had applied for vouchers.
About 2,000 were randomly selected to receive them, and about 1,200 of these actually used
them. As we will discuss below, this double randomization has analytic advantages.

3.2. Large scale programs
We now turn to describing large scale programs. The fact that they distribute vouchers without
targeting implies that these have the potential to have a greater effect on educational markets,
although this impact ultimately depends on their design and on the context into which they are
introduced. Table 3 summarizes five cases we consider, highlighting variation in the percentage
of enrollments at independent schools and whether these schools can: operate for-profit,
implement selective admissions policies, have a religious affiliation, and charge tuition above the
voucher. The remainder of this section discusses these on a case-by-case basis.
3.2.1 Chile19

In 1981 Chile introduced a universal voucher scheme. Prior to this reform, three types of
schools were in operation: i) public schools were managed by the national Ministry of Education
and accounted for about 80 percent of enrollments, ii) unsubsidized private schools catered to
upper-income households, and accounted for about 6 percent of enrollments, and iii) subsidized
private schools did not charge tuition, received limited lump-sum subsidies, were often Catholic,
and accounted for roughly 14 percent of enrollments.
The 1981 reform had two main components. First, it transferred public school management to
municipalities, simultaneously awarding them a per-student subsidy sufficient to cover their
costs. Second, subsidized (or “voucher”) private schools began to receive exactly the same perstudent subsidy as municipal schools. These changes resulted in substantial private school entry.
19

For further background see Gauri (1998), McEwan and Carnoy (2000), Mizala and Romaguera (2000), Hsieh and
Urquiola (2006), and Mizala and Urquiola (2013).

13

By 2009, about 57% of all students attended private schools, with voucher schools alone
accounting for about 50%.20
Chile’s scheme imposes few restrictions on private schools. These can receive voucher
subsidies regardless of their religious status, and can operate for-profit. They are allowed to
implement admissions policies subject to few restrictions and, as of 1994, can charge tuition addons.21 The latter are capped at about four times the voucher payment, but this constraint rarely
binds.22 Public schools operate under more restrictions. They are not allowed to turn away
students unless oversubscribed, and cannot charge tuition at the primary level. All schools must
implement elements of a national curriculum and participate in annual standardized exams, the
results of which have been public since the 1990s.23
Recent years have seen further reforms. Since 1997 schools charging tuition add-ons are
required to provide exemptions on these for a percentage of low income students. In 2008 the
flat voucher became differentiated: it was increased for low income students. However, not all
schools receive these additional subsides as they have to comply with a number of conditions to
receive them.
Even further significant reforms to the voucher system are under active discussion, in part in
reaction to persistent student protests. The current Bachelet administration has submitted to
congress a proposal with three main ingredients: i) the elimination of tuition top-ups, ii) the end
of the ability of private voucher schools to operate for profit, and iii) the introduction of a
significant reduction of the ability of private schools to select students. The proposals are still
under discussion, and the details of implementation remain to be seen.
3.2.2 Denmark24

Denmark has a long tradition of subsidizing independent schools. Since the Free School Act
of 1855, it has allowed parents and organizations to set up independent schools to which any

20

The “elite” unsubsidized private schools continued to account for about 6 percent of enrollments.
Over the years education-related legislation often mentions that private schools should not select students. The
anecdotal evidence indicates that this rarely binds—for instance no admissions lotteries are required. We return to
this issue below.
22
Most of the “elite” unsubsidized private schools could take vouchers but choose not to; see Urquiola and
Verhoogen (2009).
23
These tests have been used for purposes of accountability and targeting. For instance, Chay, McEwan, and
Urquiola (2005) consider a program that targeted the 900 worst performing schools in the country.
24
For further discussion see Justesen (2002), on which this discussion is based.
21

14

child can apply, and which are allowed to have religious affiliations. Historically, these schools
were funded through a scheme by which the State reimbursed a large portion of their expenses.
In 1992 this system was replaced with one that provides independent schools with a grant
based on the number of pupils enrolled by a certain date. Public schools continue to be financed
by a combination of national and local government allocations; they do not receive per-student
payments.
The voucher-type payment for independent schools is indexed to expenditures in public
schools and varies with two factors: school size (with higher payments for smaller schools to
account for economies of scale) and the age distribution of students and teachers. These
payments cover only about 80 percent of average educational costs, and independent schools are
therefore allowed to charge tuition (low income households can apply for waivers) or seek
external grants to cover the remainder. Despite this, total per-pupil expenditures are slightly
lower in the independent school sector.25 By 2005 independent schools accounted for about 12
percent of enrollments. They operate subject to nationwide collective agreements with teachers,
and to basic curricular requirements that leave them relatively broad pedagogical autonomy.

3.2.3

Holland26

The Dutch 1848 constitution allows for churches, foundations, and parental associations to
set up independent school boards that operate schools to which any child can apply. The 1917
constitution further includes commitments of equal financial support for public and independent
schools. While both types of schools receive funds for infrastructure, a substantial part of
schools’ support is in the form of a per-pupil grant, with greater payments when they enroll
children of low socioeconomic status.
While this system was initially set up to allow for transfers to Catholic and Protestant
schools, at present it also covers schools with other religious affiliations. Nevertheless a majority
of independent schools still identify as Protestant or Catholic, with enrollment shares of 27 and
29 percent, respectively. The public sector’s share is 35 percent, with the remaining 9 percent of
children in schools of other types. Independent schools must be run on a not-for-profit basis and
“top up” tuition charges are not allowed. In addition, these schools must implement at least parts
of a core national curriculum, participate in national standardized exams, and comply with
25

Justesen (2002) indicates that in the aggregate, 77 percent of independent schools' resources come from vouchertype payments, 18 percent from user fees, and the remaining 5 percent from other external sources.
26
For further reference see Justesen (2002), Patrinos (2002), and Levin (2004), on which this discussion is based.

15

regulations regarding aspects like class size, teacher qualifications, and minimum enrollments.
Private schools implement selection policies and may deny admission for various reasons,
including religious affiliation.
3.2.4 New Zealand27

In 1989 New Zealand implemented a decentralization initiative transferring control of each
public school from a national department of education to a “Board of Trustees”—largely
consisting of parents—elected locally. In 1991 this system was extended by granting per-pupil
funding to all schools, including independent and “integrated” institutions. The latter are schools
which, while being institutionally independent, had been affiliated with the public system since
the 1970s; most, though not all, have a religious affiliation. At present, the enrollment shares of
public, integrated, and independent schools are 85, 11, and 4 percent respectively.
These arrangements put in place a key ingredient of a voucher system—schools that attract
more students receive greater funding. That said, they depart from the textbook voucher in some
ways. First, not all schools receive the same per-student funding. Public schools receive
subsidies for teacher salaries, operational costs, and capital expenses; integrated schools are only
compensated for teacher salaries and operational costs; and independent schools receive only a
portion of the per-student payments awarded to integrated schools (the percentage has fluctuated
around 30 percent over the years). Second, public and integrated schools do not have control
over teacher pay; pay scales are centrally determined for all but the independent schools.
In addition, while public schools may supplement their central subsidies via fundraising
activities and donations, they are not allowed to charge mandatory fees. Integrated schools are
allowed to collect donations and charge compulsory “attendance dues” to meet capital costs.
Independent schools can charge fees.
The 1991 legislation allowed all schools wide latitude in setting up admissions procedures.
For example, admissions policies could specify a catchment area, sibling preferences, and the use
of parental interviews. Lubienski, Lee, and Gordon (2013) point out that some restrictions on
selection were implemented in the 1990s. These mainly related to transparency in stating the
selection criteria and the specification of catchment areas (there had been objections around the
fact that children living very close to a given school might not gain access to it). Nevertheless
schools retain wide latitude in selecting students.
27

This description is based on Ladd and Fiske (2001), Adams (2009), and Lubienski, Lee, and Gordon (2013).

16

3.2.5 Sweden28

Prior to the early 1990s, almost all Swedish children (about 99 percent) attended municipal
schools. While controlled by local jurisdictions, municipal schools were funded by earmarked
transfers originating in the national government, which also directly hired teachers. Beginning in
1991 these arrangements underwent reforms which had four main components. First, the
government turned the earmarked funds into largely lump sum subsidies, with municipalities
gaining latitude in financial management. Second, municipalities became teachers’ official
employers, obtaining the ability to negotiate pay and terminate employment. Through 1996,
however, the national government largely fixed teacher pay as a function of credentials and
experience (Hensvik, 2012). Beginning in 1996, salaries were determined by negotiation at the
local level. Although these negotiations allowed for greater pay differentials, their outcomes
continued to be constrained by agreements at the national level.29 Third, “open enrollment” plans
were instituted at the municipal level, such that in principle students could attend any school in
their jurisdiction; in practice, distance to school continued to be a criterion for admission. Fourth,
independent schools were given the right to receive municipal funding as well—the government
mandated that municipalities fund them with a per-student payment equivalent to the resources
they would have spent themselves. In practice, these payments equal about 80 percent of per
student costs at municipal schools.30
Independent schools must be approved by the National Agency for Education. While
municipalities can raise objections regarding specific institutions that apply for approval, they do
not have veto power. Independent schools may be operated on a for-profit or non-profit basis;
they can be religious or secular, and they can focus on specific ethnic groups or languages. In all
cases, however, independent schools must be open to all students—regardless of their
municipality of origin, ethnicity, or religion—and they cannot charge tuition beyond the voucher.
Further, grades cannot be used as admissions criteria at the compulsory level. Instead, proximity
to the school, wait list (first-come, first-served), and sibling presence at a school determine

28

For further reference see Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005) and Bohlmark and Lindahl (2007) on which this
discussion is based.
29
There were two five-year agreements between the central government and the teachers union. The first raised
teacher pay by 10% over five years and the second, beginning in 2000, by 20%. Hence, local negotiations were
constrained by minimum pay requirements set at the national level.
30
Further, if a student crosses municipal lines, the locality losing him has to make a similar transfer to the
municipality that accommodates the student.

17

priority. Ability-based admissions are allowed at the secondary level. Top-up funding is not
permitted. Ownership of a school is unrestricted, and hence can be religious, for-profit, or nonprofit.
Bohlmark and Lindahl (2012) point out that there was relatively little voucher school entry
through 1998; at that point, the independent school share began to grow. By 2004, the
independent school enrollment rate reached 10% for high schools and 6 percent for primary and
lower secondary. By 2009, independent schools accounted for roughly 10% of all students. The
reasons for the relative lack of voucher school entry for the first several years are unclear. These
could include anything from a lack of information or risk aversion on the part of parents, to the
fact that the 1996 relaxation of centralized wage setting might have allowed independent schools
to compete more effectively.

4. Theory
In this review our primary emphasis is on empirical research (a comprehensive review of
theoretical and computational research is provided by Epple and Romano, 2012). Nonetheless,
this section provides a brief summary of the theoretical literature with an emphasis on empirical
and policy implications.
The case for a market-based educational voucher was laid out by Milton Friedman (1962),
who provided a vision for voucher design and an enumeration of the benefits that he foresaw
from voucher adoption. He supported public funding of education on the grounds that such
funding was warranted by the social externalities flowing from an educated population and due
to borrowing constraints, but argued that public funding need not imply public provision. He
envisioned a system in which parents could choose a school for their child with public funding
going to the chosen school. The role of government would be to provide funding while
“…insuring that schools meet certain minimum standards, such as inclusion of minimum
common content in programs…” (p. 89). Implicit in this government role would be assurance
that voucher funds be spent on education. Friedman argued that competition for students would
induce schools to operate efficiently and reward quality teaching, with effective schools
establishing good reputations. The poor would have educational choices not bound by the
residence restrictions embodied in neighborhood public school systems. In Friedman’s view, the
education environment was not sufficiently different from other market settings to interfere
significantly with effective functioning of such a marketplace for education.
18

More recent research has modeled educational vouchers taking account of distinctive features
of the education environment. Table 4 provides a summary of the characteristics of models that
we discuss in this section. The delineation of model characteristics in Table 4 is imperfect and
does not, of course, fully describe differences across papers. For example, the table indicates
whether the vouchers that are studied are targeted, but does not indicate the type of targeting,
which varies in important ways across studies. Likewise, there are important differences in what
makes public schools heterogeneous in the models that have such differentiation.
discussion below, these modelling differences are highlighted.

In the

In reviewing this recent

literature, we make reference to how it helps to address the five fundamental questions on
vouchers that we set out in Section 1.
A central theme that emerges is that the answers to these questions depend on voucher
design. Regarding question 2, virtually all theoretical analyses predict that a laissez-faire design
will induce “cream skimming” with the associated implication for question 1 that some students
will gain more than others; and, some will be made worse off unless the effects on public school
performance (question 3) are substantial. Theoretical models are often paired with a
computational counterpart to quantify magnitudes, distributional effects, and, with respect to
question 4, net impacts. As problematic implications of the laissez-faire design have become
better understood, research has increasingly emphasized ways in which benefits from voucherinduced competition can be obtained without adverse distributional effects. While the natural
focus with regard to question 1 is on educational outcomes, theory has also developed interesting
implications regarding impacts on residential choice and housing values, and the connection to
voucher design. Regarding question 3, theoretical research has identified potential sources of
efficiency gains from educational competition as well as ways that public school performance
might be adversely affected. Failures of voucher proposals at the ballot box have motivated
research addressing question 5.

4.1 The effects of vouchers
The theoretical and computational literature typically begins from a characterization of the
educational environment while taking the existence and characteristics of vouchers as
exogenous. The question then is how the introduction of a given voucher program into a school
“market” affects: school effectiveness, the distribution of outcomes and welfare across students,
the distribution of students across schools, tax revenues, public school expenditures, residences,
19

and property values. In our discussion below, we draw out the predictions of theoretical models,
while also noting those that have not yet received empirical testing.
Manski (1992) pioneered this type of approach developing a theoretical and computational
model that captures features of the educational environment including:

public and private

sectors between which students can choose; students differing by household income and
motivation, with demand for educational quality rising with income and motivation; a positive
peer externality from highly motivated students; educational quality determined by expenditure
per student and peer quality; analysis of alternative public sector objectives including rent
seeking; and zero-profit private schools that set tuition to maximize enrollments with tuition and
a voucher spent on educational inputs.31 Manski uses this setup to assess if vouchers would
induce changes that equalized educational opportunity.

The simulations and outcomes he

considers are numerous, but overall the conclusion is that vouchers are not a “panacea.” A key
prediction is that, as the voucher level rises, the fraction of highly motivated students in the
public schools tends to fall, especially in poor communities. He states that “even in the most
favorable case, a systemic choice system would not come close to equalizing educational
opportunity across income groups.” Thus, Manski’s analysis predicts that cream skimming of
the sort raised in question 2 will adversely affect less motivated students.
Epple and Romano (1998) study private and public school competition when students vary in
ability and household income, and school quality increases with peer ability. Private schools
maximize profits and can price discriminate, i.e., charge tuition that varies with student ability
and income. Schools have fixed costs, as well as variable costs that are an increasing convex
function of enrollment, i.e., cost per student is U-shaped in enrollment. The model gives rise to
the following predictions. First, because school quality increases with peer ability, private
schools charge lower tuitions (i.e. provide more financial aid) for high ability students. Second,
higher income households with low ability students pay a tuition premium to enable their
children to attend high quality schools. Thus, the school system will have a general tendency
towards stratification in two respects. There will be stratification across schools within the
private school sector, and there will be stratification between the public and private sectors.
Moreover, private schools will be differentiated in quality and will exhibit “diagonal
stratification,” with each private school having a student body that is a “diagonal slice” in the
31

While Manski describes students as varying in motivation, we label such variation as “aptitude” in Table 4.
Many authors describe students as varying in ability, and we have just chosen one term in the table to describe
student variation along these lines. Note, too, that Manski considers rent-seeking public schools as we indicate in
Table 4, but also other objectives.

20

income-ability plane. The lowest income and lowest ability students will attend public schools.
Thus, the model predicts that there will be a higher correlation between income and ability in
public than in private schools.32 The model predicts that introduction of a universal (flat-rate)
voucher will induce additional private schools to enter, with each entering school being of lower
quality than the preceding entrant, and each exhibiting the diagonal stratification pattern. As the
amount of the voucher increases, average peer quality in the public schools is predicted to
decline as private entrants “cream skim” higher income and higher ability students from the
public schools. If a comparatively low voucher is introduced, those switching to private schools
will attend a school with higher peer quality than the public-sector school they depart. As the
voucher level is increased, however, students who are induced to switch to private school exit a
public-school sector whose peer quality has been diminished by cream skimming to a private
school with comparatively low peer quality. Thus, regarding questions 1 and 3, the model
predicts that there will be high achieving voucher schools serving the relatively more able and
affluent, lower achieving voucher schools serving the relatively less able and affluent, and a
public school sector with lower achievement still. Epple and Romano (2008) extend this setup to
show that these properties persist when school quality depends on expenditure per student in
addition to peer quality.33
Could all students nonetheless have improved educational outcomes with the voucher? If
private schools have an educational approach that is sufficiently superior to that of the public
schools they supplant, and if the remaining public schools are induced by competition to adopt a
superior delivery approach, all students might have higher achievement than in the no-voucher
equilibrium. Computational analysis calibrated to the U.S. context suggests, however, that some
students will benefit from the voucher, the comparatively more able and affluent, while others,
the comparatively less able and affluent, will be hurt. Regarding question 4, the effect on
normed aggregate achievement (equal to future earnings) may be positive or negative depending
on the extent to which private school education delivery is more effective than pre-existing
public schools, and the extent to which public schools upgrade delivery in response to
competition. In summary, the model yields unambiguous predictions about stratification, private32

These and other predictions of the model are tested in Epple, Figlio, and Romano (2004) and are found to be
supported by the data.
33
One additional finding is that low-quality “bottom feeder” schools may enter when vouchers are available,
providing financial aid “kickbacks” to induce low-income households to choose low-quality schools. It is shown that
this can be prevented by a mandate that the voucher be spent on education. Theoretical models have generally
assumed that kickbacks are not allowed. The incentive to kick back monies to poor students raises the related
question as to whether vouchers would lead schools to provide non-educational goods to students as a way around a
requirement to spend all of a voucher on education.

21

school pricing, and relative achievement across the predicted school hierarchy, while predicted
aggregate effects depend on the impact of vouchers on educational effectiveness. It bears
emphasis that these predictions are for a universal (flat-rate) voucher design, the Chilean voucher
(at least in roughly its first two and a half decades) being perhaps the closest observed
counterpart.
Epple and Romano (2008) also investigate the implications of voucher design for cream
skimming, showing that an ability-targeted and tuition-constrained voucher can preserve
efficiency benefits from competition while eliminating cream skimming and providing relatively
uniform benefits across the distribution of student income and ability types. The tuition
constraint disallows “top ups” and “kickbacks.” Such an ability-targeted design has not been
implemented in practice.34 Voucher designs requiring that over-subscribed schools select by
lottery and that all school funds be spent on education, coupled with a prohibition against
topping up, may be the nearest operational counterpart. Chakrabarti (2013c) provides a model of
such a voucher and tests the sorting predictions, as discussed in Section 5.3.35 Relative to the
design of Epple and Romano (2008), the absence of enhanced voucher funding for low ability
students reduces incentives for schools to seek out and retain less able students.
Nechyba (1999, 2000, 2003) analyzes the effects of voucher programs in multi-district local
economies. He develops a rich theoretical and computational model to investigate the effect of
several voucher programs under alternative public school financing schemes. He demonstrates
the importance of household mobility and general equilibrium effects in predicting outcomes
from large-scale voucher programs. In his 1999 framework, there are multiple local school
34

In related work Eden (1994) examines efficient voucher policy in a model with peer effects within schools and an
achievement externality to society. Education is a pure investment good and capital markets are (implicitly) perfect.
He shows that an achievement subsidy aligns school and social incentives, and combined with a type-dependent
voucher equal to the efficient expenditure plus the student’s peer externality cost induces an efficient (zero-profit)
equilibrium in which students pay nothing out of pocket.
35
Chakrabarti (2013c) assumes students differ continuously in income and ability, with demand for school quality
increasing in both. School quality is equated to expenditure per student, with a maximum quality. She considers a
voucher that, for simplicity, covers the highest quality cost of education, effectively implying no topping up.
Neither can private schools kick back any of the voucher. Private schools have no incentive to base admissions on
ability due to an absence of peer effects, as with a voucher that requires equal probability of admission. Private
school slots are, however, limited. While the voucher covers all tuition costs, students face utility costs of applying
for a voucher that they may not get; and may face a monetary cost of attendance if, for example, transportation costs
are not covered. Chakrabarti shows that there is sorting by ability at the application stage, but there may not be
sorting by income. The former is because higher ability types value quality by more and there are utility costs of
applying. The latter is because tuition is fully covered, utility costs of applying are independent of income, and the
potential monetary cost may not be enough to deter application. In contrast, in the enrollment stage, there will likely
not be ability sorting but there will be sorting by income. The former is because ability sorting has already occurred,
and the latter is because monetary attendance costs that arise for some will deter take up by some lower income
students.

22

districts, a fixed stock of heterogeneous housing units, neighborhoods within districts
differentiated by housing quality, district-wide homogeneous public schools, perceived education
quality that varies with expenditure per student and average peer quality, and peer quality that is
correlated with household income. Tuition varies across private schools, but, in contrast to Epple
and Romano (1998, 2008), price discrimination is not permitted, implying each private school is
specialized to serve one student type. This and the willingness of higher income households to
pay a premium for quality results in stratification by peer ability and income in the private sector.
Households simultaneously choose where to live (district and neighborhood), whether to send
their child to public or private school, and vote for a district-wide property tax used to finance
public schools. Nechyba conducts policy analysis in a computational counterpart calibrated to
data for New Jersey. His model predicts that private schools will emerge in poor communities as
high income households take vouchers and relocate to occupy higher quality housing in such
communities. Hence, stratification of income and property values across communities is reduced.
Poorer households do not experience improved peer quality in their (public) schools, however,
because incumbent somewhat higher income households opt for private schools or relocate to
communities with better public schools. Expenditure per student rises in public schools as long
as the voucher is not high enough to induce more than half the population to attend private
schools. Hence, public school quality could increase if this increased spending offsets the decline
in public school peer quality. By allowing mobility and expenditure effects in public schools,
Nechyba’s analysis predicts more favorable effects of universal vouchers on poor students
relative to Epple and Romano (1998, 2008).

On the other hand, by not allowing price

discrimination, benefits from vouchers to high ability students, whether rich or poor, are
curtailed.
Nechyba (2000, 2003) extends this framework by studying vouchers targeted to poor
individuals and to poor districts, as compared to universal vouchers. This is of particular
relevance for the US context.36 He concludes that a small non-means-tested voucher targeted to
residents of low-income districts is largely equivalent to a universal voucher that is not targeted,
due to household mobility. Most households taking such vouchers would reside in or move to
low income districts, whether or not targeted to these districts. More generally, for realistic
36

As reported in Tables 1 and 2, targeting vouchers to the poor usually characterizes U.S. voucher programs.
Targeting to poor districts would be similar to the practice of targeting to poorly performing schools if households
need only reside where their designated public school is so labeled to get a voucher, though prior attendance
requirements limit this. In addition to differences in the underlying models, the ability targeting analyzed in Epple
and Romano (2008) has a normative focus, while targeting forms studied in Nechba (2000,2003) are better
motivated empirically.

23

values, vouchers targeted to the poor district will have small effects. Similarly, income targeted
vouchers will have modest effects unless school quality depends largely on child ability. In that
case, low-income parents of high-ability children will choose private schools in districts with
poor quality public schools. Milwaukee would appear to be fertile ground for empirical
investigation of Nechyba’s predictions of the effects of vouchers on household location, but such
testing has not yet been undertaken.
Ferreyra (2007) builds on Nechyba’s model introducing both preferences for religious
schools and idiosyncratic (randomly drawn) preferences for school types (public, private secular,
religious) and location. She estimates the parameters of the model using data from seven
metropolitan areas. She then uses these estimates to simulate the effect of several voucher
programs. In particular, Ferreyra examines the differential effects of vouchers depending on
whether these can be used at religious schools.37 She finds that both types of voucher programs
increase private school enrollment and give rise to mobility effects of the type identified by
Nechyba. She also finds that a prohibition on the use of vouchers at religious schools results in
less private school enrollment and can shrink religious enrollments as some students take a
voucher and switch from religious to secular private schools. Milwaukee’s 1998 shift to allowing
the use of vouchers at religious schools provides a potentially promising environment for testing
these predictions, although, to date such testing has not been undertaken.
Neilson (2013) develops and tests a model with geographically differentiated schools that
compete for vouchers that are higher for poorer households. The empirical application is to
Chile, as we discuss in Section 5.3. Private schools are differentiated by their endogenously
chosen quality, as well as by their location. There are no peer effects. Households differ
demographically (e.g., in income) and in residence, with idiosyncratic preferences over schools
as well as (estimated) systematic differences in preferences. Locational differences among
private schools and idiosyncratic preferences imply market power.38 Profit-maximizing private
schools choose quality below the competitive (zero-profit) level, with the quality reduction
increasing in their market power. The quality mark down is greater in poorer areas, where
households are estimated to be more price-sensitive. As such, vouchers that are higher for
poorer households have a greater positive effect on quality. This paper speaks to question 1,

37

We describe the vouchers in Ferrerya (2007) as universal and non-targeted in Table 4, but the variation in whether
vouchers can be used at religious schools or not is central to her paper.
38
Nielson’s schools are then differentiated “vertically” by quality and “horizontally” by location and idiosyncratic
appeal. Epple, Romano, Sarpca, and Sieg (2013) also provide a model of vertical and horizontal school
differentiation, applied to colleges.

24

with gains to voucher students coming largely from reduction in market power among private
providers; but it is also relevant to question 3 on public sector responses.
In contrast to the research discussed so far, McMillan (2005) is squarely focused on question
3.

This paper endogenizes how public schools adjust their effectiveness in response to

competition from more effective private schools. In McMillan’s framework, households are of
two income types, with high income households willing to pay more than low income
households for school quality. Schools exert effort, which raises their effectiveness but comes at
a cost to them. Competition constrains private schools to provide efficient effort. Private schools
serving low income students charge lower tuition and provide lower effort than private schools
serving high income students. The rent-seeking public school sector will provide one of two
quality levels, a high level sufficient to attract both high and low income students, or a low level
that attracts only low income students. If the former, high income students prefer public schools
over paying tuition to attend private school; hence the public sector attracts all students.
McMillan considers the effect of a universal voucher in the high public school effort case. The
voucher lowers the cost of private-school education, and may induce high income households to
switch to private schools. If this happens, public schools choose to lower effort to the level
required to retain only low income students. A voucher could, alternatively, induce public
schools to increase effort to retain high income students.

Hence, McMillan provides a

mechanism such that, instead of improving public school effectiveness, voucher-induced private
school competition, and associated income stratification, may have an adverse effect on public
school effectiveness. McMillan’s framework thus captures an endogenous peer effect associated
with variation in how parents of different income levels are able to induce school effectiveness.
Building on McMillan (2005), Ferrerya and Liang (2012) model imperfect parental and
policy-maker monitoring of schools’ effort choices. Households vary in ability and income, and
higher ability households are more efficient at monitoring their children’s learning. Competitive
private schools are sufficiently small that no free rider problem arises in parental monitoring,
while free riding prevails in the public sector. They demonstrate that combining vouchers with
increased public monitoring of the public sector has the potential to increase everyone’s
achievement and aggregate welfare.
Chakrabarti (2013d) also develops a model where vouchers could increase or decrease effort
of rent seeking public schools. In her model, students differ continuously in income and ability
with demand for quality increasing in both, and school quality depends on school effort and
mean ability.

Private schools cannot price discriminate as in Nechyba’s (1999) model.
25

Universal vouchers induce higher ability students to exit the public sector, implying students at
the margin of attending public school are of lower ability in the voucher regime. Increasing
effort and public school quality has a smaller marginal effect on increasing their attendance. If
this is the dominant effect, then public schools worsen as in McMillan (2005).
Motivated by voucher programs like the former Florida program (FOSP) targeted to failing
schools, Chakrabarti then contrasts such a voucher with a policy that awards vouchers only if the
public school fails to meet a quality standard. She shows that with appropriate setting of the
quality standard such a program will induce increased public school effort and quality
improvement. This is because public schools have a stronger incentive to improve to meet the
standard and avert the voucher and loss of students, while students at the margin of attending
private schools would always exit with a universal voucher. She goes on to the test the model as
discussed in Section 5.3.
In exploring why sorting might adversely affect students left in the public sector, the above
models focus on peer effects.39

MacLeod and Urquiola (2009, 2012) depart from this by

studying informational mechanisms instead.

Specifically, they model the combination of

educational and labor markets. In a first period each individual attends school and accumulates
skill as a function of her innate ability, her effort, and her school’s value added. In the second
period the individual is employed in a competitive labor market. MacLeod and Urquiola assume
that innate ability and effort are not directly observed; employers infer ability from all the
available information. A key assumption is that individual innate ability is more accurately
assessed by schools than by employers. For example, schools might be better able to administer
admissions exams or conduct parental interviews. As a result, employers rationally use an
individual’s school of origin as a signal of her skill. In turn, students seek to attend schools with
good reputations, where a school’s reputation is the expected skill of its graduates.
Two key sets of empirical implications emerge. First, “laissez faire” school systems have a
tendency towards stratification by ability. Students in non-selective schools (e.g. the public
sector) will be hurt by this stratification; their low ability is revealed to employers by their failure
to gain admission to a selective school. Second, the effects of school competition induced by
vouchers will depend on design. For example, schemes that restrict schools’ ability to select
students will maximize effort on the part of students and their willingness to choose schools with
the highest value added. Schools, in turn, will be forced to build their reputations on their
39

See Sacerdote (2011) and Epple and Romano (2011) for a recent surveys of the literature on educational peer
effects.

26

advantage in value added as opposed to just their ability to select high ability students. In
contrast, systems that facilitate selection will tend to lower students’ study effort and raise the
probability that they choose schools based on peer quality rather than value added.
To summarize, MacLeod and Urquiola (2009) show that even in the absence of peer effects,
the reputational mechanisms emphasized by Friedman (1962) do not ensure that vouchers will
increase the production of skill. The intuition behind this result is twofold. First, the fact that
school membership allows students to convey their innate ability reduces the incentive they face
to work hard and do well in school. Second, under some conditions, rational parents will not
always prefer the highest value added schools, and rational schools will not always choose to
compete on value added. These implications are consistent, for example, with the well identified
empirical evidence that selective schools only sometimes produce higher learning (e.g. Clark
(2010), Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2014), Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013)).

4.2 Vouchers and political economy
The research reviewed thus far studies implications of vouchers but does not analyze the
endogenous public choice of voucher policy, a subject of obvious importance given the poor
performance of voucher proposals in referenda in California and Michigan.

Ireland (1990)

provided the foundation for research on this issue. In his framework, households obtain utility
from the education of their children and from the consumption of other goods. Households’
demand for educational expenditure is increasing in income. Expenditures on public schools and
on a voucher, if any, are funded by a proportional income tax. Ireland investigates how public
school spending is impacted by the introduction of a universal voucher smaller than per-student
public school expenditure. The effect may be either an increase or decrease depending on
whether the reduction in outlay for students who switch from public to private school in response
to the voucher is sufficient to offset the cost of providing a voucher to students who would attend
private school anyway.
Ireland treats the voucher and tax rate as exogenous; subsequent work has sought to model
these as chosen by majority rule. This effort encounters two challenges. First, the policy vector is
a triple (tax rate, public school expenditure per pupil, voucher). Invoking the public sector
budget constraint eliminates one of these variables, leaving a two-dimensional choice set and the
accompanying challenges for analyzing majority rule set forth by Plott (1967). Second, even if
one variable, say the voucher, is exogenous, preferences over the tax rate are not single-peaked.
27

Epple and Romano (1996) investigate the second of these issues, considering voting over the tax
rate that funds public educational expenditure and the voucher, taking the voucher amount as
given.40 They show that, despite the non-single peaked preferences, equilibrium under majority
rule is likely to exist for realistic parameter values. The equilibrium is of an ends-against-themiddle form, with a coalition of poor and wealthy households, comprising half the population,
favoring a reduction in the tax rate, and middle-income households, comprising the other half,
preferring an increase.41
Work to endogenize voucher choice has followed two avenues. One is to consider voting one
issue at a time. The other is to limit the choice set in other ways, such as requiring that the
voucher equal public expenditure or by considering voucher-only economies. Hoyt and Lee
(1998) endogenize both the voucher and tax rate by considering sequential voting with the
voucher determined first and the tax rate second. Employing information on the income
distribution in each state, they find that there are some states in which introduction of a $1,000
voucher would permit lowering the tax rate without lowering public expenditure per student.
Chen and West (2000) take the voucher as equal to public school expenditure per student in
their examination of the political economy of income targeting. If vouchers produce some
efficiency gains, they find that the targeted regime is likely to be majority preferred both to the
no-voucher status quo and to a non-targeted voucher regime.
Another approach, voucher-only economies, is employed by Fernandez and Rogerson (2003)
to study vouchers in a dynamic setting in which education spending impacts adult earnings. They
consider three alternative voucher programs: a universal flat-rate voucher, a means tested
voucher, and a “means-equalizing” voucher that depends on household income and the amount
of income devoted to education. They find that all three alternatives increase utilitarian welfare
substantially relative to the purely private system; all tend to correct the inefficiency from low
investment on the part of poor households.42
Bearse et al. (2009) continue the study of income targeted programs by considering a
voucher that is positive for the lowest income household and declines linearly with income to
zero. A sequential voting equilibrium, with the tax rate chosen first, followed by the parameters
40

See also Glomm and Ravikumar (1998).
In a very similar model, assuming existence of majority choice equilibrium, Rangazas (1995) identified the
tradeoffs in the public choice of expenditure in the public school for a given voucher. His computational analysis
predicts that a voucher equal to 1.25% of a teacher’s annual salary would cause per student public expenditure to
increase. Investigation of “ends-against” voting is undertaken by Brunner and Ross (2010).
42
Fernandez and Rogerson note that their three voucher systems can be viewed as analogous to three different
systems of state grants to local districts (foundation, means tested, and power equalizing). Hence, their analysis can
alternatively be viewed as informing the political economy of public school finance.
41

28

of the voucher program, is shown to exist. Their computational model shows that, compared to
the no-voucher public equilibrium, the means tested voucher chosen by majority rule benefits the
poor via higher education spending and a lower tax rate, while also benefitting wealthy
households who prefer private schooling coupled with a low tax rate.
An alternative approach to overcome the Plott existence issue is adopted by Epple and
Romano (2014). They analyze simultaneous voting over the tax rate, public school expenditure
per student, and the voucher, exploiting the citizen-candidate model of Besley and Coate (1997).
They provide necessary and sufficient conditions for equilibrium, and show computationally that
equilibrium exists for realistic parameter values. They also show that a voucher is likely to
garner greater political support when income inequality is low. Intuitively, when inequality is
low, a relatively small number of households choose private school. A marginal increase in the
voucher induces a relatively large exodus from the public schools, permitting an increase in
public school expenditure per student with a lower tax rate, a change that garners unanimous
support.
Epple, Romano, and Sarpca (2014) extend this model to include income targeting via
simultaneous voting over the tax rate, expenditure per student in public schools, the voucher
amount, and the maximum income of households eligible for vouchers. They find that income
targeting increases political support for vouchers by limiting their use by high-income
households that would use private school even in absence of vouchers, and that a targeted
voucher always garners political support. The preference for targeted vouchers conforms to
observation, but the finding that a targeted voucher would always garner political support does
not. This latter finding brings to the fore limitations of the workhorse Ireland (1990) framework,
particularly the assumptions that all households have the same preference function and differ
only in income. Evidence on voting by legislators for voucher proposals discussed in Section 5,
along with differences in opinions evoked by vouchers, point to consideration of ideological
differences in preferences as an avenue for extending the Ireland framework. This is being
pursued in ongoing research of Epple, Romano, and Sarpca.
To summarize the research on the political economy of vouchers, two prominent themes
emerge. One is that the majority of voters, those who do not choose private school in the absence
of vouchers, will benefit by targeting vouchers so as to prevent take-up by those who would
attend private school anyway. The other is that a voucher offering less than per-student
expenditure in public school will generally be preferred by those who would continue to attend
public school. Such a partial voucher induces some households to switch to private school, and
29

this yields a net tax savings to those attending public school equal to the differential between perstudent public spending and the voucher.

5. The Empirical Evidence
This section reviews the empirical evidence on each of the five questions raised above. For
each we highlight the methodological challenges that arise, and we focus the review on the
papers that have most successfully dealt with these challenges. This implies that we discuss some
voucher programs more than others, depending on the question at hand.

5.1 Question 1: What effects do vouchers have on the students who use them?
The key challenge in answering this question is establishing credible counterfactuals; e.g.,
what would the outcomes of voucher winners have been had they not received a voucher? While
different types of research attempt to do this, the papers on small scale voucher programs are the
most focused on it and have tackled it with the highest degree of credibility.
This reflects that in many cases their setup at least emulates a randomized controlled trial in
which subjects are randomly assigned to treatment (voucher) or control (no-voucher) groups.
Specifically, some publicly and privately funded voucher programs have been explicitly
designed as experiments. In other instances, non-experimental programs are over-subscribed, and
random assignment arises from the use of lotteries to allocate scarce slots. These cases at least in
principle establish a clear counterfactual—on average the observed and unobserved
characteristics of treated and untreated groups should be identical, and therefore simple
comparisons of their achievement can reveal the causal effect of vouchers.
One aspect to bear in mind is that in all the programs we discuss those who are offered a
voucher are not required to use it. Hence, a distinction arises between the effects calculated by
focusing the comparison on those who have been offered the voucher and those who actually
take it up. A comparison of the average outcomes of those offered and not offered the voucher
yields an “Intent to Treat” (ITT) estimate. A Treatment on the Treated” (TOT) estimate adjusts
for the proportion of students who “take up” the voucher—thus providing an approximation to
the effect of the treatment on those who received it. Both types of estimates have analytical
advantages. For instance, the ITT estimate might provide a reasonable approximation to the

30

effect of implementing a small scale voucher scheme, since it is always the case that the
proportion of students who take up the voucher is less than one.
Finally, in some cases we also review the results of papers that, facing a lack of a (quasi-)
experimental counterfactual, seek to establish one by using matching techniques or otherwise
attempting to control for observable characteristics. In such cases one must bear in mind that
estimates can still be biased if unobserved student or parental characteristics are correlated with
treatment.
To preview the bottom line on question 1, the evidence does not suggest that awarding
students a voucher is a systematically reliable way to improve their educational outcomes. A
perhaps surprisingly large proportion of the best-identified studies suggest that winning a
voucher has an effect on achievement that is statistically indistinguishable from zero. This is
contrary to what one would expect, for example, if private or independent schools had
systematically higher value added. There is, however, recent evidence from two randomized
control studies that point to more favorable effects on attainment. There is also evidence that in
some settings, or for some subgroups or for specific outcomes, vouchers can have substantial
positive effects on those who use them.
A question is therefore what accounts for the variation in estimated impacts. The literature
offers some tentative and useful clues, but no definitive guidance. This reflects two aspects we
will be explicit about.

First, the best evidence on question 1 comes from very different

settings—in this section we review studies on the U.S., Colombia, and India—and while all these
provide useful evidence, extrapolating is difficult as these settings vary along multiple
dimensions. Second, the experimental studies can provide clear counterfactuals and credibly
answer question 1, but they deliver a “reduced form” form answer that does not fully reveal what
mechanisms account for the effects—a further reason for why extrapolation is difficult.

5.1.1 The U.S.
Wolf et al. (2010a, 2010b) report on the Washington D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program,
which used an experimental design. Their sample consists of roughly 2,300 students, of whom
about 60 percent were offered a voucher, with the rest serving as a control group. Of those
offered a voucher, 77 percent made use of it. The authors find no significant impact on test
scores after one, two, or four years (a significant effect emerges for reading after three years, but

31

none for math).

Overall, there is little evidence that the Washington D.C. Opportunity

Scholarship Program resulted in a sustained improvement on test scores.
In contrast Wolf et al. (2010b) report that the program had a large and statistically significant
impact on graduation rates. After four years, students who were offered a voucher (ITT) were 12
percentage points more likely to graduate than those who were not, with a corresponding TOT
effect of 21 percentage points. Exploring heterogeneity in impacts, Wolf et al. find similar
effects among students originally in schools designated as “in need of improvement.”
The School Choice Scholarship Foundation created three voucher programs—New York
City, Dayton, and Washington, D.C.—that also conform to experimental design.

The most

intensively studied of these is the one in New York, where in 1997 a lottery was conducted
among approximately 11,000 applicants (Peterson et al., 2003). None of these experiments yield
significant test score effects for non-African American students. Nonetheless, Mayer et al.
(2002) find the program increased the test scores of African American students in New York by
about 6 percentile points (ITT). Krueger and Zhu (2004) show, however, that this finding is
sensitive to how ethnicity is coded, as well as to how one handles students with missing baseline
scores.43 In Washington, Peterson et al. (2003) find significant effects for African American
students at the end of two years of treatment, but these vanish by the third. In Dayton they find
that African Americans had a 4 percentile point advantage at the end of two years (significant at
the 10% level). Overall, this group of experiments suggests some—albeit not very robust—
indication of test score effects for African American students, and none for the rest.
As in the D.C. Opportunity Scholarship program, however, these experiments produced
better results in terms of graduation rates, at least for African American students. Specifically,
Chingos and Peterson (2015) study college enrollment as another outcome in New York. At the
time of the experiment (late 1990s), participants were in grades K-5. Chingos and Peterson were
able to obtain follow up information on college enrollment for a remarkable 99% of the roughly
2,700 students in the original study. They find no significant differences between the treatment
and control groups as a whole, but a significant difference for African American students—for
those offered a voucher (ITT), the estimated increase in part and full-time enrollment is 7
percentage points, a 20% increase.
The above papers focus on voucher programs that were designed with an explicit
experimental setup in mind. This was not the case in Milwaukee, which displays over time
variation in its ability to deliver clear counterfactuals.
43

Specifically, in its early years the

On this issue see also Barnard et. al. (2003), Krueger and Zhu (2003), and Peterson and Howell (2004a, 2004b).

32

Milwaukee program featured randomization due to oversubscription, but starting in 1994,
increases in the income cap and the incorporation of Catholic schools had the effect of making
vouchers generally available to most eligible students without recourse to lotteries.
Rouse (1998) analyzes impacts during both periods.44 First she exploits randomization,
finding little evidence of effects for reading. Her estimates (both ITT and TOT) for mathematics
are substantial—statistically significant effects of 0.3 to 0.5 standard deviations over a four-year
period. She also follows Witte (1997) in considering a random sample of public school students
as the comparison group, obtaining similar findings.
Witte, et. al. (2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012) conduct a five-year study of the effect on
voucher recipients (TOT) using a matching strategy. They find no significant effects on test
scores in the first, second, and third year of the program. A statistically significant fourth-year
gain of 0.15 standard deviations emerges in reading; gains in mathematics are also evident, but
are significant only for students in grade seven. Overall, this analysis suggests that during this
post-expansion phase, the Milwaukee voucher program had little if any effect on test scores. In
contrast Witte et al. (2011b) and Cowen et al. (2013) use a matching strategy and find positive
impacts on years of schooling, although the results are not entirely robust to different
specifications. Beyond potential biases from unobserved characteristics, a concern with these
longer term matching-based estimates emerges from the possible existence of contemporaneous
non-voucher-related policies. For instance, starting in 2002 the public reporting of schools’ test
score began to be required, and this might have affected schools’ performance quite aside from
vouchers.
Overall, the evidence on the U.S. points to non-existent or not very robust effects of vouchers
on test scores, except perhaps for Black students.

In contrast, more robust evidence has

accumulated regarding positive impacts on graduation probabilities, again particularly for Black
students.

5.1.2 Colombia
Colombia yields perhaps the most positive evidence that emerges from (quasi-) experimental
work on question 1. Specifically, Angrist et al. (2002) exploit voucher lotteries implemented in
the cities of Bogotá and Cali. In terms of test scores, their key finding is that three years after the
allocation, voucher winners scored 0.2 standard deviations higher on achievement tests. Using a
44

See also Witte et al. (1995) and Greene et al. (1996).

33

similar design, Angrist et al. (2006) find that, correcting for differences in test taking between
lottery winners and losers, the program increased high-stakes college admissions test scores also
by 0.2 standard deviations. They further find an effect on longer term outcomes: voucher
winners were 15-20 percent more likely to complete secondary school, less likely to work while
in school, and less likely to marry or cohabit as teenagers.
In short, the experimental results from Colombia are more positive than those from the U.S.
in every measured dimension. A relevant question is: Why are voucher winners in Bogotá and
Cali benefiting more consistently than those in New York City or Washington D.C.? None of
the experimental studies reveal the precise channels through which its effects work—the clear
identification comes at this cost, to some extent—so it is not possible to answer this question
definitively. Nevertheless, the institutional differences between the U.S. and Colombia voucher
experiments render some differences more or less likely as potential candidates.
Is it possible that public schools in Colombia are much weaker than in the U.S., and so the
opportunity to use a private school has a large effect? This may play a role but is unlikely to
provide a full explanation, as—somewhat unusually—both voucher winners and losers in
Colombia tended to enroll in private schools. For example, Angrist et al. (2002) point out that
while about 94 percent of lottery winners attended private school in the first year, so did 88
percent of the losers. This partially reflects (Section 3.1.2) that a requirement for application was
to have been accepted at a private school (the stated goals of the program were related to raising
enrollment rates by increasing private participation). Thus one might reasonably expect the
program to be more attractive to students strongly interested in private school anyway.
Is it possible that the positive findings reflect greater resources at the receiving schools? This
is a possibility since winners on average used the voucher to “upgrade” to more expensive
institutions—Angrist et al. (2002) report that vouchers “crowded in” educational expenditure to
some extent. There is less data on the resource changes that vouchers imply in the U.S.
A final possible channel relates to student incentives. In Colombia the vouchers were
renewable contingent on grade completion, and thus the program included an incentive
component—voucher winners faced a stronger reward for doing well at school. Thus, superior
performance could have been due to incentives rather than to the voucher provision itself.45

45

Digging even deeper into mechanisms, the gains in Colombia could have also reflected peer effects. However,
Bettinger et al. (2010) suggest that at least for a subgroup of PACES beneficiaries, at least observable peer quality
does not seem to account for the results. Specifically, they show that the advantage found in Angrist et. al. (2002)
persists even when one considers students who chose to attend vocational schools with typically lower observable
peer quality.

34

To summarize, the Colombian experiment suggests that vouchers had a positive effect on
tests scores and several other outcomes, but the difficulty in attributing effects to a precise
channel makes it difficult to draw precise policy implications.

5.1.3 India
Turning to India, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) analyze an experiment in villages
of the state of Andhra Pradesh, as described in Section 3.1.3. They find that four years after
treatment, lottery winners did not have higher test scores than losers in Telugu (the local
language), Math, English, Science, and Social Studies; in contrast, there was a positive and
significant effect in Hindi. The authors interpret this as an overall positive effect, since private
schools achieve higher Hindi results with no disadvantage in the other tests.
Interpreting the effect in Hindi is complicated by the fact that public schools in Andhra
Pradesh essentially do not teach Hindi at all. More specifically, Muralidharan and Sundararaman
use interesting complementary data to show that the private schools spend much more time
teaching Hindi (essentially relative to a base of zero in public schools) and substantially less on
the remaining subjects, except for English.46
The setting this paper explores also raises interesting contrasts with the U.S. and Colombia
cases described above. Importantly, in contrast to Colombia where voucher winners benefited
from greater expenditure, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) point out that private schools
in the villages analyzed have expenditures that are only about one third of those in public
schools. This reflects that many private schools in India operate without subsidies even as they
cater to very low income individuals. This is observed in other settings, including Pakistan and
parts of Africa (e.g., Andrabi, Das and Khwaja, 2013); in these areas private expansion has been
observed in a magnitude that in middle or high income countries would seem to require
significant public subsidies.

This might reflect parental willingness to escape a deeply

dysfunctional public sector, in which there is evidence of rampant absenteeism by teachers; see
for example Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2012) and Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011).
46

The authors further note that not all private schools use Telugu or Hindu as the language of instruction, with some
using English instead. While acknowledging that this is an endogenous choice (and hence not a feature of the
experimental design), they present suggestive evidence that the choice of English as a medium of instruction
disrupts learning. If parents do not realize this is the case, then further regulation of private schools may be
warranted. But another possibility is that parents are aware of this but willing to make the sacrifice, if for example,
English has high labor market returns. A broader point the findings around Hindi and English illustrate is that
choice is likely to produce more of what parents want that may or may not be skills along the precise dimensions
policymakers prefer.

35

Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) emphasize that coupled with the above findings on
achievement, the fact that the private schools spend so much less implies a substantial private
productivity advantage. They also show that the crux of this cost difference is in teacher
salaries—private school teachers are younger, typically less-trained, more often female and on
average make only one sixth the salary of their public sector counterparts. In short, private
school students have instructors who are paid much less. On the other hand in some dimensions
private school students have access to more educational resources. For instance, they enjoy
lower class sizes, and the probability that they are in multi-grade classrooms is lower by about 50
percentage points.47
In short, private and public schools in Andhra Pradesh are organized very differently, but on
net have no testing performance differences except in Hindi, which the public schools do not
teach. It is again the case that the myriad differences in setting provide interesting implications,
but complicate extrapolation. Just to cite one example, the voucher schools in Andhra Pradesh,
India, on average have lower class sizes than public schools; the opposite is the case in present
day Chile.
To summarize, question 1 is perhaps the most straightforward among those we ask, and yet
the above review makes clear that the answer to it is complex. The results are not clear cut—in
many cases and for many outcomes transferring students to private school does little to their
achievement; in others, it improves it substantially. In addition the most rigorous research on
this question typically delivers reduced-form results. These do not reveal the mechanisms that
account for the differences, making it hard to draw clear implications. It is relevant to point out
that the evidence—particularly that from the U.S.—is consistent with vouchers improving some
types of skills more than others.

For example, it is possible that the positive effects on

graduation rates in the U.S. stem from improvements in non-cognitive skills, while the lack of a
consistent impact on test scores points to weaker impacts in a cognitive dimension.48

5.2 Question 2: Do vouchers induce non-random migration from public to private
schools, possibly lowering the achievement of students that remain in the public sector?

47

The research in Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2011) suggests this might have a large favorable impact on
performance.
48
We thank an anonymous referee for this observation.

36

Another fundamental question on vouchers is whether these lead to sorting. As discussed above,
this is the common prediction of theoretical work. However, that work also makes clear that the
type of sorting observed will be a function of the rules governing the voucher system.
We begin by considering the evidence on large scale voucher programs.

These are

analytically suited to addressing question 2 in that they provide a chance to study situations in
which large numbers of students of all types are given a chance to exercise school choice, and in
which schools get a chance to enter and exit the market in response.
Yet the evidence from large-scale programs has disadvantages too. Most importantly, almost
by definition, very clear identification is difficult to obtain from these programs. They involve
the distribution of vouchers to anyone who wishes to use them, and are typically implemented
country-wide. Thus, it is very difficult to establish clear counterfactuals regarding what would
have happened in the absence of these programs, and of course randomizing at the country level
is not feasible.

5.2.1 Large scale voucher programs: Chile and Sweden
The original design of Chile’s voucher scheme allowed private schools ease in setting up
admissions policies. These could include features such as admissions exams and parental and
student interviews.49 In addition, since the mid-1990s schools have been able to charge tuition
add-ons. Under such circumstances, models like Epple and Romano (1998) and MacLeod and
Urquiola (2009, 2015) suggest that the introduction of vouchers would lead to cream skimming
from the public sector, and stratification by income and/or ability within the private sector.
Hsieh and Urquiola (2003, 2006) analyze this by looking at the growth of the private sector
across municipalities. They essentially implement a difference in differences analysis that asks if
stratification measures increased more in markets with greater growth in the private voucher
sector. Again, this is not equivalent to a randomized experiment and biases could arise, for
instance, from pre-existing trends. Nevertheless, Hsieh and Urquiola find evidence that the
voucher-induced growth in the private sector was associated with a “middle class” exodus from
public schools consistent with cream skimming; this is robust to the use of candidate
instrumental variables for private growth.

49

Over the years more restrictions on selection by private schools have been written into law. In our understanding,
these include generalized statements regarding prohibitions on selection rather than specific, legally binding
mechanisms (e.g. centralized lotteries).

37

McEwan et al. (2008) additionally present a descriptive analysis of sorting in small markets.
The idea—one related to an approach used in industrial organization—is that fixed costs
determine that private voucher schools must be of at least a minimum size in order to break even.
This implies that very small markets—say very small towns—will tend be served by public
schools only. Larger towns will have private participation. McEwan et al. focus on the range of
towns (by population size) where private entry is first observed, comparing the degree of sorting
observed just below the approximate size threshold that determines private entry, to that
observed just above. This is akin to a “fuzzy” regression discontinuity design, albeit one with
limited statistical power. They find that private entry is indeed related to stratification, consistent
with the first private school cream skimming the highest ability/income kids from the public
sector.
Finally, a large number of studies point to cross sectional evidence of high stratification in
Chile. For instance, Valenzuela, Bellei, and de los Rios (2010) suggest that Chile displays one of
the highest levels of school-level stratification by socioeconomic status in the OECD.

In

addition Mizala et al. (2007) suggest stratification is particularly extensive in the private sector.50
In closing the discussion on Chile, it is worth mentioning that there is widespread consensus
among observers and policy makers there around the claim that vouchers have facilitated sorting.
In addition and as we discuss below, the high degree of stratification in the school sector seems
to be a significant contributing factor to student protests that have persisted over a number of
years.
Stratification has been less of a focus on the research in Sweden. Speculating, this might
reflect that Sweden’s voucher design likely promotes sorting less than Chile’s.

As stated

independent schools must partially apply a first-come-first-served criterion if over-subscribed,
and tuition add-ons are not allowed. Nevertheless, research points to some sorting effects. For
instance, Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005) report that independent school students are more
likely to be immigrants and to have parents with higher income and education (see also
Bjorklund et al., 2005). Further, Bohlmark and Lindahl (2007) find that public schools tend to
lose students who are second-generation immigrants or whose parents are more highly educated,
but find no evidence of sorting by income.
In more recent work that considers effects through 2009, Bohlmark et al. (2015) find that
after accounting for residential sorting, school segregation increased more in municipalities in
50

For other examples of large scale school market liberalization leading to stratification, see Mbiti and Lucas (2012)
for the case of Kenya. For related evidence in the U.S. see Urquiola (2005).

38

which school choice became more prevalent (as measured by the number of independent schools
in operation). Specifically, segregation in such areas has grown between immigrants and natives,
and between children of parents with high/low levels of education. Nevertheless, they conclude
that the magnitude of the effect of choice on segregation is relatively low, and that Sweden still
ranks as a country with relatively low levels of across-school sorting along such dimensions.

5.2.2 Small scale voucher programs
The literature on small scale programs has also explored question 2. These programs can be
expected to have a different impact on sorting (relative to large scale programs) due to the fact
that they tend to display four features: a) targeting of low-income students, b) lotteries in cases of
oversubscription, c) requirements that voucher proceeds be used for educational expenses (i.e.
not to provide financial aid), and d) rules against tuition “top-ups.” In addition, in the case of the
U.S. the potential for voucher-induced sorting is set against a backdrop of a public school system
in which parents can sort into school districts or catchment areas (Tiebout, 1956). Nevertheless,
some scope for cream skimming remains since the more affluent and/or more able among the
eligible population may be more likely to apply for or use a voucher.
Turning to the evidence, we begin with the largest voucher system in the U.S.: Milwaukee’s.
Chakrabarti (2013c) investigates sorting during its first five years, 1990-1994. She finds
significant evidence that the probability of applying to the program rises with individual ability
but not with income. Among winners, there is some evidence that the probability of take-up rises
with income but not with ability. Given the income targeting of the Milwaukee program during
this period, any income stratification with respect to voucher use is limited to variation within the
population of low income students. Hence, the finding of stratification by ability is more salient
from the perspective of concerns about cream skimming.
As it has grown, Milwaukee’s program has changed in ways that increase the potential for
sorting. First, the income eligibility limit was raised to 300% of the poverty level. Second, a
tuition premium for high school students with household income more than 220% above the
poverty limit was allowed.51 Fleming et al. (2013) analyze sorting in Milwaukee during this
51

That these two changes would go together is in some sense not surprising—raising the income eligibility limit
results in a concurrent increase in political support for permitting private schools to charge a tuition premium to
voucher students. When only low income households are eligible for vouchers, few could afford a tuition premium,
making the issue moot. As higher income households become eligible, more are willing to pay a premium for more
costly private schools. The conditions giving rise to political support for permitting tuition premia are thus the same
as the conditions likely to give rise to cream skimming if such premia are permitted.

39

more recent period. They compare voucher students to a random sample of Milwaukee public
school students in school year 2006. They find that voucher students are significantly more likely
to be black or Hispanic, English language learners, and female. They also use a matched panel
to consider parental characteristics. They find that voucher parents report significantly lower
incomes. Their overall education levels are also lower, but there is a somewhat higher college
participation rate among them. Perhaps the most salient difference in the matched panel is that a
much higher proportion of voucher recipients report being Catholic (29% versus 19%) and
attending religious service at least once a week (62% versus 48%).
Wolf et. al. (2009) investigate the take-up of vouchers in Washington, D.C. Of about 1,400
students offered a voucher, 41% used it for the full (three-year) period, 34% made partial use of
it, and 25% never used it. Comparing ever-users to never-users, the most prominent difference
was that ever-users were only one-third as likely to have a learning or physical disability.52 There
were no significant differences in baseline test scores, family income, or mother’s education.
Ever-users were somewhat more likely to be African-American, less likely to be Hispanic, and
somewhat less likely to be male.
There is less evidence on the effects of tax-credit funded vouchers on sorting. An exception
is work by Figlio, Hart, and Metzger (2010), who study the FTC program. They find that,
compared to non-participants, voucher participants attended lower performing public schools.
Moreover, voucher students were among the lower-performing students in the public schools
they had attended. Hart (2011) presents results consistent with this, suggesting that voucher
participants tend to come from schools with worse academic performance and higher rates of
violence. In addition, they are more likely to exit public schools when they encounter more
convenient (e.g. by distance) and varied private school options. Finally, they are more likely to
exit schools with high concentrations of African American students, and the latter holds
regardless of the student’s own race.
To summarize, the evidence suggests that, perhaps not surprisingly, vouchers can result in
the non-random reallocation of students across and within sectors. That said, the details of
program design clearly matter. For one example from among large scale programs, Chile’s
design generally facilitates sorting more than Sweden’s.

52

Similarly Wolf et al. (2012) estimate that between 7.5 to 14.6% of Milwaukee voucher students have disabilities,
as compared with 19% for Milwaukee public schools.

40

5.3 Question 3: Do voucher programs pressure public schools to become more
efficient?
A key reason to introduce competition into any industry is the possibility that it will lead to
productivity improvements. Question 3 asks whether vouchers induce these in the public sector,
perhaps as its schools attempt to fend off gains on the part of private competitors.
To illustrate the methodological challenges that this question raises, Hsieh and Urquiola
(2003) point out that a first pass answer to it is provided by calculating the difference in average
public school performance before and after the introduction of vouchers.

They point out

however, that one would ideally want to decompose this change into three effects:
a) the public sector’s change in value added—essentially the object of interest in question 3,
b) a composition effect—for example, vouchers may worsen public sector performance if they
result in higher ability/income children leaving to private schools, and
c) a peer effect—for instance, if there is non-random sorting the performance of those “left
behind” may be affected by no longer interacting with departing students.
While a) is the object of interest in this case, the presence of b) and c) make it very difficult to
isolate this effect. Specifically, in order to isolate a) it would be necessary to control for
children’s characteristics, some of which may be unobserved. Further, even if one observed all
student characteristics, adequately controlling for peer effects is difficult, given that the literature
has not produced a consensus on the functional form of such effects, or even on whether a stable
functional form exists (Carrell, Sacerdote, and West, 2013). A clear prior on the direction of at
least some of the effects in a)-c), could provide analytical leverage to empirically get a sense of
the direction of the others.

However, as noted in Section 4, theory does not provide

unambiguous guidance on any of these.
Hsieh and Urquiola (2003, 2006) present evidence of these difficulties for the case of Chile.
For example, they show that public performance worsened in municipalities that experienced
greater private growth after the introduction of vouchers. They point out that this could be
driven purely by composition effects—b) in the listing above. They therefore call for a focus on
how the introduction of vouchers affects aggregate performance.

This does not solve the

challenge posed by c), but it does control for b) and potentially come closer to identifying the
effect of vouchers on overall school productivity. We will return to that issue in the context of
discussing question 4 (which focuses on aggregate, net effects); for now we review the evidence
on question 3 keeping in mind the above challenges.
41

5.3.1 The U.S.
Hoxby (2003) studies question 3 in the context of Milwaukee. She measures the intensity
with which public schools face competition by the proportion of their students that are eligible
for vouchers. In Milwaukee, this measure varies because eligibility for a voucher is dependent on
students’ income. In this approach, schools with a low proportion of poor students serve as the
control group. As an additional control, Hoxby chooses a set of low income public schools
outside of Milwaukee. She finds that more intensively treated public schools have higher rates of
productivity growth measured as achievement on a standardized exam relative to expenditure.
Chakrabarti (2008) extends Hoxby’s approach, considering two periods in the Milwaukee
voucher system. She designates 1990-1997 as Phase I; Phase II consists of years after 1998,
roughly when the program experienced changes including the expansion of the proportion of
eligible students and religious school eligibility. She uses school-level data, with the proportion
of students on free or reduced lunch (FRL) as a measure of the intensity of treatment. As
controls, she uses the 33 Wisconsin public schools outside Milwaukee that had at least 25% of
their population eligible for FRL, had a black population of at least 15%, and were in locales
similar to Milwaukee in 1990. Chakrabarti finds little evidence that the voucher program had
effects on public schools in Phase I. By contrast, for Phase II she finds significant gains on the
order of 0.1-0.15 standard deviations; these are statistically significant in reading and language
arts, but mostly not in mathematics and science.
Figlio and Hart (2010) study the effect of the Florida Tax Credit (FTC) scholarship program
on public school performance. This program is available for students from families with incomes
below 185% of the poverty line. Their logic is that the competitive impact of voucher availability
on public schools will be greatest when public schools have nearby private competitors. They
create four measures of private school proximity, and find that public school achievement is
related to each of these measures significantly, albeit modestly:

a one standard deviation

increase in the number of nearby private schools raises achievement by 0.02 to 0.03 standard
deviations.
A special feature of the (now cancelled) Florida Opportunity Scholarship Program (FOSP)
facilitates identification of program effects, but potentially confounds their interpretation for
purposes of analyses related to vouchers. Specifically, in this program Florida schools were
graded based on student performance on a series of standardized exams. If a school received an
42

F grade twice within four years, its students became eligible for a voucher. Schools that received
one F faced a threat of a voucher, and the performance of students in these schools can then, for
example, be compared to that of their peers in schools that received a D grade.
Figlio and Rouse (2006) examine test score gains in schools receiving one F grade using
several strategies including regression discontinuity, with D schools serving as a control group.
They find effects on high-stakes mathematics tests (i.e., tests relevant to grading of the schools)
of about 0.2σ, larger than effects on low-stakes exams, suggesting non-trivial gains but also
some strategic focusing of resources. However, they emphasize and present some evidence
suggesting that the gains may be due to the stigma associated with receiving another F grade,
rather than to the threat of loss of funding associated with a voucher. In short, the program may
confound the effects of vouchers with those of accountability.
Chakrabarti (2013a, 2013b) continues the study of the FOSP program. Using a difference-indifference and regression discontinuity designs, Chakrabarti (2013a) provides evidence that
schools receiving one F focused resources on improving the scores of students predicted to be
near the boundary of the threshold of failure, and on preparing for the writing exam, where
performance is believed to be more easily improved. She provides some evidence that the
voucher threat was important, for example, finding larger effects of receiving an F grade on
schools that faced more private school competition, as in Figlio and Hart (2008). Chakrabarti
(2013b) focuses on pure gaming effects of the program by investigating whether schools classify
students with an eye to preventing their scores from counting toward the school grade. This
analysis again compares F to D schools, and finds significantly increased classification of
students as limited English proficiency. While F schools might have tried to do the same by
classifying more students as special education, their tests scores also excluded from the school’s
grade, the gains from this strategic reclassification would come at the cost of these students then
becoming eligible for another Florida voucher program. These schools did not increase such
classification. It bears repeating that studies of the FOSP program provide interesting avenues
for identification of the program effects, but the challenge of disentangling the accountability and
voucher effects weakens implications that can be drawn for the more common accountabilityindependent voucher programs.

5.3.2. Canada

43

Chan and McMillan (2009) study the effect on public school performance from a private
school tax credit in Ontario. This was passed into law on short notice in June 2001, with the
credit becoming available in January 2002. The plan provided for a private-school tax credit that
was scheduled to grow in increments over five years, but the program was cancelled in
December 2003, retroactively to January 2003. Using the 2002-03 private school enrollment
share in a public school attendance zone as their measure of private school competition, Chan
and McMillan find that a 1 standard deviation increase in competition is associated with a
statistically significant 0.1 standard deviation increase in the percentage of public school students
achieving the provincial performance standard for grade 3.

5.3.3. Sweden
Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005) consider whether students in Swedish public schools
perform better if they live in municipalities that have a larger share of independent schools. As
stated such an evaluation confronts difficulties that originate in the non-random sorting that
follows private entry, as well as the endogeneity of this entry. The first of these might be
somewhat mitigated since Swedish independent schools are not allowed to select on ability.
Nevertheless, applying to an independent school is still endogenous. Sandstrom and Bergstrom
(2005) deal with this by way of a Heckman correction. In order to address the endogeneity of
private entry, they use variables approximating whether local authorities are “hostile to
independent schools.” Specifically, they proxy for these attitudes using measures of the extent to
which municipalities contract out responsibilities to the private sector. The identifying
assumption is that this attitude will only affect educational outcomes through the channel that
municipalities with less hostility will be less likely to block independent school entry. The key
finding is that the presence of independent schools results in better public performance in a
GPA-type measure, as well as in standardized mathematics exams and in an indicator for
whether students passed all three exams necessary for high school admission.
To summarize, several studies of public school response to voucher school competition have
measured intensity of competition either by the proportion of a public school’s students who are
potentially eligible for vouchers, or by the proximity of private school alternatives. Virtually all
of these studies find public school achievement increases with the intensity of treatment. That
said, most of these analyses do not have an iron-clad strategy to deal with potential biases from

44

composition effects (which section 5.2 suggests could be significant) or with potentially
confounding policies such as accountability.53

5.4 Question 4: What is the net effect of vouchers on educational outcomes?
As stated above, some studies focus not on questions 1-3, but rather on the net effect of
vouchers—question 4.

The reason to do this can be stated by summarizing some of the

difficulties that arise in answering questions 1-3, and why even ideal answers to these three
questions may only give a partial sense of the overall effect of vouchers.
Specifically, as stated question 1 can be credibly addressed with experiments, but doing so
provides only a partial assessment of the impact of vouchers. For instance, to the extent that a
private advantage is at least partially due to a peer effect, then this gain will not be independent
of the size of the private sector and/or of the sorting its growth induces. In other words, the
advantage conferred by transferring to a private school may dissipate as the private sector grows
and incorporates weaker children. In some scenarios— e.g. if private schools are not more
productive and peer effects are linear in means, private expansion may be zero sum (Hsieh and
Urquiola, 2003).
Further, even a solid answer to question 1 does not provide an assessment of the
consequences on the children not using vouchers. Studying questions 2 and 3 begins to provide a
sense of this, but immediately raises significant empirical challenges. For instance, if vouchers
induce sorting then it is very hard to empirically isolate their effect on public school value added.
One alternative in the face of these difficulties—particularly when looking at large scale
programs—is to simply analyze market level net effects (Hsieh and Urquiola, 2003). This does
not allow one to isolate the specific channels through which vouchers work, but can provide a
sense of their aggregate effect.

5.4.1 Chile
One of the more common approaches to addressing question 4 has been to use panel data for
multiple local school markets. The changes in the private sector’s reach within these are then
compared to the change in average performance.

This controls for market-specific fixed

53

Figlio and Hart (2014) study the effects of Florida’s FTC program before it was actually implemented, and
therefore avoid sorting-related concerns.

45

characteristics.

In this spirit, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) apply a difference-in-differences

approach to municipal-level data for 1982 to 1996, suggesting that while municipalities with
greater private growth display clear signs of greater sorting, they display no relative advantage in
terms of the evolution of achievement on standardized tests and on years of schooling. As with
the analyses of the effects of large scale programs on sorting (question 2), the key source of
concern with these estimates—despite the use of some candidate instrumental variables (e.g.
population density)—is that private entry into school markets is endogenous. For instance, if
outcomes had been declining in areas where the private sector grew more, these effects would
underestimate the salutary effects of competition.
Other work implements a cross-sectional variant of this idea by looking for an instrument for
the prevalence of voucher schools and evaluating its effect on aggregate performance. Here
again the challenge is finding credible instrumental variables for private enrollment. Auguste
and Valenzuela (2006) use distance to a nearby city and find evidence of cream skimming and
significant positive effects on achievement. Gallego (2006) uses the density of priests per
diocese and finds substantial effects on average achievement.
Another way to consider aggregate effects—the one that takes this logic the furthest—is to
simply look at aggregate country performance, particularly in international tests. Hsieh and
Urquiola (2003) point out that Chile’s performance did not improve in the first 20 years after the
voucher reform. Recent experience in this area has been more favorable. After dropping by 5
and 7 points respectively from 1999 to 2003, Chile’s 8th grade math and science scores increased
substantially—by 29 points and 48 points respectively from 2003 to 2011. Hanushek, Peterson,
and Woessman (2012) estimate that Chile had the second-highest growth rate among 49
countries they studied for this period. Looking at national tests, Neilson (2013) shows evidence
of improvement among voucher schools in 4th grade test scores during 2008-2012—this contrasts
with stagnant performance between 2003 and 2007. At the same time, this progress seems to
have significantly decelerated, depending on the subject tested, as measured by the last PISA
iteration (2013).
The literature features another approach to look at the net aggregate effects of choice—
structural estimation. Papers that take this route often achieve interesting analytical richness, but
also require strong assumptions. Beginning with test scores as an outcome, Neilson (2013)
argues that the 2008-2012 improvement cited in the previous paragraph is due to a 2008 reform
that increased the voucher for low income students. Specifically, the reform increased the
voucher by about 40% for the poorest 40% of the population, with schools having higher
46

concentrations of low income students receiving even higher payments. In exchange for this
higher subsidy, voucher schools were required to eliminate tuition top ups for these students, and
to refrain from selective admissions. About three-fourths of voucher schools eventually chose to
participate.
The paper uses rich data (that includes distance to school) to estimate school-specific quality
measures and a random utility model of school choice by heterogeneous households. The results
suggest that the targeted voucher: i) increased average school quality by 0.21σ, ii) increased
average voucher school quality by 0.16σ, and iii) did not affect quality at the non-voucher (elite)
private schools. These estimates are then used to parcel achievement gains between those that
result as low income students switch to higher quality schools (as tuition drops to zero) and to
increases in school quality. The counterfactual with the targeted voucher introduced but with no
change in school qualities is simulated to estimate the former effect. The analysis suggests that
1/3 of the achievement gain is from changes in school choice, and 2/3 is due to school quality
improvements. Further research here might consider further whether gains can be explained
“simply” by increased school expenditure from the voucher.
This approach addresses very interesting issues, but also requires strong assumptions. For
instance, period-specific school quality is measured by regressing test scores on a school fixed
effect and a number of controls.

This assumes there is no selection on unobservable

characteristics; e.g. parental tastes for educational achievement or religious instruction.54 In
addition, the framework assumes that students can attend any school they are willing to travel to
and pay for. While consistent with the Chilean legislation, these assumptions would seem at
odds with the extensive stratification and heated current discussion over the implementation of
more binding mechanisms to stop selection, such as centralized lotteries.
Finally Bravo, Mukhopadhyay, and Todd (2010) present an evaluation of the attainment and
labor market—as opposed to test score—effects of the Chilean voucher regime based on
estimation of a structural model of dynamic school and labor market choices. They use the 2002
and 2004 waves of a large survey of working-aged individuals that includes educational and
work history, and family background characteristics. The identification originates in that
individuals vary in the number of years they were exposed to the voucher regime. The
parameters of the structural model are estimated using about 100,000 person-year observations.

54

This is a highly restrictive way of measuring school quality/value added relative to other recent efforts in the
literature, e.g. Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2014), Kane and Staiger (2008) and Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014a,b).

47

The results are then used to simulate choices and outcomes for those fully exposed to the
voucher regime and to compare these to the counterfactual with the voucher program shut down.
The results suggest that the introduction of vouchers led to an increase in earnings from years
attending municipal and subsidized private primary schools, but a decrease from years attending
secondary schools. The authors note that the secondary school effects might be explained by
entry of less efficient schools induced by the voucher, and by reduced per student expenditures
noted in Section 3. Educational attainment is estimated to be substantially increased by the
voucher regime. For example, full exposure to the regime is estimated to increase high school
graduation by 3.6%, and completion of at least two years of college by 2.6%. Average lifetime
earnings are estimated to be unchanged by the voucher. The increased attainment is offset by the
lower return to secondary education and delayed entry into the labor force.55 Earnings variation
is reduced by the voucher, as those at the bottom end of the earnings distribution benefit from
improved primary education while those at the top end suffer from weakened secondary schools.
The authors find substantial increases in average discounted lifetime utility, approximately 10%.
These gains arise from the utility of time spent attending school and not working. Gains are
found at all percentiles, with larger increases at lower percentiles than higher percentiles.
The paper is ambitious and the findings of large attainment effects, no (average) earnings
effects, and substantial lifetime utility gains add new findings on the net effects of vouchers.
Identifying the effects of vouchers at different school levels and on different school types is also
notable relative to other approaches. Again, however, the structural approach comes at a cost.
First, the identification challenges inherent in a large scale program are still present. Second, to
make the model tractable, individuals are of “just” three types. Related to this, the model has
limited potential to provide insight into sorting effects on schooling and labor market outcomes.
For example, might the finding of lower earnings from attending secondary school be a result of
sorting (with both municipal and subsidized schools having worse students on average in the
voucher regime), whether through composition or peer effects?

5.4.2 Sweden
Bohlmark and Lindahl (2008) present an analysis analogous to that of Hsieh and Urquiola
(2006)—they ask if outcomes improved by more in municipalities that experienced more
55

Earning returns to college education are estimated to be relatively low. The model does not allow the voucher
regime to directly affect the returns to college education.

48

extensive independent school entry. They focus on three types of student outcomes: i) GPA for
the 9th and 12th grades, ii) participation in higher education (a dummy for having completed at
least one year of education within six years of leaving compulsory schooling), and iii) years of
schooling eight years after compulsory education. On outcome i) the results point to a small
positive effect on average 9th grade GPA that does not persist until grade 12; on ii) and iii) there
is no evidence of an effect.
Bohlmark and Lindahl (2012) extend this analysis to several additional cohorts, finding
significantly more positive conclusions. Specifically, measures i)-iii) are found to increase with
the independent-school enrollment share. For instance, a 10 percentage point increase in this
share is associated with a 0.08σ increase in language and math scores at the end of 9th grade, and
a .04σ rise in the fraction of individuals completing at least one semester of university. As stated
these estimates are obtained using data at the municipality level.

When observations are

aggregated further the results with respect to test score and grade gains are robust, while those
with respect to college attendance and years of schooling are somewhat less so.
Bohlmark and Lindahl (2012) conclude by discussing the contrast of findings for Sweden
relative to Hsieh and Urquiola’s (2006) findings for Chile. They observe that the more favorable
results for Sweden with respect both to cream skimming and educational outcomes are consistent
with the predictions of the reputational model of MacLeod and Urquiola (2009). Namely, the
fact that it is harder for independent schools to cream skim may imply that they may seek to
build reputations for quality on value added rather than peer composition; parental school choice
may in turn be driven by value added as well.
However, recent work suggests a potential source of caution with respect to the test scorerelated results from Sweden. Specifically, while as stated the content of the tests is nationally
standardized, they are graded at each school. A concern that had been mentioned in Sweden is
that independent schools might grade more leniently; indeed this is something that Bohlmark and
Lindahl (2008) themselves mention. This was recently analyzed in a re-grading exercise
described by Tyrefors and Vlachos (2013). Independent graders re-examined exams from
different schools. The authors point out that independent schools were more likely to have their
grades lowered upon a second examination.56 It is possible that the independent schools—
perhaps under greater pressure to please parents—engaged in more grade inflation.

56

This brief synopsis is based on correspondence with the authors, as the article cited is in Swedish. In addition, see
the reporting in Fisman (2014).

49

Consistent with this, Wondratschek, Edmark, and Frolich (2013) look at other outcomes and
find modest to zero effects. Two aspects distinguish their study. First, rather than look at
variation in school choice at the municipality level they use a more finely grained measure
calculated using geographical information. Specifically, they suppose that children who lived
closer to more (public or private) schools were impacted more by the voucher reform, which
allowed them greater choice among nearby schools. Second, they consider both short- and longterm outcomes. They find small effects on test scores from exams graded at school (again, grade
inflation may be a concern, although Wondratchek et al. suggest it is not a major one) and on
military exam scores for men. They find zero effects on longer term outcomes such as university
educational attainment, employment, criminal activity, and health.
Finally, as in Chile, one can undertake the most aggregate analysis by simply looking at the
evolution of Sweden’s performance in international test scores (with analogous threats to
identification). Here the picture is distinctly more negative, as Sweden has seen significantly
deteriorating performance in the years since vouchers were implemented. As in Chile, there
have been calls for reform, although the details remain under debate.

5.4.3 Canada
The aggregate effect of a voucher-like system is also explored by Card, Dooley, and Payne
(2010) in Canada. Specifically, they consider the case of Ontario, where two parallel systems
co-exist. First, non-Catholics are allowed to attend public schools—for this segment the public
sector essentially operates a monopoly. Second, Catholics (who account for roughly 40% of the
population) are allowed to attend a “separate” Catholic school system. If they do so these
schools receive the resources that would have otherwise gone to the public sector, emulating a
voucher system.

In short, Catholics have greater choice and their presence can generate

competition between schools.
In particular, the competitive pressure will be greater in a given area to the extent that: i)
Catholics are prevalent in it, and ii) they are willing to switch between sectors. Card et al.
measure the former simply by the population share of Catholics; they proxy the latter by
measuring how willing the eligible population is to switch between systems when a school of a
system that previously did not exist opens in a given area. They find that this is more likely to be
the case in areas that are growing. A key assumption is that the fraction Catholic has no direct

50

effect on average test score gains. A further concern is that the entry of the Catholic system into
a given area may be endogenous.
Card et al. find statistically significant average gains in achievement (in terms of test score
improvement between the 3rd and 6th grade) that are greater in more competitive markets—those
that have more Catholics and are growing faster. They describe these as modest; for instance,
markets with 60 as opposed to 20 percent of children with choice would have achievement
higher by 0.03 to 0.05 standard deviations.

5.4.4 India
Finally, as noted in Section 3.1.3, the experimental design in Andhra Pradesh was unique and
notable in that randomization involved not only students but also towns/markets. Specifically,
first some towns were selected for distribution of vouchers; second, within the towns selected for
treatment, some children were randomly selected to receive the vouchers. This allows
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) to go beyond the usual comparison (lottery winners vs.
lottery losers) and address potential externalities on children who remain in public school. For
example, by comparing non-applicants in towns that did not receive vouchers to non-applicants
in towns that did, they can get a sense of negative effects on children “left behind” in the public
sector. The authors find little if any evidence of such externalities. In short, the gains in
performance found in the tests for Hindi may represent true aggregate-level gains.

5.5 Question 5: What political economy factors determine the existence and design of
voucher programs?
We close our review of the empirical literature by looking at evidence related to political
economy. Brunner, Sonstelie, and Thayer (2001) study voting on the 1993 California voucher
proposal using data from 3,786 precincts in Los Angeles County. They take Nechyba (1999) as
their point of departure, noting that this model predicts that a voucher would cause house prices
to fall (rise) in neighborhoods with high (low) quality schools. The authors use a hedonic
equation to estimate the relationship of housing prices and school quality—measuring the latter
by scores on standardized tests—to estimate the housing price premium for schooling in each
district. This price-premium is then included in a regression in which the dependent variable is
the proportion of voters supporting the voucher. They find strong support for predictions with
51

respect to housing owners. Holding other variables constant, their estimates imply that the
difference in the vote favoring vouchers between districts with a housing premium 15% above
the average would be 8% lower than in a district with a housing price premium 15% below the
average.
Brunner and Sonstelie (2003) analyze a 2000 voucher proposal in California. They study
opinions on the proposal using data from a statewide opinion poll conducted three months prior
to the vote. The poll asked respondents whether they supported the voucher, their perception of
quality at their local public school, and their income and demographic characteristics. The
authors investigate responses among three groups of home owners: those without children, those
with children in public school, and those with children in private school. For owners without
children, support for the voucher was inversely related to local public school quality. This is in
keeping with a concern for property values. Households with children in private schools are
much more supportive of the voucher, but also at the margin have a larger reduction in support as
public school quality increases. For those with children in public school, voucher support was
positively related to public school quality, though significant at only the 10% level. Brunner and
Sonstelie note that this finding might emerge if (as Nechyba’s analysis predicts) some
households with children in public school expect to move to a neighborhood with low quality
public schools (low housing prices), take up the voucher, and send their children to private
school. Households with children already in private school who choose nonetheless to live in a
neighborhood with a high quality public school would presumably not relocate in response to the
voucher. Hence, results that, at first glance seem contradictory can in principle be reconciled.
Brunner and Imazeki (2008) extend the analysis of California voting, arguing that higher
income voters’ support for a voucher depend on the extent of choice in local education markets.
In markets with many districts, higher income households can be expected to have paid a
substantial housing price premium to locate in a high quality district. For such households, a
private-school voucher program could adversely affect home values. By contrast, in low choice
markets, high income households would likely benefit from being able to use vouchers to pay for
private schooling. They use block-level voting data from the 2000 ballot initiative (Proposition
38) that would have offered a flat voucher of $4,000 per student in California. They create an
index for choice among public schools and estimate regressions in which the dependent variable
is a logistic transformation of the fraction of yes votes. The regressions include income, an
interaction of income and the choice index, and demographic controls. They predict that income
will have a positive coefficient, the interaction of income and the choice index will have a
52

negative coefficient, and the sum of the coefficients will be negative. Their predictions are
supported. Moreover, the effects are quite large and are robust to a variety of specification
checks, providing evidence that the extent of Tiebout choice impacts voucher support.
Brunner, Imazeki, and Ross (2010) exploit the idea that votes on the California voucher
initiative may signal intent to use the voucher. They find that support for the voucher by white
households with children increased with the proportion of nonwhite students in their children’s
schools. No comparable phenomenon was present either for non-white households or for
households without children. They provide some evidence that households may be responding to
correlates of race/ethnicity rather than race/ethnicity per se. For example, voucher support
among non-white households with children increased with share of non-white students with
limited English proficiency.
Kenny (2005) studies support for vouchers, both in referenda and in state legislatures. He
identifies ten referenda initiatives that, in some way, provide support for private schools. These
include proposals for transportation for private school students, in addition to a variety of
voucher models. All ten referenda were defeated. Kenny then turns to a descriptive assessment
of factors that influence whether a voucher proposal is considered by a state legislature, a
number of which have been passed or at least supported by one chamber, and factors that raise its
probability of success. He concludes that ideology plays a central role, noting that virtually all
proposals were in states where the Republican Party controlled the legislature, and among those,
the successful proposals were in states with relatively more conservative Republicans. Kenny
also finds evidence that voucher proposals focused on big-city districts tend to garner more
support.
Kenny (2010) investigates voting on two voucher proposals that have come before the
U.S. congress. One, an amendment to the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB), would have
allowed federal funds to help children in poorly performing or unsafe public schools attend
private schools. The other was to authorize a voucher for Washington, D.C. Only four
Democrats, found by Kenny to be highly conservative, voted for either. Hence, Kenny again
focuses on an empirical description of the determinants of votes by house Republicans. He
considers the degree of conservatism of the legislator—based on Americans for Democratic
Action (ADA) scores—and characteristics of the legislator’s district: percent urban, percent low
income, percent black, percent teachers unionized, and percent of private school attendees. Of
these, the ADA score is highly significant in the expected direction. The variation in percent
teachers unionized is negatively correlated with voting on the NCLB amendment, but essentially
53

uncorrelated with the position on the Washington, D.C. vote. Kenny notes this is consistent with
teachers unions exerting more effort to defeat the NCLB legislation, which would have had
impact nationwide. Variation in percent black across districts has a relatively significant positive
impact on the NCLB vote, but not on the Washington, D.C. vote. This may also be consistent
with legislators voting in constituents’ interest,57 since constituents would be directly impacted
by NCLB legislation but not by the Washington D.C. voucher.
We saw in our review of theoretical research on the political economy of vouchers an
emphasis on variation in preferences for education spending across the income distribution, and
associated financial incentives for support or opposition to vouchers. Kenny’s work suggests a
greater role for ideology in theoretical modeling of preferences over vouchers. Theoretical
analysis of the political economy of vouchers also emphasizes the fiscal incentives for adoption .
In particular, that research highlights the potential for reducing school taxes if a voucher less
than per student public school expenditure induces students to exit to private schools.58 For
example, Brunner and Sonstelie (2003) report that the Legislative Analyst’s Office estimate
overall fiscal cost of the voucher to be in the range from an increase of $500 million to a
decrease of $2.5 billion. Thus, far, these fiscal incentives have not been investigated empirically,
making this an interesting open issue for research.

6. Conclusion
Vouchers have been neither the rousing success imagined by proponents nor the abject
failure predicted by opponents. Our assessment is that recent theoretical and empirical results
reveal a need for—and reasons to be optimistic about—potential gains from improving voucher
design.
In high income countries research on the impact of small-scale programs on test scores
exhibits no consistent, robust pattern. While the effects are rarely adverse and sometimes
favorable, it is frequently the case that no significant impact is found. The most robust finding is
57

Opinion polls regarding vouchers generate considerable debate about the sensitivity of responses to the phrasing
of questions. Overall, however, polls on voucher programs tend to find greater support among African Americans
than among the overall population. See, for example, responses to questions (16a) through (16c) in
http://educationnext.org/files/2014ednextpoll.pdf. Eight surveys of African Americans were conducted between
1996 and 2008 by the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies (2008). The proportion supporting vouchers
exceeded the proportion opposed in the eight surveys, with a majority supporting vouchers in five of the eight.
58
We noted above that such fiscal gains arise from the Milwaukee voucher, although peculiarities of the financing
result in the gains accruing to Wisconsin taxpayers outside of Milwaukee.

54

that voucher threats induce public schools to improve. While significant identification challenges
arise in this type of analysis, the estimated effects seem to us reliable and large enough to be
educationally meaningful and warrant further research. In addition, recent evidence from smallscale experiments in the U.S. finds substantial gains in years of school for recipients who had not
experienced gains in test scores. While potentially due to differential peer composition between
public and private schools, the effects are large by the standards of the peer effects literature, and
therefore encouraging with respect to the impact of vouchers. Nonetheless, the evidence is from
a few programs and hence still too limited to permit generalizations.
More encouraging results on the effect of small scale programs come from developing
countries. First, there are positive reduced form findings from Colombia, although questions
remain as to whether the central mechanisms that account for these are really due to vouchers.
Further interesting evidence comes from India. While vouchers there delivered modest test score
gains, they did so at one-third the cost per student of public schools and with no adverse
distributional effects. Such results have not been mirrored elsewhere, but may have relevance in
other developing countries that, like India, have dysfunctional public school systems (e.g. with
severe teacher attendance shortfalls). Other educational reforms are also likely to be effective in
such countries, and at some level interventions that increase achievement might have higher
priority than innovations that merely reduce cost. Further, the extent to which cost savings—
which come largely from lower pay to untrained (e.g., individuals who may be high school
graduates only), entry level teachers—can be sustained in the longer term and at higher grade
levels remains an open question. On the other hand, the observed results might improve as new
teachers gain experience.
The evidence on large scale programs raises methodological challenges, and very much
highlights the importance of voucher design. For instance, analysis of the first two decades of
the Chilean voucher provided strong evidence of cream skimming and at best mixed evidence of
impacts on test scores. These adverse findings—and discontent with the education system more
generally—brought and is likely to bring further reforms. Notably in 2008 the government
introduced greater voucher payments targeting lower income students, and prohibited tuition
“top ups” (charging more than the voucher) for these students at participating schools. Recent
research suggests favorable effects from this reform and highlights the desirability of further
analysis in this dimension.
Finally, the Chilean case also shows the importance of getting voucher design right. As
stated, large protests surrounding the school system have been prevalent over the past years.
55

Michelle Bachelet, who returned to the presidency in 2014, made a salient campaign promise to
remove the ability of private voucher schools to operate for profit. The existing research does
not speak directly or definitively to whether this would be productive, but aside from this, these
events highlight the desirability of getting design elements right, before popular discontent and
political considerations direct voucher design.
In the case of Sweden’s large scale voucher program, early research with respect to effects on
test scores likewise found little effect. More recent work features evidence of significant gains,
although there are mixed results and concern related to grade inflation among private schools.
Recent research also tends to support the finding that voucher competition has improved the
performance of public schools, and that the program design has contributed to limiting cream
skimming. Like in Chile, however, there is significant discontent with vouchers in Sweden,
although perhaps not as widespread.

Interestingly, while Chile historically has had low

performance in international test scores, it has been improving; in contrast, Sweden historically
had high performance and has been declining. This juxtaposition is to some extent arbitrary—
for example, Chile’s gains may be larger and more relevant that Sweden’s decline. The more
general point is that aggregate educational performance is the product of complicated processes
with significant lags, and methodologically it is difficult to isolate how vouchers affect it.
To summarize, the evidence thus far, while uneven, is sufficiently encouraging to make a
strong case for continued experimentation and evaluation. The evidence also suggests that work
originating in a single country or in a single research approach is unlikely to completely answer
questions regarding vouchers. Small scale experiments are appealing in providing strong
statistical identification, but do not always isolate mechanisms (e.g., peer effects, differences in
expenditure per pupil) and leave open the issue of scalability. Large scale programs provide
scope for assessment of the effects of vouchers in practice, but identification is a greater
challenge due to potential selection effects and associated differential peer effects (and,
sometimes, to potential confounding effects of contemporaneous policy changes). For research
the ongoing tasks include continuing refinement of identification strategies, investigating longerterm impacts, providing a better understanding of why effects emerge or fail to emerge, and
marshalling theory and evidence to improve voucher design.

56

References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J., Dynarski, S., Kane, T. and Pathak, P., “Accountability and
Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126 (2): 699-748, 2011.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. and Pathak, P. “The Elite Illusion: Achievement Effects at
Boston and New York Exam Schools.” Econometrica 82 (1): 137-196, 2014.
Adams, M. “Tomorrow’s Schools Today: New Zealand’s Experiment 20 Years On,” Mimeo,
Mercatus Center, George Mason University, 2009.
Aedo, C. and Larrañaga, O., “Sistemas de Entrega de los Servicios Sociales: La Experiencia
Chilena.” In Sistemas de Entrega de los Servicios Sociales: La Experiencia Chilena, edited by O.
Larrañaga, O. and C. Aedo, Editors, Washington, DC, Inter-American Development Bank, 1994.
Ahlin, A., “Does School Competition Matter? Effects of a Large-Scale School Choice Reform on
Student Performance.” Uppsala University Department of Economics Working Paper 2003:2,
2003.
Altonji, J., Elder, T., Taber, C., “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing
the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political Economy. 113 (1): , 2005.
Andrabi, T., Das., J. and Khwaja, A. “Students today, teachers tomorrow: Identifying
constraints on the provision of education.” Journal of Public Economics 100: 1-14, 2013.
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E. Bloom, E., King, E. and Kremer, M., “Vouchers for Private Schooling
in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American Economic Review
92 (5): 1535-1558, 2002.
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E. and Kremer, M., “Evidence from a Randomized Experiment: The Effect
of Educational Vouchers on Long-Run Student Outcomes.” American Economic Review 92(5):
1535-1558, 2006.
Auguste, S. and Valenzuela J., “Is It Just Cream Skimming? School Vouchers in Chile,” Mimeo,
FIEL and Universidad de Chile, 2006.
Barnard, J., Frangakis, C., Hill, J. and Rubin, D., “Principal Stratification Approach to Broken
Randomized Experiments: A Case Study of School Choice Vouchers in New York City.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 98 (462): 299-311, 2003.
Barrow, L. and Rouse, C., “School Vouchers and Student Achievement: Recent Evidence and
Remaining Questions.” Annual Review Economics 1: 17–42, 2009.
Bearse, P., Cardak, B., Glomm, G. and Ravikumar, B., “Why Do Education Vouchers Fail?”
Mimeo, August 16, 2009.

57

Belfield, C., “The Evidence on Education Vouchers: An Application to the Cleveland
Scholarship and Tutoring Program,” mimeo, Queens College, City University of New York,
January 2006.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. “An Economic theory of Representative Democracy.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112: 85-114, 1997.
Bettinger, E., Kremer, M. and Saavedra, J. “Are Educational Vouchers only Redistributive?”
The Economic Journal 120: F204-228, 2010.
Bjorklund, A., Clark, M., Edin, P., Fredriksson, P. and Krueger, A., The Market Comes to
Education in Sweden: An Evaluation of Sweden’s Surprising School Reforms, Russell Sage
Foundation: New York, 2005.
Bohlmark, A., Holmlund, H., and Lindahl, M, “School choice and segregation: Evidence from
Sweden.” Mimeo, Uppsala University.
Bohlmark, A. and Lindahl, M. “The Impact of School Choice on Pupil Achievement,
Segregation and Costs: Swedish Evidence.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2786, 2007.
______________________, “Does School Privatization Improve Educational Achievement?
Evidence from Sweden’s Voucher Reform,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 3691, 2008.
______________________, “Independent Schools and Long-run Educational Outcomes—
Evidence from Sweden’s Large Scale Voucher Reform,” CESifo Working Paper No. 3866, 2012.
Bravo, D., Contreras D. and Sanhueza, C., “Educational Achievement, Inequalities and
Private/Public Gap, Chile 1982-1997,” Working Paper No. 163, University of Chile Department
of Economics, 1999.
Bravo, D., Mukhopadhyay, S., and Todd, P. “Effects of school reform on education and labor
market performance: Evidence from Chile’s universal voucher system.” Quantitative Economics
1: 47-9, 2010.
Brunner, E. and Imazeki, J. “Tiebout Choice and Universal School Vouchers.” Journal of Urban
Economics 63: 253-379, 2008.
Brunner, E., Imazeki, J. and Ross, S. “Universal Vouchers and Racial and Ethnic Segregation.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 92: 912-927, 2010.
Brunner, E. and Ross, S. “Is the median voter decisive? Evidence from referenda voting
patterns” Journal of Public Economics 94: 898-910, 2010.
Brunner, E. and Sonstelie, J., “Homeowners, Property Values, and the Political Economy of the
School Voucher,” Journal of Urban Economics, 54, pp 239–257, 2003.
Brunner, E., Sonstelie, J. and Thayer, M., “Capitalization and the Voucher,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 50, pp 517–536, 2001.
58

Card, D., Dooley, M. and Payne, A., “School Competition and Efficiency with Publicly Funded
Catholic Schools,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4), pp 150-76, October
2010.
Carnoy, M., “Is privatization through education vouchers really the answer? A comment on
West,” World Bank Research Observer, 1(12), pp 105–106, 1997.
Carnoy, M., Chudgar, A. and Adamson, F., “Vouchers and Public School Performance: A Case
Study
of
the
Milwaukee
Parental
Choice
Program,”
2007.
http://www.epi.org/publication/book_vouchers/
Carrell, S., Sacerdote, B. and West, J., “From Natural Variation to Optimal Policy? The
Importance of Endogenous Peer Group Formation,” Econometrica, 81(3), pp 855-882, 2013.
Chakrabarti, R., “Can Increasing Private School Participation and Monetary Loss in a Voucher
Program Affect Public School Performance? Evidence from Milwaukee,” Journal of Public
Economics, 92, pp 1371–1393, 2008.
____________, “Vouchers, Public School Response and the Role of Incentives: Evidence from
Florida,” Economic Inquiry, 51(1), pp 500-526, 2013a.
___________, “Accountability with Voucher Threats, Responses, and the Test-Taking
Population: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Florida,” Education Finance and Policy,
8(2), 2013b.
___________, “Do vouchers lead to sorting under random private school selection? Evidence
from the Milwaukee voucher program,” Economics of Education Review, 34, pp 191–218,
2013c.
___________ “Impact of Voucher Design on Public School Performance: Evidence from Florida
and Milwaukee Voucher Programs,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy:
Contributions, 13(1), 2013d.
Chan, P. and McMillan, R., “School Choice and Public School Performance: Evidence from
Ontario's Tuition Tax Credit,” Mimeo, University of Toronto, 2009.
Chay, K., McEwan, P. and Urquiola, M., “The Central Role of Noise in Evaluating Interventions
that Use Test Scores to Rank Schools,” American Economic Review, 95(4), pp 1237-1258, 2005.
Chen, Z. and West, E., “Selective versus Universal Vouchers: Modeling median Voter
Preferences in Education,” American Economic Review, 90(5), pp 1520-1534, December 2000.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J., and Rockoff, J. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias
in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American Economic Review, 104(9) pp 2593–2632, 2014.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American Economic Review 104
(9): 2633–79.
59

Chingos, M. and Peterson, P., “Experimentally estimated impacts of school vouchers on college
enrollment and degree attainment,” Journal of Public Economics, 122, February 2015.
Chubb, J. and Moe, T., Politics, Markets, and America’s Schools, Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution, 1990.
Clark, D., “Politics, markets, and schools: Quasi-experimental estimates of the impact of
autonomy and competition from a truly revolutionary U.K. reform”, Journal of Political
Economy, 117(4), pp 745-783, 2009.
Clark, D., “Selective Schools and Academic Achievement,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
and Policy, 10(1) (Advances), 2010.
Coons, J. and Sugarman, S., Education by Choice: The Case for Family Control, Berkeley, CA:
Institute of Governmental Studies Press, 1978.
Costrell, R., “The Fiscal Impact of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program: 2010 – 2011
Update and Policy Options,” School Choice Demonstration Project Milwaukee Evaluation,
Report #22, December 2010.
Cowen, J., , Fleming, D., Witte, J., Patrick J. Wolf, and Brian Kisida, “School Vouchers and
Student Attainment: Evidence from a State-Mandated Study of Milwaukee’s Parental Choice
Program,” The Policy Studies Journal, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2013.
Cullen, J., Jacob, B. and Levitt, S., “The Effect of School Choice on Participants: Evidence from
Randomized Lotteries,” Econometrica, Vol. 74(5), pp 1191-1230, 2006.
Duflo, E., Dupas, P. and Kremer, M. “Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the impact of
tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya,” American Economic Review
101(5), 1739-1774, 2011.
Duflo, E., Hanna, R. and Ryan, S. “Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to School,”
American Economic Review, 102(4), pp 1241-78, 2012
Eden, B., “How to Subsidize Education: An Analysis of Voucher Systems,” Mimeo, 1994.
Elacqua, G., “Enrollment Practices in Response to Vouchers: Evidence from Chile,” National
Center for Study of Privatization in Education, Teachers College, Columbia University
Occasional Paper No. 125, 2006.
Engberg, J., Epple, D., Imbrogno, J., Sieg, H. and Zimmer R, “Evaluating Education Programs
that have Lotteried Admission and Selective Attrition,” mimeo, , 2010.
Epple, D., Figlio, D. and Romano, R., “Competition between Private and Public Schools: Testing
Stratification and Pricing Predictions,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, pp 1215–1245, 2004.
Epple, D. and Romano, R., “Ends against the middle: Determining public service provision
when there are private alternatives,” Journal of Public Economics, 62, pp 297-325, 1996.
60

_________________, “Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers, and Peer
Group Effects,” American Economic Review, 88(1), pp 33-62, March 1998.
_________________, “Educational Vouchers and Cream Skimming,” International Economic
Review, 49, pp 1395–1435, November 2008.
_________________, “Peer Effects in Education: A Survey of the Theory and Evidence,” , in
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., and Jackson, M., Editors, Handbook of Social Economics, , Elsevier
Science, North Holland, pp 1053-1163, 2011.
_________________, “Economic Modeling and Analysis of Educational Vouchers,” Annual
Review of Economics, 4, pp 159-184, 2012.
________________, “On the political economy of educational vouchers,” Journal of Public
Economics, 120, pp 62-73, 2014.
Epple, D., Romano, R. and Sarpca, S., “Majority Choice of an Income Targeted Educational
Voucher,” Working Paper, July 2014.
Epple, D., Romano, R. Sarpca, S., and Sieg, H., “The U.S. Market for Higher Education: A
General Equilibrium Analysis of State and Private Colleges and Public Funding Policies,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #19298, 2013.
Epple, D., Romano, R. and Zimmer, R., “Charter Schools: A Survey of Research on their
Characteristics and Effectiveness,” working paper, 2014.
Fernandez, R. and Rogerson. R., “School Vouchers as a Redistributive Device. An Analysis of
Three Alternative Systems,” in Hoxby, C., Editor, The Economics of School Choice, University
of Chicago Press, 2003.
Ferreyra, M., “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District Economies,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 97, pp 789-817, 2007.
Ferreyra, M. and Liang, P., “Information asymmetry and equilibrium monitoring in education,”
Journal of Public Economics 96(1-2), pp 237-254, 2012.
Figlio, D. and Hart, C., “Competitive Effects of Means-Tested School Vouchers,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics,6(1) : 133-156, 2014.
Figlio, D., Hart, C. and Metzger, M., “Who Uses a Means-Tested Scholarship and what do They
Choose?” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 29(2), pp 301-317, 2010.
Figlio, D. and Rouse, C., “Do Accountability and Voucher Threats Improve Low-Performing
Schools?” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90, pp 239–255, 2006.
Figlio, D. and Stone, J., “Are Private Schools Really Better?” S. Polachek, Editor, Research in
Labor Economics, pp 115– 140, 1999.

61

Fiske, E. and Ladd, H., “When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale,” Brookings Institution
Press, Washington, DC, 2000.
Fisman, R. “Sweden’s school choice disaster”, Slate, 2014.
Fleming, D.J., Cowen, J.M., Witte, J.F., and Wolf, P.J., “Similar Students, Different Choices:
Who Uses a School Voucher in an Otherwise Similar Population of Students?” Education and
Urban Society December 19, 2013.
Friedman, M., “The Role of Government in Education,” Chapter 6 in Capitalism and Freedom,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1962.
Fuller, H., “Keep intact the mission of choice program,” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, April 23,
2011.
Gallego, F., “Voucher-School Competition, Incentives, and Outcomes: Evidence from Chile.”
unpublished manuscript, MIT, 2006.
Gauri, V., “School Choice in Chile,” University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1998.
Gill, P., Timpane, M., Ross, K., Brewer, J. and Booker, K., “Rhetoric versus Reality: What We
Know and What We Need to Know About Vouchers and Charter Schools,” Rand Corporation,
2007.
Glomm, G. and Ravikumar, B., “Opting Out of Publicly Provided Services: A Majority Voting
Result,” Social Choice and Welfare, Vol. 15, pp 187-99, 1998.
Greene, J., Peterson, P. and Du, J., “The Effectiveness of School Choice: The Milwaukee
Experiment,” Harvard University Education Policy and Governance Occasional Paper 97-1,
March 1996.
Greene, J., Millas, J., and Buck, S., “The Milwaukee Parental Choice Program’s Effect on
School Integration,” School Choice Demonstration Project, University of Arkansas, Report #20,
April 2010.
Hanushek, E., Peterson, P. and Woessmann, L., “Achievement Growth: International and U.S.
State Trends in Student Performance,” Program on Education Policy and Government Report
No.: 12-03, Taubman Center for State and Local Government, Harvard Kennedy School, July
2012.
Hart, C. “Contexts matter: Selection in Means-tested School Voucher Programs,” Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 36(2): 186-206, 2014.
Hensvik, L. “Competition, Wages and Teacher Sorting: Lessons Learned from a Voucher
Reform,” The Economic Journal, 122, June 2012, 799–824.
Hoxby, C. M., “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?”
American Economic Review, Vol. 90 (5), pp 1209-1238, 2000.
62

_________ “School Choice and School Productivity: Could School Choice be a Rising Tide that
Lifts all Boats,” In C. Hoxby (Ed.), The Economics of School Choice. University of Chicago
Press, 2003.
_________, “School Choice and School Competition: Evidence from the United States,”
Swedish Economic Policy Review, Vol. 10, pp 11–67, 2003b.
Hoyt, W. and Lee, K., “Educational Vouchers, Welfare Effects and Voting,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 69 (2), pp 211–228, 1998.
Hsieh, C. and Urquiola, M., “When Schools Compete, How do they Compete? An Assessment of
Chile’s Nationwide School Voucher Program,” NBER Working Paper 10008, 2003.
___________________, “The Effects of Generalized School Choice on Achievement and
Stratification: Evidence from Chile's Voucher Program,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90
(8-9), pp 1477-1503, 2006.
Ireland, N., “The Mix of Social and Private Provision of Goods and Services,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 43, pp 201-219, 1990.
Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies. National Survey of African American Families’
Views on Education,” 2008. http://jointcenter.org/sites/default/files/Education_0.pdf
Justesen, M., “Learning from Europe: The Dutch and Danish School Systems,” Mimeo, Adam
Smith Institute, 2002.
Kane, T. J., and Staiger, D., “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An
Experimental Evaluation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14607, 2008.
Kenny, L., “The public choice of educational choice,” Public Choice, 124(1-2), pp 205-222, July
2005.
________, “The Appeal of Vouchers for Failing Large City School Districts: Voting in Congress
on Two Very Different Voucher Proposals,” Journal of School Choice 4, pp 5-22, 2010.
King, E., Orazem, P. and Wolgemuth, D., “Central Mandates and Local Incentives: The
Colombia Education Voucher Program.” Series on Impact Evaluation of Education Reforms
Working Paper No. 6, Development Economics Research Group, The World Bank, 1998.
King, E., Rawlings, L., Gutierrez, M., Pardo, C. and Torres, C., “Colombia’s Targeted Education
Voucher Program: Features, Coverage, and Participation.” Series on Impact Evaluation of
Education Reforms Working Paper No. 3, Development Research Group, The World Bank,
1997.
Krueger, A. and Zhu, P., “Comment on a Principal Stratification Approach to Broken
Randomized Experiments: A Case Study of School Choice Vouchers in New York City,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp 314-318, 2003.
63

___________________, “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher Experiment,”
American Behavioral Scientist, pp 658-698, January 2004.
Ladd, H. “School Vouchers: A Critical View,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16 (4),
pp 3-24, Fall 2002.
Ladd, H. and Fiske, E. "The uneven playing field of school choice: Evidence from New
Zealand," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 20(1), pp 43-64, 2001.
Levin, H., “The Economics of Educational Choice,” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 10
(2), pp 137-158, 1991.
_________, “Issues in Educational Privatization,” In E. Fiske & H. Ladd (eds), Handbook of
Research in Education Finance and Policy (New York: Routledge), pp 391-401, 2008.
Levin, J., “Differences in Educational Production between Dutch Public and Religious Schools,”
National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education Occasional Paper 93, 2004.
Lubienski, C., Lee, J. and Gordon L., “School Autonomy and Equity in the New Zealand
Education Market: A Geographic Analysis of Organizational Behavior and Access,” Mimeo,
University of Illinois, 2013.
MacLeod, W.B. and Urquiola, M., “Anti-lemons: School Reputation and Educational Quality,”
NBER working paper No. 15112, 2009.
______________________, “Anti-lemons: School Reputation and Educational Quality,” IZA DP
No. 6805, 2012.
MacLeod, W.B. and Urquiola, M., “Reputation and school competition,” American Economic
Review, forthcoming, 2015.
Manski, C., “Educational Choice (Vouchers) and Social Mobility,” Economics of Education
Review, Vol. 11 (4), pp 351-369, 1992.
Mayer, D., Peterson, P., Myers, D., Clark Tuttle, C. and Howell, W., “School Choice in New
York City after Three Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program,” Final
Report, Mathematica Policy Research, Reference No. 8404-045, February 19, 2002.
Mbiti, I. and A. Lucas, “Access, Sorting, and Achievement: the Short-Run Effects of Free
Primary Education in Kenya,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4), pp 226253, 2012.
McEwan, P.J., “The Effectiveness of Public, Catholic, and Non-Religious Private Schools in
Chile’s Voucher System,” Education Economics, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2001.
__________, “The Potential Impact of Vouchers,” Peabody Journal of Education, Vol. 79 (3),
pp 57-80, 2004.

64

McEwan, P.J. and Carnoy, M., “The Effectiveness and Efficiency of Private Schools in Chile’s
Voucher System,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, Vol. 22 (3), pp 213-239, 2000.
McEwan, P.J., Urquiola, M. and Vegas, E. “School choice, stratification, and information on
school performance,” Economíca, Vol. 8 (2), pp 1-42, 2008.
McMillan, R., “Competition, Incentives and Public School Productivity,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 89, pp 1133-1154, 2005.
Mizala, A. and Romaguera, P., “School Performance and Choice: The Chilean Experience,”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 35 (2), pp 392-417, 2000.
Mizala, A., Romaguera, P. and Urquiola, M., “Socioeconomic Status or Noise? Tradeoffs in the
Generation of School Quality Information,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 84, pp 7175, 2007.
Mizala, A. and Urquiola, M., “Parental Choice and School Markets: The Impact of Information
Approximating School Effectiveness,” Journal of Development Economics, 103, pp 313-335,
2013.
Muralidharan, K. and Sundararaman, V., “Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence
from India,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp 39-77, 2011.
_____________________, “The aggregate effect of school choice: Evidence from a two-stage
experiment in India” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), pp 1011-1066,, 2015.
Neal, D., "How Vouchers Could Change the Market for Education," The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp 25-44, 2002.
Nechyba, T., “School Financed Induced Migration Patterns: The Case of Private School
Vouchers,” Journal of Public Economic Theory, Vol. 1 (1), pp 5-50, 1999.
_________, “Mobility, Targeting, and Private School Vouchers,” American Economic Review,
Vol. 90 (1), pp 130-146, 2000.
_________, “Introducing School Choice into Multidistrict Public School Systems,” Chapter 5 in
The Economics of School Choice, Caroline Hoxby, Editor, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, pp 145-194, 2003.
Neilson, Christopher, “Targeted Vouchers, Competition Among Schools, and the Academic
Achievement of Poor Students,” mimeo, Yale University, 2013.
Patrinos, H., “Private Educational Provision and Public Finance: The Netherlands as a Possible
Model,” National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education Occasional Paper No. 59,
2002.
Peterson, P., Howell, W., Wolf, P. and Cambpell, D., “School Vouchers: Results from
Randomized Experiments,” in C. Hoxby, Editor, The Economics of School Choice, the
University of Chicago Press, pp 107-144, 2003.
65

Peterson, P. and Howell, W., “Efficiency, Bias, and Classification Schemes: A Response to Alan
B. Krueger and Pei Zhu,” American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 47 No. 5, pp 699-717, January
2004a.
___________________, “New Looks at the New York City Evaluation,” Education Next, Vol. 4,
No. 2, Spring 2004b.
Plott, C., “A Notion of Equilibrium and its Possibility under Majority Rule,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 57, pp 787-806, 1967.
Plucker, J., Muller, P., Hansen, J., Ravert, R. and Makel, M., “Evaluation of the Cleveland
Scholarship and Tutoring Program: Summary Report 1998 - 2004,” Center for Evaluation and
Education Policy, Indiana University, 2006a.
_________________________, “Evaluation of the Cleveland Scholarship and Tutoring Program
Technical Report 1998-2004,” Center for Evaluation and Education Policy, Indiana University,
2006b.
Pop-Eleches, C. and M. Urquiola, “Going to a better school: Effects and behavioral responses,”
American Economic Review, 103(4), 1289-1324, 2013.
Rangazas, R., “Vouchers and Voting: An Initial Estimate Based on the Median Voter Model,”
Public Choice, Vol. 82, pp 2561-279, 1995.
Rouse, C., “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence from the Milwaukee
Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), pp 553–602, 1998.
Rouse, C.E., Hannaway, J., Goldhaber, D. and Figlio, D., “Feeling the Florida Heat? How LowPerforming Schools Respond to Voucher and Accountability Pressure,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2): 251–281, 2013.
Sacerdote, B., “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are They, and How
Much Do We Know thus Far?” in Hanushek, E., Machin, S. and Woessmann, L. ed., Handbook
of Education, Vol. 3 (3), edition 1, 2011.
Sandstrom, M. and Bergstrom, F., “School Vouchers in Practice: Competition Won’t Hurt You,”
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 89, pp 351-380, 2005.
Tiebout, C., “A pure theory of local expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy 64(5), 416-424,
1956.
Tyrefors, H. and Vlachos, J. “Systematiska skillnader mellan interna och externa bedömningar
av nationella prov en uppföljningsrapport”, Appendix 5 in Olikheterna är för stora. Omrättning
av nationella prov i grund och gymnasieskolan 2013', Skolinspektionen Dnr U2011/6544/GV,
2013.
Urquiola, M., “Does School Choice Lead to Sorting? Evidence from Tiebout Variation,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 95 (4), pp 1310-1326, September, 2005.
66

Urquiola, M. and Verhoogen, E., “Class Size Caps, Sorting, and the Regression Discontinuity
Design,” American Economic Review, Vol. 99, pp 179-215, March 2009.
Valenzuela, J.P., C. Bellei, and D. de los Rios, “Segregacion escolar en Chile ,” in Martinic, S.
and G. Elacqua, eds., Fin de Ciclo?, Santiago: Unesco, 2010.
West, E., “Public Schools and Excess Burdens,” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 10 (2), pp
159-169, 1991.
Wisconsin Legislative Fiscal Bureau, Informational Paper 26, January, 2013.
Witte, J.F., Sterr, T. and Thorn, C., “Fifth-Year Report: Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,”
Mimeo, University of Wisconsin at Madison, 1995.
Witte, J.F., “Achievement Effects of the Milwaukee Voucher Program,” Mimeo, University of
Wisconsin at Madison, January 1997.
Witte, J.F., Wolf, P. J., Cowen, J. M., Fleming, D. J. and Lucas-McLean, J., “Milwaukee
Parental Choice Program Longitudinal Educational Growth Study.” Baseline Report. School
Choice Demonstration Project, Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas, 2008.
___________________, “The MPCP Longitudinal Educational Growth Study.” School Choice
Demonstration Project, Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas, 2009.
___________________, “The MPCP Longitudinal Educational Growth Study Third Year
Report.” School Choice Demonstration Project, Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas, 2010.
Witte, J. F., Cowen, J. M., Fleming, D. J., Wolf, P. J., Condon, M. R. and Lucas-McLean, J.,
“The voucher Longitudinal Educational Growth Study Third Year Report, School Choice
Demonstration Project, Report # 15, Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas, 2010.
Witte, John F., Deven Carlson, Joshua M. Cowen, David J. Fleming, and Patrick J. Wolf., “The
MPCP Longitudinal Educational Growth Study Fourth Year Report,” School Choice
Demonstration Project, Report # 23, Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas, 2011.
Witte, John F., Deven Carlson, Joshua M. Cowen, David J. Fleming, and Patrick J. Wolf, “The
MPCP Longitudinal Educational Growth Study Final Year Report,” School Choice
Demonstration Project, Report #29, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, February 2012.
Witte, J. F., Cowen, J. M., Fleming, D. J., Wolf, P. J., “Student Attainment and the Milwaukee
Parental Choice Program,” (SCDP Milwaukee Evaluation, Report #24), March 2011b.
Wolf, P., Gutmann, B., Puma, M., Kisida, B., Rizzo, L., Eissa, N., “Evaluation of the DC
Opportunity Scholarship Program Impacts After Three Years: Executive Summary,” Institute of
Education Sciences NCEE 2009-4051, U.S. Department of Education March 2009.
Wolf, P., Gutmann, B., Puma, M., Kisida, B., Rizzo, L., Eissa, N. and Carr, M., “Evaluation of
the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program Final Report, Executive Summary, Institute of
67

Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation 2010-4019 U.S. Department of
Education, 2010a.
_______________________, “Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program Final
Report June,” Institute of Education Science, National Center for Education Evaluation 20104018 U.S. Department of Education, 2010b.
Wolf, P., Witte, J.F. and Fleming, D.J., "SCDP Special Education and the Milwaukee Parental
Choice Program," SCDP, (SCDP Milwaukee Evaluation, Report #35), 2012.
Wondratschek, V., Edmark, K., and Frolich, M. “The Short and Long-term Effects of School
Choice on Student Outcomes—Evidence from a School Choice Reform in Sweden,” CESifo
Working Paper No. 4438, 2013.
Zimmer, R. and Bettinger, E., “Beyond the Rhetoric: Surveying Evidence on Vouchers and Tax
Credits,” in Ladd, H. and E. Fiske, Editors, Handbook of Research in Education Finance and
Policy, Routledge, 2007.

68

Table 1: Publicly Funded US Voucher Programs

Lottery

Underperforming
public
Pvt school
admission
criteria

Indiana
Below 150%
poverty or
failing school
Pvt school
admission
criteria

Below 250% of
poverty
Pvt school
admission
criteria

Washington D.
C.
Below 300%
poverty or on
food stamps
Pvt school
admission
criteria

1995-

2013-

2005-

2011 -

2008-

2004-

3,649 in 2012

6,300 in 2009

494 in 2011
(cap 500)

12,685 in 2009

K-8: $4,250;
HS: $5,000

$4,600 in
2011/12

K-8: $4,250; HS:
$5,000

8,000 2013
$7,617
maximum in
2011/12

3,105 in 2012
k-8: $8,256;
HS: $12,385 in
2013

Some, not
routinely

K-8: $4,250;
HS: $5,000
Yes if voucher
school in
student's
district

3,919 in 2011
$4,700 for K-8,
HS Slightly
Higher

Yes

112 in 2012
K-8: No. HS:
Yes above
220% poverty

13 in 2013
K-8: No. HS:
Yes above
220% poverty

32 in 2012
K-8: No. HS:
Yes above
200% poverty

35 in 2012
K-8: No. HS:
Yes above
200% poverty

Yes since 1998

Yes

Yes

Yes beginning
2006

Yes

Yes

Milwaukee

Racine

Florida

Below 300%
poverty

Below 300%
poverty 2013 -

Admission to
Oversubscribed Pvt
Schools

Lottery

Years of Program

Targeting

Enrollment
Funding Per Student

Transportation
Provided
Number of
Participating
Private Schools
Can tuition
supplement be
required?
Can vouchers be
used at religious
schools?
Same achievement
exams as in public
schools?

Douglas Co.
CO

Failing School

Cleveland
Open to all,
priority to low
income

All students

lottery

Lottery

Lottery

1990-

2011-

1999-2006

24,027 in 2012

520 in 2012

$6,442 in
2012/13

$6,442 in
2013/2014

Some, not
routinely

Ohio

New Orleans

Yes

Up to school

No

Voucher can be
used to pay for
metro/bus

23 in 2013

305 in 2009

280 in 2013

about 130

52 in 2012

Yes

Yes, above
200% poverty

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

69

Table 2: Tax-Credit Financed Voucher Programs*
Florida

Georgia

Indiana

Below 230% of
poverty level

All public
school students

Below 200% of
poverty level or
in underperforming public
school.

200151,023 in 201213

200813,285 in
2011-12

$4,335 average in
2012-13

Targeting

Iowa

Oklahoma

Pennsylvania

Rhode Island

Below 300%
of poverty

Below 300% of
poverty level or
in underperforming public
school.

Below $75,000 and in
under-performing public
school.

Below 250% of
poverty level.

Years of Program
Enrollment

Funding Per Student

Number of Participating
Private Schools

2009-

2013-

2001-

2006-

2,890 in 2012-13

200610,600 in
2011-12

N/A

45,100 in 2011-12

382 in 2012-13

$3,388 average
in 2011-12

$880 average in
2012-13

$1,031 in
2011-12

Up to $5,000

$990 average in 2011-12

$2,690 average in
2012-13

1,330 in 20122013

N/A

N/A

154 in 201112

N/A

400 in 2012-13

54 in 2012-13

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Can tuition supplement be
required?

Can vouchers be used at
religious private schools?
Same achievement exams as
in public schools?

* Tax credits to businesses are generally limited as is the statewide total credit and amount available to provide vouchers to eligible students. Lotteries are then generally used to
provide vouchers to applicants. The poverty level for eligibility is generally measured by the federal poverty level.

70

Table 3: International Voucher Programs
Country

Chile
Denmark
Holland
New Zealand
Sweden

Years in
operation

1981 1855 1917 1989early 1990s -

Restrictions on private/independent schools
Enrollments
in private or For-profit Selective Religious Significant
independent operation admissions affiliation
tuition
voucher-funded allowed
allowed
allowed
charges
schools
allowed
47%
12%
70%
15%
10%

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

71

Table 4: Characte ristics of The ore tical Models of Vouchers
Peers
Affect
Q uality

Vouche r Mode ls

Public Schools

Homogene ous

Heteroge neous

Manski (1991)

x

x

Epple and Romano (1998)

x

x

Nechyba (1999)

x

x

Nechyba (2000)

x

x

x

McMillan (2005)

indirectly

Ferre rya (2007)

x

Epple and Romano (2008)

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

Unive rsal

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Limit
Admissions

Public Choice

Public
Expe ndiiture

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x
x

Voucher

x
x

x

x

Targete d

No
Topping
Up

Housing
Marke t

x

x

x

x
x

Aptitude

Impe rfectly
O bse rved

Private Price
Discriminate

Vouchers

x

x

Nie lson (2013)
Chakrabarti (2013d)

x

x

Macleod and Urquiola (2009)

Chakrabarti (2013c)

RentSee king Income

x

Nechyba (2003)

Ferre rya and Liang (2012)

Student Diffe re ntiation

x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

Public Choice Models
Ireland (1990)

x

x

x

Epple and Romano (1996)

x

x

x

Hoyt and Lee (1998)

x

x

x

x

x

Chen and West (2000)

x

x

x

x

x

x

Fernandez and Rogerson (2003)

x

x

x

x

x

x

Bearse, e t.al. (2009)

x

x

Epple and Romano (2014)

x

x

Epple , Romano, and Sarpca (2014)

x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x

72

