                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             BANKS’ INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS AND DEPOSIT RATES

                                        Itzhak Ben-David
                                            Ajay Palvia
                                           Chester Spatt

                                       Working Paper 21526
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21526


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2015




We thank Allen Berger, Isil Erel, Alberto Pozzolo, and Christian Rauch for helpful comments.
We benefited from comments of seminar participants at the ASSA (IBEFA session on Banks,
Government Intervention and Deregulation), Carnegie Mellon University, Case Western Reserve
University, University of Cincinnati, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, FMA meetings (Atlanta), the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency, The Ohio State University, NBER Corporate Finance meeting, and a webinar
organized by the Global Association of Risk Professionals (GARP). The views presented in the
paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency or the U.S.
Department of the Treasury. Ben-David and Spatt acknowledge the financial support of the
GARP Foundation. Ben-David’s research is supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of
Business and by the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay Palvia, and Chester Spatt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Banks’ Internal Capital Markets and Deposit Rates
Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay Palvia, and Chester Spatt
NBER Working Paper No. 21526
September 2015, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G21

                                            ABSTRACT

A common view is that deposit rates are determined primarily by supply: depositors require
higher deposit rates from risky banks, thereby creating market discipline. An alternative
perspective is that market discipline is limited (e.g., due to deposit insurance and/or enhanced
capital regulation) and that internal demand for funding by banks determines rates. Using branch-
level deposit rate data, t we find little evidence for market discipline as rates are similar across
bank capitalization levels. In contrast, banks’ loan growth has a causal effect on deposit rates:
e.g., branches’ deposit rates are correlated with loan growth in other states in which their bank
has some presence, suggesting internal capital markets help reallocate the bank’s funding.


Itzhak Ben-David                                 Chester Spatt
Department of Finance                            Tepper School of Business
Fisher College of Business                       Carnegie Mellon University
The Ohio State University                        5000 Forbes Avenue
2100 Neil Avenue                                 Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
Columbus, OH 43210                               and NBER
and NBER                                         cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

Ajay Palvia
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20024
Ajay.Palvia@occ.treas.gov
1       Introduction

        Bank deposit rates are determined by the supply of deposits by households and firms and

the demand for deposits by banks. The literature has emphasized the role of the supply of

deposits: since depositors are concerned about the safety of their deposits, they demand a higher

premium from banks that they deem risky, and thus impose deposit market discipline on risky

banks. Researchers have found empirical support for this view, much of it from foreign markets

and the 1980s U.S. banking crisis. Park and Peristiani (1998) and Cook and Spellman (1994)

explore data from the savings and loans (S&L) crisis of the 1980s and document that riskier

institutions paid higher deposit rates, especially for deposits with uncertain insurance guarantees.

Peria and Schmukler (2001) use a sample of banks from South America to document that banks

pay higher deposit rates when the quality of their loan portfolios is low. Despite these findings, it

is questionable whether deposit market discipline is a decisive determinant of deposit rates in

countries such as the United States, where deposit insurance plays such a central role.

Furthermore, there have been enhancements to capital regulation in the last two decades, which

have led to substantially higher bank capital (see time series of bank capital in Figure 1) and

potentially lower bank default risk. 1

        The other factor that can affect deposit rates—demand for deposits by banks—has not

received as much attention in the literature. This channel suggests that a bank’s opportunities to

increase lending may lead to an increase in deposit rates in order to attract new deposits and fund

the new loans. Some studies find evidence consistent with this view; however, it is difficult to

reach conclusions about causality. For example, Jayaratne and Morgan (2000) find that loan


1
 Diamond and Rajan (2000) argue that higher capital levels lead to lower bank default risk. This hypothesis is tested
empirically by Berger and Bouwman (2013) and Brown and Dinc (2011). Of course, higher bank capital could be a
consequence of higher risk.

                                                         1
growth is highly correlated with deposit growth, especially for banks that are poorly capitalized.

Gatev and Strahan (2006) present evidence from the syndicated loan market that the spread on

commercial paper is correlated with deposit flows to banks. Related to this hypothesis, Acharya

and Mora (2015) present evidence that banks that faced a liquidity shortage (their lending

commitments exceeded their deposits) during the Global Financial Crisis increased deposit rates

in order to attract more deposits.

       Discerning the supply and demand channels that determine deposit rates is important in

order to understand the extent to which market discipline exists and to evaluate the mechanism

through which banks’ internal capital markets help liquidity creation (e.g., Berger and Bouwman

2009, Bouwman 2013). So far, however, there has not been an effort to compare the relative

importance of the supply and demand channels in determining deposit rates. One obstacle that

many studies faced was the lack of micro-level data about the deposit rates.

       We use branch-level deposit rates of U.S. banks (money-market deposits as well as

certificate of deposit (CD) data) between 2007 and 2012 to analyze the determinants of deposit

rates. We find no evidence of market discipline in deposit rates in the United States during this

period. Our results suggest, however, that internal capital markets drive deposit rates and that

banks’ lending activity is a strong determinant of deposit rates. Hence, our results suggest that in

recent years rates have been driven by banks’ demand for deposits rather than by the supply of

deposits.

       We begin the empirical analysis by estimating the relation between deposit rates and

bank risk. The view that depositors can impose market discipline on banks through deposit rates

is motivated by prior research indicating that banks knowingly choose to shift risks to the

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) by seeking risky lending opportunities and

                                                 2
funding them with deposits. The risk-shifting argument is illustrated by the finding of Esty

(1997) that stock-owned banks exhibited higher profit variability than mutual savings and loan

organizations in the mid-1980s. Keeley (1990) argues that increased competition led low-capital

banks to take on more asset risk, while documenting an inverse relation between bank capital

ratios and large denomination CD rates. Shoven, Smart, and Waldfogel (1992) also argue that

very high levels of competition unleashed by deregulation and evidenced by relatively high

deposit rates throughout the 1980s helped to set the stage for risk-shifting by troubled banks.

Another strand of the literature studies market discipline in situations where deposit insurance is

not available. For example, Park and Peristiani (1998) focus on accounts larger than $100,000

that were not fully insured by the FDIC. Peria and Schmukler (2001) find evidence for market

discipline in South America.

       Our empirical strategy in this portion of the analysis is based on measuring the relation

between deposit rates and proxies for bank risk. Following Brown and Dinc (2011) and Berger

and Bouwman (2013), we select the capitalization of banks as our main proxy for bank risk. Two

main forces determine the relation between deposit rates and bank risk. On the one hand,

depositors require higher rates to deposit funds in riskier banks. On the other hand, while

capitalization varies greatly, average capital levels are substantially higher following the Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), which suggests reduced risk levels

for deposit investors and potentially corresponding limits on market discipline. 2 In addition,

deposits in the United States (up to $100k pre-2008 and $250k post-2008) are insured by the

FDIC, thereby weakening the sensitivity to bank risk and failure. Depositors can limit the size of

their deposits at an individual bank (and even use an intermediary to facilitate spreading out their

2
 For example, Aggrawal and Jacques (2001) document that banks increased capital ratios following FDICIA
without compensating increases in risk taking.

                                                  3
deposits) 3 to guarantee that the deposits are fully insured if they conclude that the insurance is of

significant value. In effect, insurance is available to prospective depositors by spreading out their

deposits at low cost. 4 Therefore, we predict that the relation between deposit rates and bank risk

is potentially weak or even nonexistent.

         Indeed, we do not find a negative relation between deposit rates and bank capital shortly

before or after the financial crisis, which we define as beginning in 2008/Q4, which suggests the

absence of market discipline. During the period after 2008/Q4, we find a consistent positive

relation between deposit rates and equity capital, suggesting better capitalized banks pay higher

deposit rates. These results remain qualitatively similar across deposit horizons and deposit sizes.

However, the association between higher equity capital and CD rates is strongest for smaller

banks and banks with greater dependence on non-brokered deposits, suggesting that our result is

driven by local and retail deposits. In robustness analyses, we verify that our results are not

driven by the rate cap instituted by the FDIC in 2009, by the regulators’ restrictions in earlier

periods, or by a bank’s participation in the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Such rate

restrictions could have caused deposit rates to be uninformative about the riskiness of the banks’

portfolios, leading banks to alter their investment policies (Berger, Bouwman, Kick, and

Schaeck, 2012). Our results remain virtually unchanged when we remove banks that are

potentially subject to these restrictions.

         We test another prediction of the market discipline hypothesis - that deposit rates should

predict bank failure: depositors identify banks that are in poor financial shape and therefore

demand a higher premium for their deposits because these banks are more likely to fail on

3
 For example, Promontory Financial Group is one such intermediary.
4
 An important consideration that limits the exposure of uninsured depositors and increases the exposure of the
FDIC is the potential ability to withdraw in advance of the collapse of the bank and the potential ability of banks to
obtain liquidity in some instances (e.g., from Federal Home Loan Banks or even the Federal Reserve).

                                                          4
average. Our empirical test shows the opposite. For the four-quarter horizon, the relation

between bank failure and deposit rates is negative (low deposit rates in the cross section predict

bank failure) and statistically significant; it becomes statistically insignificant for the eight-

quarter horizon. Furthermore, we find the time to failure is not associated with deposit rates. In

sum, we do not find support for market discipline in the deposit market.

       These results provide preliminary support for the view that CD rates are primarily an

indicator of bank demand for funds rather than an indicator of bank riskiness. Lower CD rates

for weakly capitalized banks are suggestive of less aggressive deposit-seeking by the weak

banks. Next, we explore the internal capital markets channel of determining deposit rates in order

to directly relate bank internal loan demand to CD rates. Our hypothesis is that banks determine

deposit rates based on their internal funding needs. This hypothesis is part of a larger internal

capital markets mechanism, which postulates that the bank determines lending and deposit

activities jointly. Previous literature suggests that internal capital markets are important to banks.

Gatev, Schuermann, and Strahan (2009) find that a bank’s equity return volatility increases with

unused loan commitments and decreases with the level of deposits, potentially providing indirect

evidence for an active internal capital market. Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012a, 2012b) provide

evidence consistent with international banks shifting funds across countries to overcome

liquidity shocks during the Global Financial Crisis and that, more generally, multinational banks

manage liquidity on a global basis. Berger and DeYoung (2001) find mixed evidence about the

efficiency of geographically spread banks.

       Our focus is on the determinants of deposit rates, and thus we are interested in the causal

relation from lending activity to deposit rates. Note that a causal relation in the opposite direction

exists as well: an exogenous increase in the availability of deposits fosters banks’ lending in


                                                  5
remote locations. Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan (2013) find that banks that were exposed to a

shale oil (and deposit) shock in some branch locations increased their lending in other, non-shale

locations, i.e., a shock to the supply of deposits generates lending activity. This evidence is

consistent with our findings in that causality can run in both directions, even for the same bank:

the supply of deposits determines loan growth, and the demand for loans drives deposit rates.

Whereas Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan (2013) isolate the effects in one direction, our study

isolates the effect in the opposite direction, offering complementary evidence about the

functioning of internal capital markets.

       We test the proposed mechanism of lending activity affecting deposit rates in several

ways. Our first set of tests examines the relation among deposit rates, deposit flows, and loan

growth. Despite these relationships being endogenous, they provide a baseline for the analysis.

We document a strong positive correlation between deposit rates and loan growth, i.e., banks that

experience a higher loan growth rate offer to pay higher deposit rates on average. The sensitivity

of deposit rates to loan growth declined significantly following the financial crisis of 2008, when

lending activity was relatively low. Furthermore, we find a positive correlation between deposit

flows and both deposit rates and loan growth. Examining deposit flows is important because it

distinguishes the market discipline and the internal capital markets hypotheses. According to the

market discipline story, a bank that pays higher deposit rates is riskier and therefore should not

necessarily attract more deposits than a bank that pays lower deposit rates. In contrast, the

internal capital markets story suggests that banks increase deposit rates specifically to attract

deposits; therefore, in equilibrium, higher deposit rates should attract deposit flows. We test this

hypothesis and find that indeed deposit flows are positively correlated with deposit rates,

favoring the internal capital market hypothesis. Furthermore, we replicate the main test of


                                                 6
Jayaratne and Morgan (2000) using our more recent data, confirming that deposit growth is

positively correlated with loan growth and providing further evidence for the internal capital

market mechanism.

       While these results support the internal capital market hypothesis, they do not isolate the

direction of the effect, which is endogenous. First, it is possible that the relation between loan

growth and deposit rates captures some unobservable bank characteristics, such as riskiness, that

are observed only by depositors and not by the econometrician. Second, it is possible that the

causality runs exclusively in the opposite direction and governs the correlation between loan

growth and deposit rates. For example, banks are exposed to a positive deposit shock (and

therefore, potentially decrease deposit rates) and as a result initiate lending activity (as in Gilje,

Loutskina, and Strahan, 2013).

       We tackle the endogeneity issues with several empirical approaches. First, we examine

the relation between bank-level deposit rates and the common component of loan growth to

which banks are exposed. The advantage of using this measure of loan growth is that it is based

on market-level lending activity rather than on the bank’s endogenous lending decisions.

Therefore, if deposit rates are driven by loan growth, we would expect bank deposit rates to be

correlated with the systematic market-wide component of loan growth. To test this prediction,

we replace the bank’s specific loan growth variable with state-level loan growth. We proxy state-

level loan growth as the median loan growth of single-state banks for states in which the bank

operates. Our results are very similar to previous results: deposit rates are strongly correlated

with state-level loan growth.

       Second, we exploit the branching structure of banks to provide causal evidence that loan

growth is an important driver of deposit rates. Our test relies on the following logic: many banks

                                                  7
have branches in areas with different economic environments. The analysis examines whether

loan growth in one state in which the bank operates (State B) affects the rates on deposits of the

same bank in a different state (State A). If the bank uses deposit funding to finance loans, then

high loan growth in State B potentially leads the bank to compete more aggressively for deposits

in both States A and B. Indeed, we find that branch-level deposit rates are correlated with the

loan growth rates in the state in which the branches are located, as well as with loan growth in

other states in which the bank operates. We show that the effect is concentrated in banks that

depend on deposits as a source of financing and that this effect virtually disappeared during the

financial crisis. We view this as strong evidence that loan growth is a first-order determinant of

deposit rates.

       We summarize our data in Section 2. Our analysis in Section 3 suggests that deposit rates

are not driven by market discipline during our sample period of 2007–2012, as these rates are not

negatively related to bank equity and do not predict bank failure. Instead, we exploit the

branching structure of the banks in Section 4 and provide strong evidence that deposit rates are

driven by internal capital markets. We offer concluding comments in Section 5. Collectively, our

findings show that deposit rates are determined by the demand of banks rather than by the supply

of depositors.




2      Data and Variable Construction

2.1    Data

       Our analysis makes use of several sources of data. We employ the bank Reports of

Condition and Income, often referred to as Call Reports, to identify banks with low capital


                                                8
(equity to assets), as well as bank-related variables and controls such as loan growth and asset

size. The Call Reports data comprise all of the mandatory filings by banks at a quarterly

frequency. These data are available starting in 1984.

           We use a panel dataset of deposit rate quotes provided by RateWatch at the branch level.

RateWatch collects deposit rates and sells its data to industry participants. Clients of the firm are

banks interested in knowing the published rates of their competitors. RateWatch collects deposit

rate information from banks via telephone, fax, and email and by scraping banks’ websites. The

data are available on a weekly frequency since 2001; however, they are adjusted for bank

mergers only since 2007, so we begin our sample then. We compare RateWatch’s bank list to the

list of banks in the Call Reports and estimate that its dataset covers about 75%–85% of the

market, depending on the year.

           To merge bank financial data with deposit rate data, we consolidate the branch level

quotes at the bank level. The final dataset covers the period of 2007/Q1 to 2012/Q3. We have

deposit rates for accounts of $10k, $100k, $250k, $500k, and $1m 5 for different maturities:

money market rate and Certificate of Deposit (CD) rates for 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 months. In

Tables 1 and 2, we split the analysis by account size and maturity. In the later part of the

analysis, we focus on the most widely available rates: the 12-month CD rate for $10k accounts.

The Call Reports dataset indicates that only a relatively small fraction of bank deposits are of a

longer maturity than 12 months. Thus, shorter term deposit rates—such as 12-month CDs—are

more likely to reflect aggregate deposit investor sentiment vis-à-vis bank risk. In our Call

Reports sample, about 80% of bank deposits have less than one year in maturity remaining and




5
    Rates for accounts larger than $100k are available only for the later part of the sample, starting from 2011/Q1.

                                                             9
about 97% of bank deposits have less than three years of maturity remaining. For robustness, we

also estimate our tests using 6- and 24-month deposit rates; the core results are unchanged.

       To provide a robust measure of banks’ rates, we average the weekly deposit rate

observations for each quarter. Because our Call Reports sample is at the bank level (as opposed

to the branch level), we average the branch-level observations to the bank level, and hence our

final database is at the bank-quarter level. Our final dataset consists of an unbalanced panel with

6,606 banks between 2007/Q1 and 2012/Q3 with 122,113 bank-quarter observations of 12-

month CD rates. In Table 6, we use a subset of interstate banks for which we generate a bank-

state-quarter dataset: one observation for each bank’s operation within a state-quarter. This

dataset contains 24,863 bank-state-quarter observations from 523 unique banks.

       We plot the time series of deposit rates in Figure 2 for three different maturities for $10k

accounts (money market rates and 12-month and 24-month rates) as well as 12-month rates for

larger accounts: $100k and $500k. Each plot shows the median deposit rate in each calendar

quarter as well as the 5th and 95th percentiles. The figure shows that in our sample period, money

market rates are significantly lower than rates of longer maturities. Furthermore, there is little

difference between the rates for $10k and $100k accounts. Because the data for $500k accounts

is populated only since 2011/Q1, it is hard to make inferences about the magnitude of deposit

rates for very large accounts.




2.2    Variables

       Our primary variables of interest, besides deposit rates, are bank capital, bank failure,

deposit growth, and loan growth. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. Bank capital


                                                10
measures the risk of bank failure. In line with the literature (e.g., Berger and Bouwman (2013)

and Brown and Dinc (2011)), we measure bank capital as the equity-to-asset ratio defined as

total bank equity divided by total bank assets. Figure 1 presents a time series of the ratio of

equity-to-assets. The figure shows that since 1987 banks have improved their capitalization. In

the robustness analysis in Appendix B, we use alternative measures of bank capital: Tier-1-

capital-to-assets and Tier-1-capital-to-risk-weighted assets.

           Our analysis uses additional variables of interest. Bank failure is defined according to the

FDIC failure list, 6 which includes all failures and assistance transactions (purchase and

assumptions, re-privatizations, etc.). Deposit growth is calculated as a one-quarter change in a

bank’s total deposits. In a parallel fashion, loan growth is computed as the one-quarter change in

total outstanding loans. Unfortunately, the Call Reports do not provide a breakdown for new

deposits, deposits reinvested, and deposits matured, or for loans originated, loans renewed, and

loans terminated. The amount of total outstanding loans is net of nonperforming loans and of

loans for which there is a reasonable concern that they will become nonperforming. Because our

loan growth measure is derived from changes in the stock of loans, as opposed to flows of new

loans, we cannot directly differentiate between loan growth declines emanating from reducing

new lending and from writing-off losses from existing loans. To remedy this concern, we include

in all our specifications a measure of charge-offs, thus controlling for the effect of loan write-offs

on lending growth.

           In addition, we include a large set of controls in our specifications. These include several

proxies related to other aspects of financial health aside from capital: asset quality (ratio of




6
    http://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html

                                                          11
performing loans to total loans), the deposits-to-liabilities ratio, and the loans-to-assets ratio. 7 In

addition, we control for the ratio of time deposits to total deposits, the ratio of large deposits (i.e.,

deposits of $100k or more) to total deposits, and the ratio of brokered to total deposits.

Organizational controls include bank size (proxied by logged assets), branch network size

(proxied by the logged number of bank branches), a multi-bank holding company affiliation

dummy, and a new bank dummy (an indicator denoting that the bank was established within the

previous five years). Finally, we include measures of the asset composition: the ratio of real

estate–related loans to total assets and the fraction of commercial and industrial loans to total

assets.

          Other variables of interest are the large deposit ratios (from the Call Reports), which

measure the dollar amount of large deposits (i.e., deposits larger than $100k or $250k) as a

fraction of the total dollar amount of deposits within a bank. We present the time series for these

variables in Figure 3. The Call Reports provide information on deposits larger than $100k for the

entire sample period. The Reports only include information for deposits greater than $250k

starting with the first quarter of 2010. Figure 3 shows that the percentage of deposits larger than

$100k increases almost monotonically over the sample period, particularly during the peak of the

financial crisis (around 2008/Q4–2009/Q1). Interestingly, these larger deposits make up a

substantial portion of total bank deposits: nearly 40% before the financial crisis, and over 45% at

the end of the sample period. 8 The ratio of deposits larger than $250k to total deposits appears to

remain stable from 2011/Q1 until the end of the sample period.


7
  The loans-to-assets ratio measures the fraction of dollar loans on the bank’s asset side divided by total assets. This
is a proxy for bank illiquidity. In unreported results, we consider alternative measures such as liquid assets–to–total
assets, where liquid assets include cash, federal funds sold and reverse repos, and non-MBS (Mortgage-Backed
Securities). The core results are robust to such alternative definitions of liquidity.
8
  These represent the fraction of deposits that are partially uninsured (the uninsured deposits are only those above
the FDIC threshold), so the fraction of uninsured deposits would be much more modest.

                                                          12
3         Tests of Market Discipline

3.1       The Correlation between Deposit Rates and Capital Ratios

          We begin the empirical analysis by testing the correlation between deposit rates and the

capital ratio (equity-to-assets). In Table 2, we provide several specifications for regressions of

rates on the equity-to-asset ratio (interacted with indicators for pre-crisis or during crisis):

      𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 E/A𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 < 2008/Q4) + 𝛽𝛽2 E/A𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4)   (1)

                        + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞,

where 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 is the deposit rate of bank i at quarter q. E/A𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 is the lagged equity-to-

assets ratio. 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 < 2008/Q4) and 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4) are indicators of whether quarter q precedes

2008/Q4 or not, respectively. 𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 is a set of bank-quarter controls. 𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 is a set of time (quarter)

fixed effects. All specifications are estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank and

calendar quarter.

          In Panel A, we regress deposit rates for different maturities (money market, and 6, 12, 24,

48, and 60 month CDs) on the equity-to-assets ratio. If market discipline is an important force,

then deposit rates should be higher for poorly capitalized banks, i.e., the coefficient on equity-to-

assets should be negative. In contrast, the panel shows that all coefficients are positive and most

are statistically significant, generally at the 1% level. This result tells us that deposit rates are

actually lower on average for poorly capitalized banks.

          The relation between deposit rate and bank capital is plotted in Figure 4. For the purpose

of this plot, we split bank-quarters into 10 equity-to-assets bins (within quarter). Then, we

regress the deposit rates (12-month CD rates for $10k accounts) on the equity-to-assets decile

                                                            13
indicators, bank-level controls, and calendar fixed effects. We perform the analysis for two

subsamples: pre-2008/Q4 and 2008/Q4 onward. Prior to the crisis, CD rates exhibit a U-shape

with respect to the capital ratio. Following the peak of the financial crisis, CD rates increase with

capital. In any case, the magnitude of the effect is low: rates in the bottom of the U-shape are

0.07% lower, on average, than rates for banks that have very low or very high capital. From

2008/Q4 onward, CD rates of well-capitalized banks are about 0.05% higher than those of poorly

capitalized banks.

        Another means of identifying poorly capitalized banks is to examine past returns. We sort

the subset of publicly traded banks on their past returns in the previous quarter into quintiles.

Then, we regress 12-month CD rates on quintile indicators in addition to the usual controls. We

plot the coefficients in Figure 5, which illustrates that there is no meaningful variation across

bank capitalization. Banks in the lowest quintile of past returns have statistically the same CD

rates as banks in quintiles 3, 4, and 5.

        In Panels B, C, and D of Table 2, we provide additional robustness analyses for our

results about the no/weak relation between deposit rates and the capital ratio. In Panel B, we use

the deposit rate for the 12-month maturity as the dependent variable. We examine CD rates for

different account sizes. The panel shows that prior to 2008/Q4 there is a positive relation

between CD rates and equity-to-assets, which is statistically significant for the $10k accounts.

From 2008/Q4 onward, the relation is also positive for all account sizes and statistically

significant for the $10k, $100k, and $1m accounts. Again, these positive coefficients are the

opposite of what we would expect if market discipline were in effect. In Panel C, we break the

sample by the ratio of deposits-to-liabilities (Columns (1) and (2)) and whether or not the bank

holds brokered deposits (Columns (3) and (4)). As before, none of the subsets exhibits a negative


                                                 14
relationship between CD rates and bank capital. In Panel D, we break the sample by the ratio of

large deposits to total deposits. Large deposits are defined as greater than $100k (Columns (1)

and (2)) or $250k (Columns (3) and (4)). 9 None of the subsamples shows a statistically

significant negative relation between CD rates and capital ratio.

        In the analysis so far, we do not find any association between deposit rates and capital

ratio that would suggest that market discipline is in force.




3.2     Bank Capital and Deposit Rates: Capitalization and Size

        We provide also a breakdown by bank capitalization (below or above 10% percentile)

and by bank size in Table 2, Panel E. Columns (1) and (2) show that neither well-capitalized nor

poorly capitalized banks pay higher CD rates when their capitalization level declines further.

This evidence is at odds with market discipline. If market discipline was a dominant force, then

we should observe a significant negative relation between CD rates and equity levels, especially

for poorly-capitalized firms.

        In Table 2, Panel E, Columns (3) to (5), we explore how the correlation between CD rates

and bank capitalization varies with bank size. We split the sample into three bank size brackets

(up to $500m, between $500m and $10bn, and above $10bn). The results show that the positive

correlation between CD rates and bank capitalization exists primarily for small banks and that

the correlation for mid-size and large banks is largely zero. Again, we do not observe the

significant negative coefficients predicted by the market discipline hypothesis.




9
  In October 2008, the FDIC increased the limit for insured deposits to $250,000; however, banks started reporting
the deposit amount above $250,000 only in early 2010.

                                                       15
3.3     Bank Capital and Deposit Rates: Robustness

        To ensure that our counterintuitive results are not driven by government intervention in

the market during the crisis, we conduct several robustness tests. First, regulators could have

compelled capital-constrained banks to restrict lending activity and increase capital. Thus, our

results could reflect bank strategy or regulatory pressure. To address this concern, we re-run the

tests for the 12-month CD rates, but exclude banks that are not well-capitalized by PCA (Prompt

Corrective Action) levels; these levels are 10% total risk-based capital, 6% tier-1 risk based

capital, and 5% tier-1 leverage. We find that only about 3% of banks are not well-capitalized

over our sample period according to PCA levels (of course, this reflects book values). Excluding

these few banks from the sample does not change the direction or statistical significance of the

relation between CD rates and capital ratio (Table 2, Panel F, Column (1)). Therefore, while

banks facing regulatory scrutiny for having very low capitalization might indeed have different

incentives for lending and demand for deposits, our tests suggest that regulatory factors do not

drive our results.

        Another potential concern is that the positive correlation we find between CD rates and

banks’ capital during the Global Financial Crisis stems from rates being capped by regulators

(e.g., the FDIC) or from bank strategies directed by regulators. Berger and Bouwman (2013) and

Berger and Turk-Ariss (2014) have raised such concerns. Hence, we exclude from the analysis

subsets of banks that were likely to be affected by government intervention.

        We explore two distinct relevant interventions. First, during the Global Financial Crisis,

the FDIC intervened in the deposit market. The FDIC was concerned that certain distressed

banks raised CD rates in order to attract deposits. To prevent such behavior, the FDIC proposed

capping the allowed rates in May 2009 and started to enforce these in January 2010. To ensure

                                               16
that our results are not driven by the FDIC action, we re-run regressions akin to those in Table 2,

Panel A, excluding the banks with “potentially” binding caps, i.e., banks with CD rates above the

capped level. The rates caps are set separately for each CD maturity level and also by account

size (less or equal to $100k or greater than $100k). We use the non-jumbo (less or equal to

$100k) rate caps for 12-month CD rates, which range from a low of 1.02% in the 3rd quarter of

2012 to a high of 1.98% in the 2nd quarter of 2009. 10 The results are presented in Table 2, Panel

F, Column (2). The correlation of CD rates with the equity-to-asset ratio remains positive and

statistically significant for the post-2008/Q4 period. Hence, our results are not driven by the rate

caps imposed by regulators.

         Second, the Troubled Asset Relief program (TARP) could have affected banks’ operating

strategies (see Duchin and Sosyura (2014)). The program was launched in 2008 to counter the

effects of subprime lending and initially allowed the U.S. government to purchase from banks

“troubled” assets that were deemed illiquid or difficult to value. The goal was largely to increase

banks’ financial flexibility and increase the potential for greater lending growth. To the extent

that banks receiving TARP were under regulatory scrutiny and faced capital discipline, both

bank capitalization and the relation between capitalization and demand for loans (i.e., CD rates)

might be different for TARP banks. To explore whether TARP banks influenced our findings, we

conduct additional tests in which we remove from the sample all banks receiving initial TARP

funding within the prior two years. We observe that 620 banks in our sample received TARP

funding or were subsidiaries of bank holding companies receiving initial TARP funding between

2008/Q4 and 2009/Q4. About 3.8% of bank observations are from banks receiving TARP


10
  The FDIC sets rate caps for jumbo and non-jumbo CDs at 75 basis points above the national rate, which is the
simple average of CD rates for commercial banks using RateWatch data. The caps for jumbo and non-jumbo CDs
are almost identical in both quarters, and non-reported robustness tests confirm that our results are not sensitive to
which one is used.

                                                         17
funding in the previous two years (4,530 bank-quarter observations). When we remove these

bank-observations from our analyses, our core results remain consistent (Table 2, Panel F,

Column (3)).

         In Column (4) of Table 2, Panel F, we exclude all potentially affected banks. Our results

remain positive and statistically significant, meaning that well-capitalized banks pay higher CD

rates.




3.4      Bank Capital and Deposit Rates: Alternative Bank Capital Measures

         The previous regressions used equity-to-assets as a measure of bank capital. In Appendix

B, we provide additional analyses with alternative capital measures. We replace the equity-to-

assets variable with Tier 1 capital–to–total assets (Appendix B, Panel A), and Tier 1 capital–to–

risk-weighted assets (Appendix B, Panel B). In almost all specifications, the coefficients

conform to the results using equity-to-assets as a measure of bank capitalization. The coefficients

are either statistically indistinguishable from zero or statistically greater than zero, again,

suggesting that poorly-capitalized banks do not offer higher CD rates.




3.5      Bank Failure and Deposit Rates

         We conduct an additional test for the market discipline hypothesis. Specifically, this

theory suggests that deposit rates should be reflective of bank default risk; therefore, ex post

bank failure likelihood should be positively associated with higher ex ante deposit rates. We

follow the FDIC definition of failure and flag bank-quarters as failures according to the FDIC’s

publicly available list. We run the following logit regression:

                                                 18
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑄𝑄 𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 ,   (2)


where 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑄𝑄 𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑞𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 is an indicator of whether the bank failed within 𝑄𝑄

quarters from quarter q. We estimate these specifications for two different horizons, 𝑄𝑄 = 4 and

𝑄𝑄 = 8, using robust standard errors clustered by bank. 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 is the deposit rate of

bank i at quarter q – 1. 𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 is a set of bank-quarter controls. 𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 is a set of time (quarter) fixed

effects.

           The regression results in Table 3, Columns (1) and (2) show that the relation is negative

for both horizons and statistically significant for the four-quarter horizon. This result contradicts

the prediction that the relation between the variables should be positive.

           Next, we limit the sample to banks that failed ex post, and ask whether the time-to-failure

is correlated with the current deposit rates:

𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 − 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 − 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 ,                               (3)


where 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 − 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 − 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 is measured in years. The results are estimated using a survival

model, assuming an exponential distribution with the failure event being an FDIC defined

failure. All regressions are estimated with robust standard errors clustered at the bank level. We

find that time-to-failure is not significantly correlated with deposit rates (Table 3, Column (3)),

again contradicting the prediction of the market discipline hypothesis.

           In sum, we do not find any evidence indicating that the market discipline hypothesis

describes deposit rate data in the United States for the years 2007 to 2012.




                                                                        19
4           Internal Capital Markets and Deposit Rates

4.1         Deposit Flows

            Our main hypothesis is that banks use time deposits (CDs) to fund lending activity; we,

therefore, expect to find a correlation between deposit growth (i.e., flows) and both loan growth

and deposit rates. When loan growth is high, banks seek deposits, increasing their rates in order

to attract them. Based on this mechanism, we expect that the flow of deposits is positively

correlated with loan growth and that banks that offer higher deposit rates attract more deposits.

            These predictions differentiate the market discipline hypothesis from the internal capital

market hypothesis. The market discipline story suggests that deposit rates reflect risk: banks that

are riskier offer higher deposit rates. Depositors should not necessarily favor banks that offer

high deposit rates because of the differences in risk. In addition, deposit flows should not

necessarily be positively correlated with loan growth. In contrast, the internal capital market

hypothesis suggests that flows of deposits increase with deposit rates and that flows are

positively correlated with loan growth.

            We test these predictions in Table 4, Panel A. The OLS regressions are estimated with

robust standard errors clustered by bank and time and take the following form:

    𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞

                           = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛽𝛽2 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4)    (4)

                           + 𝛽𝛽3 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛽𝛽4 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4)

                           + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞,

where 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 is defined as the quarter-on-quarter net growth in total deposits for the

bank. In Table 4, Panel A, Column (1), we include loan growth on the right-hand side but

                                                                    20
exclude the deposit rate. The results show that deposit growth is very strongly correlated with

loan growth and that the correlation declines during the financial crisis. This result is

qualitatively similar to the finding of Jayaratne and Morgan (2000) that banks’ loan growth is

strongly correlated with insured deposit growth. Our results show that prior to the financial

crisis, a one standard deviation change in loan growth is associated with a change of 4.0% in the

same direction in deposit growth (Column (1)). 11

           We examine the relation between deposit growth and deposit rates in Panel A for the

entire sample, and in Panel B we split the sample by capitalization level in Columns (1) and (2)

and by size in Columns (3), (4), and (5). Low-capital banks are defined as the bottom 10% of

capitalization within each quarter. The results show that deposit flows are correlated with deposit

rates and that this correlation increased following the financial crisis. In addition, we find that the

correlations are strong for both weakly and strongly capitalized banks, suggesting that having

lower capital does not qualitatively alter the relations between loan growth and deposit growth or

CD rates and deposit growth. In Columns (3) to (5), we see that CD-rates are correlated with

deposit growth—more so for small and medium sized banks than for the largest banks, i.e. those

with assets greater than $10B. Similarly, the correlation between loan growth and deposit growth

is strongest for the smaller banks. The results also suggest that prior to the Global Financial

Crisis, the sensitivity of deposits to the deposit rates offered was especially high for small banks,

but was nonexistent for large banks. Interestingly, following the crisis, the sensitivity of deposits

to deposit rates increased for all bank sizes, particularly for large banks.




11
     0.060 × 0.047 / 0.070 = 0.040.

                                                  21
           These findings can be explained by the changing economic environment following the

financial crisis. The financial crisis was characterized by a freeze in lending activity, which

created an imbalance in the amount of lending and deposits. This imbalance is plotted in Figure

6. Prior to 2008/Q4, the aggregate deposit amount surpassed the aggregate loan amount by less

than $1 trillion. Following the financial crisis, however, the gap widens, and the difference

between aggregate deposits and aggregate loans is more than $2.5 trillion dollars in 2012.

           The fact that more funds were deposited in banks than banks were willing to lend created

two effects. First, internal capital markets were not critical for growth, since banks were flush

with cash. Hence, the association between deposit growth and loan growth declined significantly.

Second, because more deposits were available in a low-interest-rate environment, deposits were

more sensitive to deposit rates. Therefore, the coefficient on the interaction of deposit rates and

the crisis indicator in Column (2) is positive, meaning deposit flows were more sensitive to

deposit rates during the financial crisis. Prior to the financial crisis, a one standard deviation

change in deposit rates is associated with a 0.056 standard deviation change in deposit flows in

the same direction; following the crisis, the effect grows to 0.144 standard deviations. 12

           Note that for the economic significance calculations, we use the standard deviation of the

mean-adjusted 12-month CD rates ($10k accounts) rather than the raw rates. Raw rates vary

across quarters for macroeconomic reasons unrelated to the factors we explore and could affect

our outcomes. In our analysis, we are interested in the within-quarter variation in CD rates.




12
     0.010 × 0.389 / 0.070 = 0.056; (0.010 + 0.016) × 0.389 / 0.070 = 0.144.

                                                           22
4.2         Deposit Rates and Growth of Banks’ Loan Portfolios

            Next, we assess the relation between deposit rates and loan growth. The internal capital

markets mechanism suggests that loan growth determines deposit rates. We begin by examining

the endogenous relation between deposit rates and loan growth by regressing the 12-month

deposit rate (for $10k accounts) on lagged loan growth, controlling for bank characteristics and

fixed effects. As before, our models are estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank:

 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞

                          = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛽𝛽2 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4)   (5)

                          + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 .

            The internal capital market hypothesis predicts that deposit rates are positively correlated

with loan growth. We use the lagged loan growth of the bank as the independent variable of

interest and present our results in Table 5, Panel A, Columns (1) and (2). Lagged loan growth has

a positive and significant coefficient, meaning that CD rates move in the same direction as loan

growth. The sensitivity of CD rates to loan growth is higher in the pre-crisis period and

somewhat muted in the post-2008/Q4 period. To demonstrate the economic magnitude, consider

the coefficient on lagged loan growth in Column (2), which measures the sensitivity of deposit

rates to lagged loan growth in the pre-crisis period. A one standard deviation shift in lagged loan

growth is associated with a shift in the same direction of about 1.4% of a standard deviation. 13 In

Figure 7, we present the coefficients from a similar regression, based on a lagged loan growth

decile indicator (instead of the continuous lagged loan growth variable). 14


13
  0.117 × 0.047 / 0.389 = 0.014.
14
  Our analysis and hypotheses presume that loan growth, which proxies for loan demand, is a key determinant of
CD rates. To the extent, deposit growth attributable to loan growth affects CD rates, we also consider additional
tests where we regress the portion of deposit growth attributable only to loan growth on CD rates. These unreported

                                                                 23
         The relation between deposit rates and loan growth is, however, endogenous. A positive

relation could result from high loan growth causing an increase in deposit rates or from high

deposit rates leading to high loan growth, or a third factor that we have not controlled for could

be driving up both variables. To discern the drivers of the correlation and test the causal relation

between loan growth and deposit rates, we employ two empirical methodologies. First, we

replace banks’ loan growth rate with the loan growth rate of other banks within the same state.

Second, we exploit the branching structure of banks and examine the internal capital market

across states.




4.3      Deposit Rates and State-Level Loan Growth

         As a first attempt towards unlocking the endogenous relation between bank loan growth

and deposit rates, we replace bank loan growth with the loan growth of the median bank in the

states in which the bank operates. Arguably, this variable reflects the common component of

loan growth across banks within the state, but does not reflect idiosyncratic variation at the bank

level that could induce endogeneity. We calculate the state-level loan growth as follows: we limit

the sample to banks that operate in one state only. For each state-quarter, we compute the median

loan growth of the single-state banks that operate in this state. Then, for each bank in the sample,

we compute the average state-level loan growth across all the states in which the bank operates.

The state-level loan growth variable essentially measures the state-level common component in

loan growth, independent of the bank’s idiosyncratic loan growth. We replace the bank-level

loan growth variable with the state-level loan growth variable and run the following regression:


tests are similar in spirit to Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) and use fitted values of a regression of deposit growth
on loan growth; we find that loan growth linked to deposit growth is positively linked to CD rates.


                                                          24
 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞                                                                                                   (6)

                          = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 − 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1

                          + 𝛽𝛽2 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 − 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4) + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞

                          + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞 .

           The results, presented in Table 5, Panel A, Columns (3) and (4), are estimated using OLS

regressions with robust standard errors clustered at the bank level. The coefficients reflect a

strong correlation between loan growth and deposit rates. Pre-crisis, the coefficient is 1.208

(Column (4)) and the standard deviation of the market loan growth is 0.014; thus, a one standard

deviation increase in market loan growth is associated with a 4.3% increase in the standard

deviations of the mean-adjusted 12-month CD rate. 15 We also interact loan growth with a crisis

dummy (2008/Q4 onwards). The interaction shows that the association between CD rates and

loan growth does not change significantly during the crisis.

           We also provide analysis by bank capitalization and bank size bracket in Table 5, Panel

B. The results broadly show that the sensitivity of CD rates to loan growth is higher for banks

with low capital and banks that are small, as anticipated. These banks have limited access to

financial markets and must rely more on deposit funding to finance their loan growth. The

regressions show a decline in the sensitivity of CD rates to loan growth following the financial

crisis, potentially because lending activity froze at many banks.

           Overall, these results show that loan growth and CD rates are correlated in the pre-crisis

period and have a weaker or no correlation once the crisis begins.




15
     1.208 × 0.014 / 0.389 = 0.043.

                                                                      25
4.4    Exploiting the Branching Structure

       Another way to pin down the causal relationship between loan growth and deposit rates is

to exploit the branching structure of banks. In particular, in the absence of internal capital

markets, deposit rates in one branch would be independent of the loan growth that other,

geographically distant, branches experience. Because our data include deposit rate information at

the branch level, we can exploit the branching structure to show that loan growth actually drives

deposit rates and thereby provide a stronger test of causality. To understand how the branching

structure can be useful for testing causality, consider the following thought experiment. Suppose

a bank has branches in locations that have low loan growth (State A) and other branches in

locations that have relatively high loan growth (State B). Given that the bank is interested in

fulfilling the high demand for loans in State B, the bank may use its State A branches to raise

deposit funding. Thus, we should observe that the deposit rates in the State A branches are

correlated with the loan growth experienced by the State B branches. Hence, our test measures

the correlation between the deposit rate in a particular location and loan growth experienced in a

different location in which the bank has some presence.

       For this test, we transform our data into a bank-state-quarter level dataset and limit the

sample to banks that have a presence in more than one state. For each bank-state-quarter, we

calculate the average deposit rates across all branches within the state. Also, for each state-

quarter we compute the state-level growth rate as the median loan growth of all single-state

banks. Our final dataset contains 24,863 bank-state-quarter observations (523 unique banks).

       Our empirical test seeks to compute the sensitivity of deposit rates to out-of-state loan

growth, while controlling for in-state loan growth. Therefore, for each bank-state-quarter, we

compute two variables: out-of-state loan growth and in-state loan growth. Out-of-state loan

                                               26
growth is the average state-level loan growth of all states in which the bank-quarter has presence,

excluding the specific state-quarter. The complementary variable is in-state loan-growth, which

is calculated as simply the state-level loan growth for the state of the bank-state-quarter. We run

the following regression:

       𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑠𝑠,𝑞𝑞                                                                                                 (7)

                                 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂 − 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 − 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑠𝑠,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛽𝛽2 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂 − 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜

                                 − 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4)

                                 + 𝛽𝛽3 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 − 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ𝑖𝑖,𝑠𝑠,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛽𝛽4 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 − 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔ℎ

                                 × 𝐼𝐼(𝑞𝑞 ≥ 2008/Q4) + 𝛾𝛾𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞−1 + 𝛿𝛿𝑇𝑇𝑞𝑞 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑞𝑞,

where the index isq relates to a bank-state-quarter observation, and out-of-state loan growth and

in-state loan growth are both lagged by one quarter. As before, we include bank-quarter controls

and time dummies. The coefficients are estimated using OLS regressions with robust standard

errors clustered by bank and time.

             The results of the analysis are presented in Table 6. Panel A, Columns (1) and (2) show

the results for the entire universe of bank-state-quarters. The panel indicates that both out-of-

state and in-state loan growth variables determine CD rates. The effect is weaker in the post-

2008/Q4 period. During the pre-2008/Q4 period, the economic magnitude of the effect can be

estimated as follows (Column (2)): a one standard deviation increase in other states’ loan growth

(0.014) increases CD rates by 0.03% (which is 0.07 of a standard deviation). 16

             To sharpen the test, we perform two splits of the sample by dependence of the bank on

deposit funding. In Table 6, Panel A, Columns (3) and (4), we split the sample by the deposits-


16
     2.112 × 0.014 / 0.424 = 0.070. (The cross-sectional standard deviation of $10k, 12-month, CD rates is 0.424).

                                                                           27
to-liabilities ratio and repeat the regressions from Panel A. The results show that before the crisis

banks with high deposits-to-liabilities exhibit a stronger correlation between CD rates and out-of-

state loan growth. Following the crisis, the correlation is indistinguishable from zero for both low

and high deposit-to-liabilities ratios.

        The second sample split is by brokered deposits (Table 6, Panel A, Columns (5) and (6)).

Prior to the crisis, banks with no brokered deposits—which are likely to depend more on local

deposits as opposed to deposits from the national market—exhibit a positive correlation between

CD rates and out-of-state loan growth.

        Table 6, Panel B, presents a split by bank capitalization and bank size. The results show

that banks with low capitalization (Column (1)) have a stronger sensitivity to out-of-state loan

growth as well as to in-state loan growth. The effects are weakened during the crisis. The

breakdown by size show little statistical significance with respect to out-of-state loan growth.

Small banks have a statistically significant relation between CD rates and in-state loan growth.

        Overall, these results are consistent with the existence of an internal capital market and

with the idea that the internal demand for funds is an important factor driving deposit rates.




5       Conclusion

        The study presents new evidence in a novel setting showing that deposit rates in the

United States for the 2007–2012 period were determined by internal capital markets rather than

by market discipline. Our first set of tests finds no evidence for the effects of market discipline.

Specifically, deposit rates are not negatively correlated with banks’ equity, contradicting the

market discipline theory. Furthermore, deposit rates do not predict bank failure.


                                                 28
       In contrast, we find strong evidence that deposit rates are determined by internal capital

markets. Consistent with a significant role of internal capital markets, we show that deposit flows

are correlated with lagged deposit rates and with loan growth. In addition, we exploit the

branching structure of banks to find evidence of a causal relationship between loan growth and

deposit rates: deposit rates in one state are associated with loan growth in other states in which

the bank operates. Furthermore, this relation is stronger for banks that rely heavily on deposits

from the states in which the bank operates (as opposed to deposits from the national market).

Also, the relation between deposit rates and loan growth is stronger for banks that have a smaller

geographic spread. For these banks, the internal capital market is small; hence, demand shocks

for loans translate to stronger effects on deposit rates.

       One message to policymakers emerging from our paper is that during the Financial

Crisis, market discipline from depositors was not a tool that could be relied upon to assess bank

riskiness. Deposit rates are not indicative of the quality of the bank, but rather reflect bank loan

growth and frictions in access to funding as well as potential reliance upon bank deposit

insurance.




                                                  29
References

Acharya, Viral, and Nada Mora, 2015, A Crisis of Banks as Liquidity Providers, Journal of
Finance 70(1),1–43.
Aggrawal, Raj and Kevin T. Jacques, 2001, The impact of FDICIA and prompt corrective action
on bank capital and risk: Estimates using a simultaneous equations model, Journal of Banking &
Finance 25(6), 1139–1160.
Berger, Allen N., and Christa H. S. Bouwman, 2009, Bank liquidity creation, Review of
Financial Studies 22(9), 3779–3837.
Berger, Allen N., and Christa H. S. Bouwman, 2013, How does capital affect bank performance
during financial crises? Journal of Financial Economics 109, 146–176.
Berger, Allen N., and Christa H. S. Bouwman, Thomas Kick, and Klaus Schaeck, 2012, Bank
risk taking and liquidity creation following regulatory interventions and capital support, Working
Paper, University of South Carolina.
Berger, Allen N., and Robert DeYoung, 2001, The effects of geographic expansion on bank
efficiency, Journal of Financial Services Research 19(2/3), 163–184.
Berger, Allen N., and Rima Turk-Ariss, 2014, Do depositors discipline banks and did
government actions during the recent crisis reduce this discipline? An international perspective,
Journal of Financial Services Research.
Bouwman, Christa H. S., 2013, Liquidity: How banks create it and how it should be regulated,
in: Allen Berger, Phil Molyneux, and John Wilson (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Banking (2nd
edition), Oxford University Press.
Brown, Craig O., and Serdar Dinc, 2011, Too many to fail? Evidence of regulatory reluctance in
bank failures when the banking sector is weak, Review of Financial Studies 24(4), 1378–1405.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg, 2012a, Banking globalization and monetary transmission,
Journal of Finance 67, 1811–1843.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg, 2012b, Liquidity management of U.S. global banks:
Internal capital markets in the great recession, Journal of International Economics 88(2), pages
299–311.
Cook, Douglas O., and Lewis J. Spellman, 1994, Repudiation risk and restitution costs: Toward
understanding premiums on insured deposits, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 26, 439–
459.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2000, A theory of bank capital, Journal of Finance
55(6), 2431–2465.
Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura, 2014, Safer ratios, riskier portfolios: Banks’ response to
government aid, Journal of Financial Economics 113(1), 1–28.
Esty, Benjamin C., 1997, Organizational form and risk taking in the savings and loan industry,
Journal of Financial Economics 44, 25–55.




                                               30
Gatev, Evan, Til Schuermann, and Philip E. Strahan, 2009, Managing bank liquidity risk: How
deposit-loan synergies vary with market conditions, Review of Financial Studies 22(3), 995–
1020.
Gatev, Evan, and Philip E. Strahan, 2006, Banks’ advantage in hedging liquidity risk: Theory
and evidence from the commercial paper market, Journal of Finance 61(2), 867–892.
Gilje, Erik, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan, 2013, Exporting liquidity: Branch banking
and financial integration, Working Paper, Boston College.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Donald P. Morgan, 2000, Capital market frictions and deposit constraints at
banks, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32 (1), 74–92.
Keeley, Michael C., 1990, Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking, American
Economic Review 80(5), 1183–1200.
Park, Sangkyun, and Stavros Peristiani, 1998, Market discipline by thrift depositors, Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 30(3), 347–364.
Peria, Maria Soledad Martinez, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2001, Do depositors punish banks for
bad behavior? Market discipline, deposit insurance, and banking crises, Journal of Finance
56(3), 1029–1051.
Shoven, John B., Scott B. Smart, and Joel Waldfogel, 1992, Real interest rates and the savings
and loan crises: The moral hazard premium, Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(1), 155–167.




                                              31
                                   Appendix A. Variable Definitions

Variable                          Definition                                                              Data Source
Deposit rate for x-month          The average of X-month deposit rate for $Y account, averaged
                                                                                                          RateWatch
horizon and $Y account            across the branches of the bank
Asset quality                     Total performing loans & leases / Total assets                          Call Reports
                                  The average of state-level loan growth in other states in which the
State Level Loan Growth                                                                                   Call Reports
                                  bank operates
Charge-off ratio                  Total charge offs / Total loans                                         Call Reports
Commercial and industrial
                                  Total commercial and industrial loans / Total assets                    Call Reports
loans-to-assets
Deposit growth (1-qtr change)     log (total deposits(t)) – log(total deposits (t-1))                     Call Reports
Deposits-to-liabilities ratio     Total deposits / Liabilities                                            Call Reports
Equity-to-assets                  Equity / Total assets                                                   Call Reports
                                  An indicator to whether the bank failed according to the FDIC
Failure within Q quarters                                                                                 FDIC
                                  (http://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html)
Large deposits ratio              Total deposits of $100k or more / Total deposits                        Call Reports
Loan growth (1-qtr change)        log (total loans(t)) – log(total loans(t-1))                            Call Reports
                                  The average state-level loan growth of the states in which the
Loan growth in other states       bank has a presence, excluding the state to which the bank-state        Call Reports
                                  relates
Loan growth in own state          State-level loan growth of the bank-state’s own state                   Call Reports
Loans-to-assets                   Total loans / Total assets                                              Call Reports
Log # offices                     log (# branches)                                                        Call Reports
Log assets ($ Thousands)          log (total assets ($ Thousands))                                        Call Reports
Mean-adjusted deposit rate for    The average of X-month deposit rate for $Y account, averaged
x-month horizon and $Y            across the branches of the bank, minus the average deposit rate         RateWatch
account                           for the same quarter
Multi-bank holding company        Indicator of whether the bank is affiliated with a multi-bank-
                                                                                                          Call Reports
indicator                         holding company (MBHC)
New bank indicator                Indicator of whether the bank was chartered in previous five years      Call Reports
Non-brokered deposits–to–total
                                  Non-brokered deposit liabilities / Total liabilities                    Call Reports
liabilities
                                  Sum of total equity capital less unrealized gain (loss) on securities
                                  less accumulated net gains (losses) on cash flow hedges less
Tier-1-capital                    nonqualifying perpetual preferred stock plus qualifying minority        Call Reports
                                  interests in consolidated subsidiaries less disallowed goodwill and
                                  other disallowed intangible assets
Tier-1-capital-to-assets          Tier-1-capital / Total assets                                           Call Reports
Tier-1-capital–to–risk-weighted
                                  Tier-1-capital / Risk-weighted assets                                   Call Reports
assets
Share of real-estate loans        The share of real-estate loans out of the entire loan portfolio         Call Reports
Share of commercial and           The share of commercial and industrial loans out of the entire
                                                                                                          Call Reports
industrial loans                  loan portfolio
Share of consumer loans           The share of consumer loans out of the entire loan portfolio            Call Reports




                                                        32
                                                 Appendix B. Robustness Tables

The table presents regressions of 12-month CD rates on lagged measures of bank capitalization interacted with a
period dummy. In Panel A, bank capitalization is measured as tier-1-capital–to–total assets. In Panel B, bank
capitalization is measured as tier-1-capital–to–risk-weighted assets. Control variables include loan growth, deposits-
to-liabilities, logged assets, the log # offices, the large deposit ratio, time deposits–to–total deposits, loans-to-assets,
brokered deposits–to–total deposits, a multi-bank holding company indicator, a new bank indicator, the charge-off
ratio, asset quality, and shares of real-estate loans, commercial and industrial loans, and consumer loans. All control
variables are lagged by one quarter. All regressions are OLS regressions. Variable definitions are in Appendix A.
Standard errors are double-clustered by bank and calendar quarter. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. **, *
represent statistical significance at the 1% or 5% levels, respectively.


Panel A: Deposit Rates and Bank Tier-1-Capital–to–Total Assets

Dependent variable:                                                          Deposit rate, $10k accounts (%) of …
                                                 Money market   6-month CD     12-month CD        24-month CD     48-month CD   60-month CD
                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)           (6)
T1-Capital-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)        1.148**         0.195           0.454              0.379           0.429         0.466
                                                    (3.78)         (0.74)          (1.84)             (1.56)         (1.77)        (1.84)
T1-Capital-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)     0.789**        0.902**         1.047**            0.721**         0.536*        0.496*
                                                    (3.23)         (4.51)          (5.04)             (3.23)         (2.32)        (2.09)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                           Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
Bank FE                                              Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
Calendar quarter FE                                  Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes

Obs                                                 115696        120210          120457           114513           91404          91745
Adj R2                                              0.644         0.934           0.947            0.942            0.921          0.904


Panel B: Deposit Rates and Bank Tier-1-Capital–to–Risk-Weighted Assets

Dependent variable:                                                          Deposit rate, $10k accounts (%) of …
                                                 Money market   6-month CD     12-month CD        24-month CD     48-month CD   60-month CD
                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)           (6)
T1-Capital-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)         0.137          -0.077          0.160              0.166          0.146         0.212
                                                    (0.63)        (-0.51)          (1.04)             (1.02)         (0.89)        (1.23)
T1-Capital-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)     0.707**        0.581**         0.589**            0.373**         0.255         0.172
                                                    (3.99)         (5.17)          (4.86)             (2.68)         (1.61)        (1.08)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                           Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
Bank FE                                              Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
Calendar quarter FE                                  Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes

Obs                                                 116438        120994          121250           115240           91928          92317
Adj R2                                              0.644         0.933           0.946            0.941            0.920          0.903




                                                                    33
                                            Table 1. Summary Statistics

The table presents summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. The sample period is 2007/Q1 to
2012/Q3. Panel A shows summary statistics for the analysis for the main sample, based on 12-month deposit rates
for $10k accounts. Panel B shows summary statistics for the sample that includes deposit rates for a variety of
maturities and account sizes. Panel C presents summary statistics for the sample used for the bank branching
analysis. Variable definitions are in Appendix A.

Panel A: Summary Statistics of Main Sample (unit of observation: bank-quarter)

                                                  N       Mean Std Dev     p5       p25      p50     p75     p95
Asset quality                                  122,388     0.985 0.021    0.95     0.98     0.99    1.00    1.00
Brokered Deposit Ratio                         122,388     0.040 0.082    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.04    0.20
Charge-off ratio                               122,388     0.004 0.009    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    0.02
Commercial and industrial loans-to-assets      122,385     0.146 0.093    0.03     0.08     0.13    0.19    0.32
CD Deposit growth (1-qtr change)               122,388     0.002 0.071    -0.10    -0.03    0.00    0.03    0.12
Deposits-to-liabilities ratio                  122,388     0.933 0.069    0.80     0.90     0.95    0.99    1.00
Equity-to-assets                               122,387     0.106 0.033    0.07     0.09     0.10    0.12    0.17
Failure within 4 quarters                      122,388     0.009 0.096    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
Failure within 8 quarters                      122,388     0.019 0.136    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
Large deposits ratio ($100k)                   122,388     0.422 0.157    0.19     0.31     0.41    0.52    0.71
Large deposits ratio ($250k)                    57,773     0.134 0.112    0.01     0.06     0.11    0.18    0.36
Loan growth (1-qtr change)                     122,388     0.008 0.047    -0.06    -0.02    0.00    0.03    0.08
Loans-to-assets                                122,388     0.645 0.145    0.37     0.56     0.67    0.75    0.85
Log # offices                                  122,388     1.367 1.075    0.00     0.69     1.39    1.95    3.18
Log assets ($ Thousands)                       122,388    12.071 1.264    10.33    11.26    11.94   12.70   14.23
Multi-bank holding company                     122,388     0.190 0.392    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    1.00
New bank indicator                             122,388     0.056 0.230    0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    1.00
Real-estate loans-to-assets                    121,602     0.702 0.173    0.36     0.60     0.74    0.83    0.93
State-level loan growth                        122,342     0.006 0.014    -0.02    0.00     0.01    0.01    0.03
Time deposits-to-total deposits ratio          122,388     0.435 0.139    0.21     0.34     0.44    0.53    0.66
Time to failure (years)                         3,947      1.883 1.254    0.25     0.85     1.69    2.67    4.32


Panel B: Summary Statistics of Deposit Rates (unit of observation: bank-quarter)

Rate                                               N       Mean Std Dev     p5       p25     p50    p75     p95
Money market, $10k accounts                     117,307    0.754 0.706     0.10     0.25     0.50   1.00    2.23
12-month CD rate, $10k accounts                 122,113    1.890 1.333     0.39     0.80     1.49   2.73    4.56
24-month CD rate, $10k accounts                 116,090    2.146 1.236     0.60     1.14     1.85   2.96    4.53
48-month CD rate, $10k accounts                  92,625    2.551 1.119     1.00     1.66     2.38   3.30    4.64
60-month CD rate, $10k accounts                  93,116    2.754 1.083     1.23     1.92     2.60   3.49    4.75
12-month CD rate, $100k accounts                 78,051    1.320 1.009     0.35     0.66     1.00   1.57    3.88
12-month CD rate, $250k accounts                 34,939    0.676 0.265     0.25     0.50     0.65   0.85    1.14
12-month CD rate, $500k accounts                 35,003    0.689 0.332     0.25     0.50     0.65   0.85    1.15
12-month CD rate, $1m accounts                   34,611    0.676 0.268     0.25     0.50     0.65   0.85    1.13
Adjusted 12-month CD rate, $10k accounts        122,113    0.000 0.389     -0.67    -0.22    0.01   0.24    0.63




                                                           34
                                      Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)

Panel C: Summary Statistics of Branching Structure Analysis (unit of observation: bank-
state-quarter)

                                              N      Mean      Std Dev    p5      p25     p50     p75     p95
12-month CD rate ($10k) (%)                 24,863    1.469     1.276    0.15    0.47    1.00    2.21    4.19
Adjusted 12-month CD rate ($10k) (%)        24,863    0.125     0.424    -0.56   -0.16   0.11    0.40    0.86
Asset quality                               24,863    0.979     0.022    0.94    0.97    0.99    0.99    1.00
Brokered Deposit Ratio                      24,863    0.045     0.066    0.00    0.00    0.02    0.06    0.19
Charge-off ratio                            24,863    0.008     0.012    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.01    0.03
Commercial and industrial loans-to-assets   24,863    0.169     0.089    0.05    0.10    0.16    0.21    0.32
Deposits-to-liabilities                     24,863    0.866     0.092    0.68    0.81    0.88    0.94    0.99
Equity-to-assets                            24,863    0.105     0.031    0.07    0.09    0.10    0.12    0.16
In-state loan growth                        24,863    0.006     0.016    -0.02   0.00    0.00    0.01    0.03
Large deposit ratio                         24,863    0.447     0.141    0.24    0.35    0.43    0.53    0.72
Loans-to-assets                             24,863    0.651     0.121    0.41    0.59    0.67    0.73    0.83
Log # offices                               24,863    4.338     2.202    1.61    2.56    3.78    6.12    8.58
Log assets ($ Thousands)                    24,863   15.452     2.687    12.16   13.31   14.66   17.78   20.91
Multi-bank holding company                  24,863    0.433     0.496    0.00    0.00    0.00    1.00    1.00
New bank indicator                          24,863    0.019     0.136    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
Out-of-state loan growth                    24,863    0.006     0.014    -0.01   0.00    0.00    0.01    0.03
Real-estate loans-to-assets                 24,863    0.701     0.146    0.44    0.60    0.72    0.81    0.92
Time deposits-to-total deposits ratio       24,863    0.317     0.156    0.09    0.19    0.31    0.43    0.58




                                                              35
                                    Table 2. Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization

The table presents regressions of 12-month CD rates on lagged equity-to-assets interacted with a period dummy.
Control variables include loan growth, deposits-to-liabilities, logged assets, the log # offices, the large deposit ratio,
time deposits–to–total deposits, loans-to-assets, brokered deposits–to–total deposits, a multi-bank holding company
indicator, a new bank indicator, the charge-off ratio, asset quality, and shares of real-estate loans, commercial and
industrial loans, and consumer loans. All control variables are lagged by one quarter. All regressions are OLS
regressions and have bank fixed effects. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors are double-
clustered by bank and calendar quarter. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. **, * represent statistical
significance at the 1% or 5% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, by Maturity

Dependent variable:                                                    Deposit rate, $10k accounts (%) of …
                                           Money market   6-month CD      12-month CD       24-month CD 48-month CD   60-month CD
                                                (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)      1.241**         0.403           0.600**            0.435*      0.511**      0.521**
                                              (4.48)         (1.72)           (2.83)            (2.29)       (2.59)       (2.60)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)   1.022**        1.122**          1.222**           0.878**      0.708**      0.689**
                                              (4.41)         (6.40)           (6.58)            (4.68)       (3.37)       (3.14)

Deposit to Liabilities (q-1)                  0.140          -0.154          -0.188        -0.248*        -0.213         -0.209
                                             (1.19)         (-1.36)         (-1.51)        (-1.98)       (-1.59)        (-1.55)
Log Assets (q-1)                             -0.031         -0.057*          -0.014         -0.004        0.002          0.022
                                            (-0.86)         (-2.34)         (-0.65)        (-0.18)        (0.10)         (0.98)
Loan Growth (q-1)                           0.106**         0.099**         0.089**        0.071**       0.073**         0.068*
                                             (3.58)          (3.27)          (3.78)         (3.24)        (2.82)         (2.16)
Log # of Offices (q-1)                       -0.044          -0.009          -0.024         -0.026        -0.031         -0.031
                                            (-1.73)         (-0.46)         (-1.30)        (-1.43)       (-1.50)        (-1.63)
Large Deposit Ratio (q-1)                   0.163*          0.076*           0.038          0.054         0.060          0.055
                                             (2.39)          (2.04)          (1.12)         (1.56)        (1.55)         (1.34)
Time Deposits-to-total Liabilities (q-1)      0.055         0.149*          0.189**        0.205**        0.165*         0.162*
                                             (0.67)          (2.35)          (3.06)         (3.46)        (2.33)         (2.32)
Loan to Assets (q-1)                         -0.138         -0.253*          -0.111         -0.072        -0.093         -0.011
                                            (-1.32)         (-2.52)         (-1.13)        (-0.76)       (-0.81)        (-0.09)
Charge-off-Ratio (q-1)                      -0.676*        -0.665**          -0.477         -0.546       -0.740*        -0.749*
                                            (-2.33)         (-2.61)         (-1.72)        (-1.80)       (-2.30)        (-2.26)
Asset Quality (q-1)                         0.734**         1.233**         1.010**        0.788**       0.636**        0.626**
                                             (3.26)          (6.90)          (5.81)         (4.36)        (3.84)         (3.40)
Brokered Deposit Ratio (q-1)                  0.068         0.196*          0.226**        0.238**        0.114          0.074
                                             (0.58)          (2.42)          (3.27)         (3.54)        (1.74)         (1.05)
RE Loan Share (q-1)                         0.236**           0.020          0.058          0.082         0.078          0.133
                                             (2.96)          (0.28)          (0.82)         (1.08)        (0.81)         (1.27)
C/I Loan Share (q-1)                        0.270*           -0.027          0.038          0.013         -0.004         0.075
                                             (2.34)         (-0.31)          (0.46)         (0.15)       (-0.03)         (0.73)
Consumer Loan Share (q-1)                   0.346*          0.575**         0.481**        0.370**       0.391**         0.239
                                             (2.44)          (5.70)          (5.02)         (3.84)        (3.23)         (1.91)
Multi-Bank Holding Company (q-1)              -0.05          -0.043          -0.037         -0.029        -0.007         -0.005
                                            (-1.83)         (-1.93)         (-1.96)        (-1.79)       (-0.35)        (-0.25)
New Bank Indicator (q-1)                    0.213**         0.171**         0.137**        0.096**       0.074**         0.047*
                                             (4.41)          (5.80)          (5.68)         (4.18)        (3.54)         (2.23)
Herfindahl Index (q-1)                      -0.213*          -0.100          -0.087         -0.089        0.064          0.120
                                            (-1.96)         (-0.98)         (-0.93)        (-0.93)        (0.69)         (1.25)

Bank FE                                       Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Calendar quarter FE                           Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

Obs                                          116438         120994           121250        115240         91928          92317
Adj R2                                       0.643          0.933            0.947          0.941         0.920          0.903


                                                                36
                        Table 2. CD Rates of Low-Capital Banks during Crisis (Cont.)


Panel B: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, by Account Size

Dependent variable:                                                     12-month CD rate (%) of …
                                             $10k accounts   $100k accounts $250k accounts $500k accounts   $1m accounts
                                                   (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)         (5)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)         0.600**          0.075            0.575
                                                 (2.83)          (0.20)           (0.29)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)      1.222**         0.881**           0.291           0.385        0.316*
                                                 (6.58)          (5.13)           (1.85)          (1.77)       (2.15)

Deposit to Liabilities (q-1)                    -0.188           -0.152        -0.124*          0.049         -0.158**
                                               (-1.51)          (-1.10)        (-2.21)          (0.37)         (-2.67)
Log Assets (q-1)                                -0.014           -0.022          0.005         -0.034           -0.000
                                               (-0.65)          (-0.80)         (0.21)         (-0.83)         (-0.01)
Loan Growth (q-1)                              0.089**          0.078**          0.003          0.010            0.000
                                                (3.78)           (3.92)         (0.28)         (0.67)           (0.01)
Log # of Offices (q-1)                          -0.024            0.026          0.015          0.030            0.013
                                               (-1.30)           (1.20)         (1.07)         (1.58)           (0.91)
Large Deposit Ratio (q-1)                        0.038           -0.066          0.011          0.025            0.047
                                                (1.12)          (-1.42)         (0.34)         (0.38)           (1.40)
Time Deposits-to-total Deposits (q-1)          0.189**          0.216**          0.057          0.000           -0.012
                                                (3.06)           (3.12)         (0.96)         (0.01)          (-0.19)
Loan to Assets (q-1)                            -0.111            0.066        0.261**         0.191*          0.257**
                                               (-1.13)           (0.66)         (5.24)         (2.01)           (5.27)
Charge-off-Ratio (q-1)                          -0.477           -0.283         -0.295         -0.127          -0.326*
                                               (-1.72)          (-1.26)        (-1.85)         (-0.65)         (-1.99)
Asset Quality (q-1)                            1.010**            0.385          0.145          0.188            0.125
                                                (5.81)           (1.93)         (1.17)         (0.90)           (1.01)
Brokered Deposit Ratio (q-1)                   0.226**          0.272**        0.120*           0.053          0.136*
                                                (3.27)           (3.73)         (1.98)         (0.45)           (2.14)
RE Loan Share (q-1)                              0.058            0.119          0.038         -0.093            0.027
                                                (0.82)           (1.49)         (0.88)         (-1.35)          (0.63)
C/I Loan Share (q-1)                             0.038           -0.025          0.046          0.057            0.020
                                                (0.46)          (-0.24)         (0.82)         (0.62)           (0.38)
Consumer Loan Share (q-1)                      0.481**          0.309**          0.071          0.113            0.082
                                                (5.02)           (2.83)         (0.91)         (0.91)           (1.13)
Multi-Bank Holding Company (q-1)                -0.037           -0.019         -0.016         -0.022           -0.012
                                               (-1.96)          (-0.91)        (-1.11)         (-1.14)         (-1.00)
New Bank Indicator (q-1)                       0.137**          0.053*           0.014          0.033            0.011
                                                (5.68)           (2.52)         (1.59)         (1.32)           (1.28)
Herfindahl Index (q-1)                          -0.087           -0.043          0.036         -0.009            0.066
                                               (-0.93)          (-0.41)         (0.92)         (-0.17)          (1.45)

Bank FE                                          Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Calendar quarter FE                              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes

Obs                                             121250          77396           34678           34737          34361
Adj R2                                           0.947            0.925         0.654           0.708          0.660




                                                             37
                 Table 2. CD Rates of Low-Capital Banks during Crisis (Cont.)

Panel C: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, by Fraction of Large Deposits

Dependent variable:                                      12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
                                             Fraction of Deposits >$100k     Fraction of Deposits >$250k
                                                 Low              High           Low             High
                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)         0.542            0.639*
                                                (1.84)           (2.46)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)     1.314**          1.049**        0.879**        0.488**
                                                (5.88)           (4.39)         (4.39)          (3.01)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                      Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Bank FE                                         Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Calendar quarter FE                             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes

Obs                                             60726           59988          25803           25708
      2
Adj R                                           0.944           0.942           0.786          0.775


Panel D: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, by Deposits/Liabilities and by Non-
Brokered Deposits

Dependent variable:                                    12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
Sample broken by:                                Deposits / Liabilities        Brokered deposits
                                                 Low             High          >0           None
                                                  (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)         0.531           0.416       0.815**         0.628*
                                                (1.54)          (1.49)       (3.06)         (2.25)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)     1.297**         1.121**      1.203**        1.235**
                                                (5.75)          (4.41)       (5.29)         (5.39)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                       Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Bank FE                                          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Calendar quarter FE                              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Obs                                             62652           57943           54806           66146
        2
Adj R                                            0.937          0.950           0.937           0.948




                                                   38
                  Table 2. CD Rates of Low-Capital Banks during Crisis (Cont.)


Panel E: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, by Bank Capitalization and Bank Size

Dependent variable:                                        12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
Sample broken by:                                    Capital                           Bank assets
                                               Low             High      <$500m       [$500m,$10bn]           >$10bn
                                                (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)                 (5)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)       -1.918         0.749**     0.661**          0.004               -0.629
                                             (-0.82)          (3.82)       (2.87)         (0.01)              (-0.42)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)   1.465**         1.176**     1.249**          1.044*              -1.194
                                              (2.82)          (6.04)       (6.00)         (1.98)              (-1.02)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                    Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes          Yes
Bank FE                                       Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes          Yes
Calendar quarter FE                           Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes          Yes

Obs                                          11864            107847           101276            18613         1287
      2
Adj R                                         0.917           0.946             0.949              0.926       0.928

Panel F: Deposit Rates and Bank Capitalization, Robustness

Dependent variable:                                                    12-month CD rate (%)
Sample:                                             Exclude             Exclude            Exclude
                                              poorly-capitalized      rates above       banks receiving     Exclude
                                                      banks        rate-cap ceiling         TARP           all (1)-(3)
                                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(pre-2008/Q4)             0.570**            0.669**             0.600**          0.600**
                                                     (2.74)             (3.29)              (2.70)           (2.84)
Equity-to-Assets (q-1) × I(2008/Q4 onward)          1.179**            1.185**             1.238**          1.098**
                                                     (6.08)             (5.88)              (5.94)           (5.08)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                            Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes
Bank FE                                               Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes
Calendar quarter FE                                   Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes

Obs                                                 116571              113721             113965           104621
        2
Adj R                                                 0.947             0.949               0.948            0.949




                                                        39
                                   Table 3. Bank Failure and CD Rates

The table presents regressions of failure indicators (Columns (1) and (2)) and time-to-fail (Column (3)). A bank is
considered to have failed if it is included in the FDIC failed bank list. The results presented in Columns (1) and (2)
are estimated using logit regressions and the results in Column (3) are from a hazard regression with an exponential
survival function. Odds Ratio is reported in Columns (1) and (2) and Hazard Ratio is reported in Column (3).
Control variables include change in deposits-to-liabilities, logged assets, the log # offices, the large deposit ratio,
time deposits–to–total deposits, loans-to-assets, brokered deposits–to–total deposits, an interbank holding company
indicator, a new bank indicator, the charge-off ratio, asset quality, and shares of real-estate loans, commercial and
industrial loans, and consumer loans. All control variables are lagged by one quarter. Variable definitions are in
Appendix A. Standard errors are double-clustered by bank and calendar quarter. t-statistics are presented in
parentheses. **, * represent statistical significance at the 1% or 5% levels, respectively.


            Dependent variable:                      Failure within…                     Hazard failure
            Sample:                             4 quarters     8 quarters                    Model
                                                    (1)            (2)                        (3)
            12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%) -0.324*          -0.079                     -0.086
                                                  (-2.49)        (-0.71)                    (-0.52)

            Bank characteristics (q-1)                        Yes           Yes               Yes
            Calendar quarter FE                               Yes           Yes               Yes

            Obs                                            114677          114677            114647
            Psuedo-R-Square                                 0.520           0.432

            Chi-Square t-Statistic                          1050            1045              1532




                                                         40
                        Table 4. Deposit Growth, CD Rates, and Loan Growth

The table presents regressions of deposit quarter-on-quarter growth on lagged loan growth and 12-month CD rate
and lagged loan growth. In Panel A, Columns (1) and (2) use the entire sample of bank-quarters. In Panel B,
columns (1) and (4) split the sample based on the equity-to-assets ratio, with Column (1) using the bottom decile and
Column (2) using the top nine deciles. Panel B, also splits the sample by bank asset size with columns (3), (4), and
(5) including small (<$500M), medium sized (>$500M and < $10 B), and large (>$10B). Control variables include
the change in deposits-to-liabilities, logged assets, the log # offices, the large deposit ratio, time deposits–to–total
deposits, loans-to-assets, brokered deposits–to–total deposits, an interbank holding company indicator, a new bank
indicator, the charge-off ratio, asset quality, and shares of real-estate loans, commercial and industrial loans, and
consumer loans. All control variables are lagged by one quarter. All regressions are OLS regressions and have bank
fixed effects. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors are double-clustered by bank and calendar
quarter. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. **, * represent statistical significance at the 1% or 5% levels,
respectively.


Panel A: Deposit Growth and Deposit Rates

                     Dependent variable:                                    Deposit Growth
                                                                             (1)        (2)
                     12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%) (q-1)                       0.010**
                                                                                      (6.21)
                       × I(2008/Q4 onward)                                           0.016**
                                                                                      (6.53)
                     Loan growth (q-1)                                    0.060**    0.077**
                                                                           (4.18)     (5.99)
                       × I(2008/Q4 onward)                                 -0.015    -0.038*
                                                                          (-0.81)     (-2.13)

                     Bank characteristics (q-1)                             Yes           Yes
                     Bank FE                                                Yes           Yes
                     Calendar quarter FE                                    Yes           Yes

                     Obs                                                   121522       114569
                            2
                     Adj R                                                  0.103        0.107




                                                          41
                 Table 4. Deposit Growth, CD Rates, and Loan Growth (Cont.)

Panel B: Deposit Growth and Deposit Rates, by Bank Capitalization and Bank Size

Dependent variable:                                                 Deposit Growth
                                                   Capital                       Bank assets
Sample:                                       Low           High     <$500m [$500m,$10bn]      >$10bn
                                               (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%) (q-1)   0.016**       0.009**     0.011**      0.006*       0.005
                                             (3.11)        (5.70)     (10.20)      (2.22)       (0.70)
  × I(2008/Q4 onward)                       0.014*        0.017**     0.018**      0.008*      0.030**
                                             (2.29)        (6.41)     (12.29)      (2.26)       (3.06)
Loan growth (q-1)                           0.039**       0.069**     0.089**      0.016        0.007
                                             (2.73)        (5.11)      (7.86)      (0.79)       (0.35)
  × I(2008/Q4 onward)                        -0.001        -0.033    -0.045**      0.009        0.002
                                            (-0.05)       (-1.83)     (-3.57)      (0.30)       (0.06)

Bank characteristics (q-1)                   Yes             Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes
Bank FE                                      Yes             Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes
Calendar quarter FE                          Yes             Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes

Obs                                         11251         102925      95719        17581        1196
      2
Adj R                                        0.028         0.092      0.107        0.126        0.120




                                                     42
                                Table 5. Deposit Rates and Loan Growth

The table presents regressions of the 12-month CD rates on measures of loan growth. In Panel A, Columns (1) and
(2) use lagged bank loan growth as a proxy for current loan growth. Columns (3) and (4) use the lagged market
(state-level) loan growth as a proxy for current loan growth. In Panel B, columns (1) and (4) split the sample based
on the equity-to-assets ratio, with Column (1) using the bottom decile and Column (2) using the top nine deciles.
Panel B, also splits the sample by bank asset size with columns (3), (4), and (5) including small (<$500M), medium
sized (>$500M and < $10 B), and large (>$10B).. Control variables include the change in deposits-to-liabilities,
logged assets, the log # offices, a large deposit ratio, time deposits–to–total deposits, loans-to-assets, brokered
deposits–to–total deposits, an interbank holding company indicator, a new bank indicator, the charge-off ratio, asset
quality, and shares of real-estate loans, commercial and industrial loans, and consumer loans. All control variables
are lagged by one quarter. All regressions are OLS regressions and have bank fixed effects. Variable definitions are
in Appendix A. Standard errors are double-clustered by bank and calendar quarter. t-statistics are presented in
parentheses. **, * represent statistical significance at the 1% or 5% levels, respectively.


Panel A: Deposit Rates and Loan Growth

             Dependent variable:                       12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
             Loan growth (q-1)                  0.104**      0.117*
                                                 (4.27)      (2.00)
               × I(2008/Q4 onward)                           -0.020
                                                             (-0.31)
             State-level loan growth (q-1)                               1.101**      1.208**
                                                                          (2.99)        (2.70)
               × I(2008/Q4 onward)                                                      -0.186
                                                                                       (-0.22)

             Bank characteristics (q-1)           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
             Bank FE                              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
             Calendar quarter FE                  Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes

             Obs                                121250        121250        121204          121204
             Adj R2                              0.947        0.947          0.947           0.947




                                                         43
                       Table 5. Deposit Rates and Loan Growth (Cont.)

Panel B: Deposit Rates and Loan Growth, by Bank Capitalization and Bank Size

    Dependent variable:                        12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
    Sample broken by:                     Capital                      Bank Assets
                                     Low          High    <$500m [$500m,$10bn]         >$10bn
                                      (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)
    State-level loan growth (q-1)   2.343*       0.449    1.167**        -1.876*     3.975
                                    (2.32)      (1.13)     (4.01)        (-1.75)     (0.93)
      × I(2008/Q4 onward)           -1.029       0.245     -0.383         2.747*     -2.818
                                    (-0.78)     (0.32)     (-1.23)        (1.95)     (-0.58)

    Bank characteristics (q-1)       Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Bank FE                          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Calendar quarter FE              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes

    Obs                             11864     108946       101230       18613          1287
          2
    Adj R                           0.917      0.946       0.949        0.926          0.930




                                                44
                      Table 6. Local CD Rates and Loan Growth in Other States

The table presents our analysis of CD rates. Panels A and B show a regression of the 12-month CD rates on
measures of loan growth. In Panel A, columns (1) and (2) include all inter-state quarters; columns (3) and (4)
include low and high deposit to liabilities banks and columns (5) and (6) include banks with positive and zero
brokered deposits. In Panel B, columns (1) and (4) split the sample based on the equity-to-assets ratio, with Column
(1) using the bottom decile and Column (2) using the top nine deciles. Panel B, also splits the sample by bank asset
size with columns (3), (4), and (5) including small (<$500M), medium sized (>$500M and < $10 B), and large
(>$10B).Control variables include the change in deposits-to-liabilities, logged assets, the log # offices, the large
deposit ratio, time deposits–to–total deposits, loans-to-assets, brokered deposits–to–total deposits, a multi-bank
holding company indicator, a new bank indicator, the charge-off ratio, asset quality, and shares of real-estate loans,
commercial and industrial loans, and consumer loans. All control variables are lagged by one quarter. All
regressions are OLS regressions and have bank fixed effects. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard
errors are double-clustered by bank and calendar quarter. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. **, * represent
statistical significance at the 1% or 5% levels, respectively.


Panel A: All Interstate Banks

Dependent variable:                                               12-month CD rate (%)
                                       All inter-state           Deposits/Liabilities          Brokered Deposits
Sample:                                bank-quarters              Low              High          >0        None
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)
In-state loan growth (q-1)          0.798*         0.499         0.123           2.609*        0.008       2.211
                                    (2.05)         (0.83)        (0.21)           (2.45)       (0.01)     (1.69)
  × I(2008/Q4 onward)                              0.515         0.997           -2.585        1.036      -2.246
                                                   (0.66)        (1.30)          (-1.90)       (1.43)    (-1.23)

Out-of-state loan growth (q-1)     1.894**         2.112         1.509          4.436*         1.170        4.679*
                                    (2.74)        (1.95)         (1.27)         (2.55)         (1.03)       (2.04)
  × I(2008/Q4 onward)                             -0.368         0.596         -3.954*         0.752        -4.697
                                                  (-0.28)        (0.41)        (-2.18)         (0.59)       (-1.74)

Bank characteristics (q-1)           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Bank FE                              Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Calendar quarter FE                  Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
State Econ Variables + FE            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

Obs                                 24863         24863          20987          3875           19515         5348
      2
Adj R                                0.944        0.944          0.945          0.943           0.945        0.926




                                                            45
             Table 6. Local CD Rates and Loan Growth in Other States (Cont.)

Panel B: Interstate Banks, by Dependence on Deposits

 Dependent variable:                            12-month CD rate, $10k accounts (%)
 Sample broken by:                        Capital                       Bank assets
                                    Low           High    <$500m       [$500m,$10bn]   >$10bn
                                     (1)           (2)       (3)             (4)          (5)
 In-state loan growth (q-1)       7.476**       -0.140     3.189*          0.140       -0.651
                                   (3.19)       (-0.27)    (2.53)          (0.19)      (-0.76)
   × I(2008/Q4 onward)            -6.207*         1.091    -3.015          0.640        1.515
                                  (-2.05)        (1.63)    (-1.83)         (0.55)       (1.45)

 Out-of-state loan growth (q-1)   10.522**     0.637       2.316          0.181         7.359
                                   (3.78)      (0.69)     (1.45)          (0.15)       (1.69)
   × I(2008/Q4 onward)             -5.992      1.026      -1.298         -0.229        -0.650
                                   (-1.78)     (0.88)     (-0.74)        (-0.17)       (-0.13)

 Bank characteristics (q-1)         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
 Bank FE                            Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
 Calendar quarter FE                Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
 State Econ Variables + FE          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes

 Obs                               2525        22336       5169           10949         8743
       2
 Adj R                             0.870       0.947       0.939          0.946        0.952




                                               46
                           Figure 1. Equity Capital to Assets 1987–2012




The figure shows the average equity-to-assets ratio and the 10th percentile of the distribution of equity-to-
assets among banks. Source: Call Reports.




                                                     47
           Figure 2. Time Series of Deposit Rates, by Maturity and Account Size




    Money market rates for $10k accounts             12-month CD rates for $10k accounts




    24-month CD rates for $10k accounts              12-month CD rates for $100k accounts




    12-month CD rates for $500k accounts

The figure presents time series of deposits for money market accounts and 12-month accounts
for different account sizes: $10k, $100k, and $500k accounts. The figure plots the 5th, 50th and
95th percentiles. Source: RateWatch.




                                              48
                          Figure 3. Time Series of Large Deposit Ratios




The figure shows the evolution of the average large deposit ratios over time. These variables measure the
percentage of the dollar amount of large deposits (i.e., deposits larger than $100k or $250k) as a fraction
of the total dollar amount of deposits within banks. Source: Call Reports.


                             Figure 4. CD Rates and Equity-to-Assets




The figure shows the relation between deposit rates and lagged equity-to-assets. It presents the
coefficients from regressions of CD rates (12-month duration for $10k accounts) on lagged equity-to-
assets decile indicators, bank controls, and calendar fixed effects. The sample is split into two: pre-
2008/Q4 and 2008/Q4 onward. The solid lines represent the point estimates of the coefficients. The dotted
lines represent two standard errors around the point estimates of the coefficients. Sources: RateWatch and
Call Reports.

                                                    49
                          Figure 5. CD Rates and Past 3-Month Returns




The figure shows the relation between deposit rates and lagged 3-month returns. It presents the
coefficients from regressions of CD rates (12-month duration for $10k accounts) on lagged 3-month
return quintile indicators, bank controls, and calendar fixed effects. The solid line represents the point
estimate of the coefficients. The dotted lines represent two standard errors around the point estimate of
the coefficients. Sources: RateWatch and Call Reports.



                             Figure 6. Aggregate Deposits and Loans




The figure shows the quarterly aggregate deposits and loans. Source: Call Reports.



                                                   50
                            Figure 7. CD Rates and Equity-to-Assets




The figure shows the relation between deposit rates and lagged loan growth. It presents the coefficients
from regressions of CD rates (12-month duration for $10k accounts) on lagged loan growth decile
indicators, bank controls, and calendar fixed effects. The sample is split into two: pre-2008/Q4 and
2008/Q4 onward. The solid lines represent the point estimate of the coefficients. The dotted lines
represent two standard errors around the point estimate of the coefficients. Sources: RateWatch and Call
Reports.




                                                  51
