                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
                AND LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT
                    IN THE OPEN ECONOMY




                       Joshua Aizenmafl




                    Working Paper No. 2152




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 MassachUsetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1987




                           is part of the NBER'S research program
The research reported here                            those of the
in International Studies. Any opinionS expressed are
                            National Bureau of Economic Research.
author and not those of the
                                                      NBER working Paper #2152
                                                      February 1987



                                       and Labor Market
             MonOpOliStiC Competition
                   Adjustment in the Open Economy


                                    ABSTRACT



                                             and employment adjustment Ifl an open
         This paper explains prices, output
                                                       market structure where goods
           characterized by a monopolistic competitive
economy
                                     determined by contracts that pre-set the wage
prices are flexible while wages are
                                               rational expectation equilibrium In an
path for several periods. The paper solves the             negotiation, for which the
economy characterized by staggered. unsynchronized wage
                                  is endogenously determined. it investigates the
degree ol contract staggering
                                      and prices to nominal and real shocks, and to
adjustment of output. exchange rate
                                          the market power enjoyed by each producer
what extent that adjustment depends on
                                                                          studies the
                                   domestic and foreign goods. It also
 and the substitutability between
                                        like wage indexatiOn to nominal income. The
 potential role of indexation clauses,
                                            shocks can generate persistent aggregate
 analysis shows that unexpected monetary
                                                                                   of
output and relative price shocks, whose nature is determined by the degree
                                                     Greater substitutability induces
substitutability between domestic and foreign goods.                        short and
                                  effects and smaller prices effects in the
a greater output and employment                                             to reduce
the intermediate run. On the other hand, greater substitutability iS shown
                                                     If the income elasticity of the
the persistency and duration of the adjustment.
                                                   of nominal wage contracts tends to
demand for money is less than unity the presence
                                              to real shocks. and a larger degree of
magnify the responsiveness of the economy
                                               and the intermediate—run adjustment of
substitutability will magnify the short-run
                                   and will reduce the needed adjustment of relative
prices and output to real shocks,

 prices.



                                                         Joshua Aizenman
                                                         GSB. University of Chicago
                                                          1101 E. 58 St.

                                                          ChicagO IL 60637
                                                          312- 962 7260
                                               -2-

1.    INTRODUCTiON AND SUMMARI

          The volatility    of the real exchange rate exhibited in recent years has led to


a growing concern regarding the need for labor market adjustment in the presence of

misalignment The purpose of this paper Is to address th nature of adjustment In an

economy characterized b labor contracts that limit the flexibility of wage

                                  I   postulate a stochastic monopolistic competitive
adjustment. Specifically,

                                                          every   several periods due to the
economy, where wage negotiations are carried out

presence of transaction costs. These costs can reflect the expenses of collecting and

processing information as well as direct output losses associated with a time—

                                                                           are assumed to be
consuming negotiation process. The wage negotiation periods

distributed uniformly over time. This distribution results          in wage and price paths


that differ across firms, according to the timing            of their most recent pricing

decision. Following the construction of the building blocks               of the economy, we

derive the optimal wage pre-setting rule. Such a rule
                                                                    is   characterized by two

elements. First, for a given frequency of wage negotiation we derive the optimal

 path of wages to be pre-set at the beginning of each contract cycle. Second, we

 solve for the optimal frequency of wage negotiation.

                                                                              the evolution of
           Armed with the optimal wage pre-setting rule, I analyze

 Qoods prices and the implication of the wage pre-setting                rule for the aggregate


 economy. Specifically, i investigate the adjustment of output, exchange rate, prices,

 employment and wages to nominal and real shocks. The discussion focuses on the

 dependency of the adjustment on the market power enjoyed                by each producer. The



               1. Dixit and StiglitZ (1977) revived the interest in monopolistic competition.
     A growing body of research has recognized the importance of a limited degree of
                                        transmission of macro shocks. See, for example,
     goods substitutability in explaining
     Rotemberg (1982), Dornbuscfl (1985), Flood and HodriCk (1985), Giovanini (1985),
     Aizenman (1986) Svannson (1986). Svannson and van wijnbergen (1986). On
     monopolistic competition in the context of trade models see Helpmafl and Krugmafl

     (1985).
                                              -3-
   analysis shows that unexpected monetary shocks can generate persistent aggregate
  output and relative price Shocks, whose nature is
                                                    determined by the degree of
  substitutability between domestic and foreign goods. Greater
                                                                      substitutability induces
  a
      greater output and employment effects and smaller prices effects in the short and
  the intermediate run. On the other hand,
                                              greater substitutability is shown to reduce
  the persistency and duration of the adjustment. These results follow from the
  observation that a larger Substitutability is shown to be associated with shorter
  wage contracts. Thus, a greater degree of substitutability    has   two opposing effects —
  it raises the magnitude but reduces the duration of the output and employment
 shocks resulting from a given monetary innovation.

          The details of the adjustment to real shocks are more involved, being
 determined by the magnitude of the income elasticity of the demand for money and

 the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods. if the income
                                                                        elasticity of
 the demand for money is less than
                                    unity (as is suggested by empirical studies) the
 presence of nominal wage Contracts tends to magnify the responsiveness of the
 economy to real shocks, and a larger degree of
                                                       substitutability will magnify the
 short-run and the intermediate-run
                                      adjustment of prices and output to real shocks,
and will reduce the needed adjustment of
                                                relative prices. The direction of the

nominal exchange rate adjustment induced by real shocks is shown to be determined

by the size of the income elasticity of the
                                                        demand for money and by the
substitutability between domestic and foreign
                                                    goods. Large (small) elasticities are
associated with a nominal appreciation
                                                    (depreciation) in the presence of
expansionary real shocks. An Important feature of
                                                        our staggered framework is that
the speed of adjustment to real        and nominal shocks accelerates
                                                                                durin9 the
adjustment, it is noteworthy tnat te result
                                                    regarding the accelerated speed of
adjustment differs from the one obtained
                                           applying linear models, where typically the

speed of adjustment drops during the cycle.
                                          -4-
       The last part of the paper evaluates the potential role of labor market
             in the presence of misalignment. We distinguish between two sources    of
guidelines

misalignment.   The first is due to a large realization of the nominal or real shocks.

The second is due to structural shocks that change the underlying parameters, like a

change in the substitutability between various goods, a change in the share of labor

in the GNP, changes in the covarlance structure of the shocks,       etc. The analysis

demonstrates that a wage rule that will index the wage to nominal Income will

stabilize    employment in the presence of the first type of shocks. Such a rule.

however,    will not stabilize employment in the presence of the second type of shocks:

accommodation to structural shocks will necessitate wage renegotiation and a

change in the frequency of wage adjustment.

       Section 2 of the paper describes the model by formulating the goods. the

money and the labor market. Section 3 derives the long-run equilibrium where all

prices and wages are flexible. Section 4 studies the dynamics of adjustment to

monetary and real shocks. Section 5 discusses the factors determining contract

length, and Section 6 evaluates the role of labor market guidelines     in the presence


of   misalignment. Section 7 closes          the paper with concluding remarks.
                                                 -5-




  2.   THE MODEL

            In   this section we outline the building blocks of     the model. We start with
  the goods market specification and we conclude with the labor and the
                                                                        money market.



 2.1 THE GOODS MARKET

            Consider an economy characterized by producers organized in a       monopolistic

 competitive       manner, There are two classes of goods - domestic and foreign. All
 domestic producers are facing the same demand function and share the same
 technology. Demand facing producer k is given by



           (i) 0k         ''k (EP/Pk)0                     +>

 where P is the average price of domestic goods, E is         the   exchange rate, P is the
average     price of foreign goods (in units of the foreigncurrency) and        Is the price

of good K 2 We assume a large number of domestic producers (denoted by m.such

that     each of them treats     as given 3. we denote by 8     the demand elasticity with

respect     to the competing domestic goods. The substitutability between domestic and



       2. To simplify exposition we consider here the case where the demand is a
function only of relative prices. Our analysis can be extended to the case where
income effects are added without affecting the main results.


                                             m
          3. Formally, P is defined as P
                                                 [Pk/mJ To simplify notation we assume


that I    is large enough to imply that                8 P/ P 0. See Aizenman (1985)
for an alternative analysis (though in a different context) that does not impose
this assumption.
                                         -5-

foreign goods is measured by , and for simplicity of exposition we invoke the law

of one price for foreign goods.4

        The production function of each domestic producer is characterized b




        (2) Xk:QLk


where Lk is the labor employed in the production of good k, and Q stands      for labor


productivity. Aggregate output is denoted by X, where




        Suppose we start from an initial equilibrium. Let us use lower-case letters

for the logarithm of the upper-case variable. Thus, for a variable Z, z       log Z. For


example, applying equations (1) and (3) yields that the (percentage) change    In output


is proportional to the change in the terms of trade:




        (4)         oc(e-)

2.2 THE LABOR AND THE MONEY MARKETS

         For the purpose of our analysis we will distinguish between two types of
labor markets. In the first case, we will consider a flexible prices economy where

the labor market always   clears. This corresponds to the case where wages are fully

flexible and where the labor market is cleared in an auction manner. The usefulness

of   this environment stems from providing the benchmark economy for our subsequent



         4. Our analysis could be conducted for the symmetric case where the foreigfl
 good' is composed of a large number of differentiated products. See, for example,
 Appendix B in Aizenman (1986).
                                                    -7-
  discussion, where we will allow for the presence of nominal contracts In the labor

  market. In this benchmark economy money Is neutral, because all prices are flexible

  to adjust fully to the state of liquidity. Thus, the benchmark            economy serves to

 define the tong run equilibrium. The presence of nominal contracts will introduce a

 distinction between the long, the intermediate and the short-run.
                                                                            Among other topics,

 our analysis will study tne factors determining the effective duration of the short

 and the intermediate run.


         Consider the case where each producer is a price taker in the labor market.

 To   simplify notation we normalize the labor force to mand we assume an Inelastic
 supply of labor.5 Let W denote the money wage rate. Application of equatIons (1) and

 (2) yields the dependency of the price charged by producer k on the money wage:


             k a1 (p' + e) + a2                   a3 W + eEc - qJ


 where 0     I/El   +   (i-j)(Q( + .0))   ;   C     log {1(Q( +      + .8-1));

a1     o (-i)e          a2   .8   (-i)e       and a3      0.



Note that the sum of the elasticities of               with respect to foreign prices (a1), the
wage (a2), and domestic competitors' prices (a3) adds up to one: a1 + a2 + a3 = 1.

This is a reflection of the homogeneity postulate, implying that an equi-proportional

rise in all prices will not affect the real equilibrium. The relative importance of
foreign prices in the determination of the domestic price              is characterized by the

substitiuatability of domestic and foreign goods. As we approach perfect




        5. Our analysis can be extended to the case where the supply of labor is
dependent on real wages without affecting the main results.
                                           -8-

substitiutability (i.e. as    -. oo) we approachs an absolute PPP peicing rule where p

  pw+e.6
        We conclude this section with the specification of the money market. Let us

denote by M the supply of money, and consider a simple money demand function:




        (6) m:+j

where        is the income elasticity of the demand for money.7 We turn now to the
characterization of the long-run, flexible price equilibrium.




        6. Note that as      - oo. a1    1. a2 -. 0, a -. 0 and eEc -   qJ   -'   0. For a
discussion on the   PPP doctrine, see Frenkel (1981).
        7.Allowing for a dependency of the demand for money on the interest rate
wilL complicate the reduced form solutions for all variables, but it will not affect
the main results regarding the determinants of contract lengths and the nature of the
adjustment to shocks.
                                                   -9-
 3.   THE LONG RUN EQUILIBRIUM

          The long-run     equilibrium is characterized by    flexibility of prices. In such an
 economy all domestic producers are facing the same demand and supply conditions.
 As a result, in this equilibrium all       producers    will employ    0 and will charge the
 same price          = p). Applying equations (1) and (2) yields that the long run PPP ratio

 is   equal to




          (7)       e+ p -      = q/
The PPP ratio is determined by two factors - the measure of the efficiency of

production (Q) and the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods (a).             A
rise in domestic efficiency (          d q > 0) or a drop In the substitutability between

domestic and foreign goods is         associated   with a deterioration in the terms of trade.

AS one might expect, the long-run equilibrium is independent of monetary

considerations. Applying (7) to (5) we infer that the producer's real        wage is



         (8) w - p        q -   c



The term c represents the markup pricing rule, where the price is a markup of wages.

From the definition of c (see (5)) it       follows that the markup rate        drops    with
  +   , which      corresponds to the degree of substitutability. It can be also shown

that as         + . -, Co we   approach the competitive outcome, where the labor bill share

approaches (. We turn now to an analysis of the short- and the intermediate—run.
                                          -10-


4. THE SHORT AND THE iNTERMEDIATE RUN

         The purpose of this section is to design a framework that will allow
assessment of the short- and intermediate-run adjustment to unanticipated monetary

and real shocks, and the evaluation of economic factors determining the effective

duration   of the Intermediate run. We introduce nominal rigidities by assuming that

pricing decisions in the labor market are carried out every several periods due to

the presence of transaction costs associated with frequent wage negotiation8. We

consider the case where labor is employed subject to contracts that pre-set the

wage path for n periods, where within the contract duration employment is demand

determined. At the beginning of each contract cycle, the contract sets the wage path

for the next n periods. We start this section with the assumption that n is

exogenously given, and we conclude with an analysis of the endo9enous determination

of n.9

         The wage in period d that was pre-set h periods ago is denoted by Wdh , and

the price charged by the producer who employs labor that is paid Wdh is denoted by


d,h . For example, a producer who starts a contract cycle in t should negotiate at

period t the path of (wt.;     w,11; ... w_1,_1).         Figure 1 descrIbes the prices


         8. To highlight the role of wage contracts we assume that prices in the goods
market are flexible. Alternative modeling strategy can focus on price rigidities in
the   goods market, as in Sheshinski and Weiss (1977), Mussa (1981), Rotemberg
(1982). and Aizenman (1986).
       9. The present formulation is related to Fischer (1977), who studies the
determinations of contracts in the presence of two-periods staggered contracts. The
new aspect of the present discussion is in allowing for endogenous determination of
the extent of staggering prices, focussing on    the role of the substitutability between
various    goods and the stochastic structure in explaining the nature of the resultant
equilibrium. Our Approach is closer to Fischer (1977) than to Taylor (1979), who
considers a staggered equilibrium that sets one price for the pre—setting horizon,
which is taken to be exogenously given. This paper applies Fischers formulation
because it allows for a more tractable analysis regarding the role of goods
substitutability in the determination of wages and final prices.
(w,p) t10      w
                t+1,1
                          w       w         w
                          t+212    t+3,3     t+n—1,n—1
(w,p) t p1       •
                 •
                              •
                              •         •
                 •            0     0

(w,p) t 2                           •
                 0            0     0
                 0            0     0
                 •            0     0
                 •            0     0
                 •            0
(w ,             0            0
                                    0



                                    0

       0         0            0     0
       0         0            0     0
       0         0            0     0
       0         0            0     0
       0         0            0

       0         0            0     0
       0         0            0     0
       •         0            0     0
       0         0
       0         0            0     0




                          t2 t3
       0         0            0     0

       •         0            0     0


   t           t+1                          tn—1 t


             FIGURE ONE
                                               —1!—

and wages prevailing in our economy. At time t we observe n prices and a
corresponding     n wages, as described by the vertical vector. A producer charging Pt.


at period t is also pre-setting wages for the next n-i periods, as is described by

the horizontal vector, The pre-setting rule is governed by the notion that wages are

pre-set at a level that is expected to clear the labor market facing the producer. In

doing so labor and management are using all the Information regarding the wages

that have already been set, the expected path of the exchange rate and foreign prices,

and the prices that other competitors are expected to set in the future10. Applying

equations (1), (2) we get that the wage set at time t for period t+k such that the

following condition hold




        (9) E(q) =          E(p
                                  -
                                      t+k,k
                                              +
                                                  o E(e t+k - 't41c,k

where          denotes the conditional expectation operator, when expectations are
        Et

conditional on the      information at time t. Applying (9) to (5) we obtain

        (10)                            +          ci
                   Wt.k Et t+k


We assume a stable stochastic structure,          and unsynchronized price setting .- i.e.   that

the contracts decision periods are distributed uniformly over time. Within this

assumption the complexity of the problem is reduced significantly. This assumption




        10. We start our formulation with the case where we do allow for pre-set
wages contingent on future (presently unavailable) information. At the extreme case,
where we would make optimal use of all future information In a contingent wage
contract, we would converge on the flexible equilibrium economy, described earlier.
This paper does not attempt to provide a theoretical justification for non-contingent
contracts (for further discussion on this issue see Blanchard (1979)). Rather, their
existence is    taken   for granted. In section 6 we will allow for limited contingencies

by considering wage indexation to prices.
                                             -12-
 breaks the symmetry of all domestic producers that is observed in the flexible

 pricing equilibrium, while at the same time it Imposes enough structure to allow a

 tractable solution. Within each period a fraction 1/n of the producers determines

 tne time path of prices. The result is pricing decisions for each period that differ

across firms, according to the timing of their most recent wage contract negotiation.

Consequently, the domestic price level is given by




                      n

         (11)
                          t,n-/ nJ




        Consider the case where we start at time zero in the long—run equilibrium,

with contracts that are fully adjusted to all the past shocks. We would now like to

study   adjustment to real and nominal shocks.      To   simplify notation we assume that
by the choice of units all   prices   and aggregate output in the initial equilibrium are
one (or zero in logarithmic terms). Our subsequent analysis will focus on
                                                                          deriving

the changes in aM variables relative to this benchmark. Consequently, we will use

the logarithmic notation to denote the percentage changes relative to this

benchmark, We allow    for two stochastic shocks:   a monetary (m) and a real shock (q).

Applying equations ('3). (5). (6), (10) and (ii) yields




                                                    — q + ( - 1)(x +       -
        (12)
                tn—k ef Et( k)t k +


                      + ( 1)m/J
                                          -13-
       Equation (12) describes the actual price at time t charged by a producer that

negotiated the labor contract n-k periods ago. This price is a function of three types

of variables the expected producer price at the time of the wage negotiation, the

price level, and the realization of the nominal and the real shocks.

       To gain further insight it is useful to impose restrictions on the stochastic

structure in order to allow a reduced form solution of the time path of the key

variables. For example, consider the case where both liquidity m and productivity q

follow a random walk:




       (13)            mt_i +
                  mt



       (14)



To simplify exposition we proceed by analyzing two polar cases. We start with an

economy where all shocks are nominal, and we continue with an economy where all

shocks are real. The general case where both types of shocks are present is obtained

as a linear combination of these two polar cases.


4.1 SHORT RUN ADJUSTMENT TO MONETARY SHOCKS

       We start our analysis by providing the general solution for prices and
quantities, and we proceed by studying the dynamics of adjustment to a nominal
shock starting from a long-run equilibrium.
       Following some tedious steps, it can be shown   that   the wage setting   rule   and

the corresponding   prices are given by



                        k

       (15)
              Wtfl_k         AjTit(flj) + {m - (a-i) q_ - c)
                        j1
                                                   -1 '1-




                         k                           n
         (16)   tnk            AjTlt(flj) +                                      + (m - (-1)       —
                                                                                                       c)
                        j1                          jk+1



                                         1 + (—      i)   ($   +

         where                                                                                     and
                         (n -j     +    1)/n + (V-        1)   ($   +   )   +
                                                                                 (j   - j)( +



                                                 (_ ')(+ )
         where B =
                       (' -j   +   1)/n   +   (
                                              —
                                                  - 1) ( +          )   +   (j   - ')($ +




         Note that A equals the elasticity of the wage for period t that was set at

period t—(n—k) with respect to innovations at period t-(n-j) for j1, ...                          k. Thus,

smaller values of j are associated with older innovations. From (15)                            it follows

that   innovations that took place in or before period t-(n—1) affect the wage with a

unitary elasticity. The logic of this result stems from the observation that

equations (6), (7) and (8) imply that the long run wage Is given by m - (-i)q -                             c.
Because in our economy there are staggered contracts whose duration is n. it takes

n-I    periods to accomplish the adjustment to a given innovation. Once that the

adjustment is accomplished, it         affects    nominal wages with a unitary elasticity.

         To gain further insight. it is           useful to consider the adjustment path to

shocks starting from a long run equilibrium at time t-1. For example, suppose that

at time t         1. With the exception of the producers that negotiate at period t
                                                     -15-
(i/n   of all producers), all the other producers do not adjust wages to reflect ¶l.


Applying (15) and (16) yields that




                                                            1 +       (jr- 1) ($   +

         (17)                                                                                   and
                               Pt.                   —
                                          1/n÷(- 1)(o)(n- i)($+oc)/n


                                                                      (j - 1) ($ +

         (18)
                  pt,1       t,2" t,fl—l




                                      (i- 1) (, +           + 1/n
         (i9):                1/n +   (- )   ($   + ) + ('        -
                                                                       ')($ +
                                                                                       <1




         The result of the increase in liquidity is to raise all prices. Note that If all

domestic prices rise at the same rate we will obtain an excess supply of goods

produced by producers that pre-set wages for time t In the past because they enjoy a

cost advantage relative to the producers that set their wage at time t. Thus, the

pre—setters will increase prices by               less   than the producers that are setting wages at

time   t (i.e..          <        . me overall effect of the pre-setting of wages is that the

aggregate price level rises by less than the Implied long-run adjustment (i.e.,
  < 1). Note also that if   + o) < I the price and the wage of producers that
negotiate the contract at time t will overshoot the long run adjustment (i.e. wt. =
       > 1). Applying (4) and (6) we infer that
                                                 -16-



          (20)            +    (1   -       =1   +   (j -      -
                 et




    Applying (19) we inter that the exchange rate depreciation exceeds the aggregate

 price adjustment, implying that the monetary shock induces real depreciation in the
 short run at a rate of




                                        (n - 1)(( +
          (21) e_j:
                                o41/n + (_ ) (, +           + (n - i)(   oc)/n]




          Another implication of equation (20) is that exchange—rate       overshooting will
occur if I >     o.   Note that (4) and (6) imply that the elasticity of the      demand for
money with respect to the exchange rate is o, and overshooting will occur if this

elasticity falls short of unity11. We turn now to an assessment of the short run

output effect of the monetary innovation, Note that (1) implies that for any producer

k




         (22)     =
                      oc(e -        +(+



The first term reflects the common effect due to the real depreciation, whereas the


         11. This condition is similar to the one derived in Dornbusch (1976). It is
noteworthy that the condition for overshooting of the wage and the price of the
flexible' producers (i.e. producers that      set    wages at time t) is more stringent than
the condition for exchange rate overshooting.
                                              -17-
second term reflects the producer specific effect due to deviations of his prices

from    the economy's average price. As our analysis Indicates, the common effect
implies that output will rise. The producer specific effect works towards output
contraction for 'flexible producers (i.e. producers that are setting wages at time t).
In   fact,   because of the inelastic supply of labor we obtain that the two effects
cancel   each other for the 'flexible' producers and that                 0. on the other hand,


the producer specific effect works towards output expansion for the producers that

pre—set wages before period t. Direct application of (17) -            (20)   reveals that




         (23) x1 0


         (2) x1 ... x,_1
                                    +   )/Ei/n +     (i-   1)   (. +      + (n   -          +




         (25)        (n-I)(cx +     + n(' -    1) ($ +     +       -          + oc)fl



         (25') 'i                  wriere      is the change in aggregate employment.




Figure 2 plots the dependency of prices and output on the substitutability between

domestic and foreign goods (o). Notice that greater substitutability induces a greater

output and employment effects and smaller price effects. Similar results apply for

the variances of the variables plotted in figure 2 for the case where only monetary

shocks are affecting the economy. Direct calculation reveals that the degree of

staggering (i.e. the contract length n) affects the adjustment in the followin9 way




                                                                                        a
                                                                 ae
         (26)              >0                     >0 ;                    >0                    <0;
                                                                 an                     an
X,e, p.e- p




   1




                             x

                             e


                             p

                             e-p


              FIGURE   TWO
                                                       -18-




                  a

                           >0.
                  8n




Longer contracts magnify the exchange rate, the output and the relative price effects

induced by monetary shocks in the short run, while it dampens the price level

adjustment.


4.2 INTERMEDIATE RUN ADJUSTMENT TO MONETARY SHOCKS

        We turn now to the adjustment observed in the intermediate run. Over time.

more wage contracts are renegotiated to reflect the liquidity shock. Because the
impact effect of the shock          is to       cause output expansion at the previously pre-set
wages, forces of excess demand in the labor market will raise wages in the
renegotiated contracts at a rate that will reduce output and employment to the pre—

shock level. This in turn will enable other producers to raise prices. Thus, over

time aggregate prices will rise while aggregate output will drop. This adjustment in

turn will reduce the real depreciation implied by the initial shock. More formally.

applying equations (4), (6). (15) and (16) we obtain that after k perioøs the monetary

shock          I will result jfl:




                                     (I'_       ')(÷) (k÷ 1)/n
        (1w)                                                                              <I
                           (1 +     k)/n    +    (V-      + ) + (n -   (k +   +
                                             -19-

       (28')                + (1 -



                             (n - (k +           +

                                                                                  (1 - oc)/(oc)
                (1 + k)/n + (V - 1)( + oc) + (n - (k +              +



                                            (n - (k +          +

       (2!') et,, -              ___________________________________________

                                o4(1 + k)/n      +   (i- ')($ + g) + (n - (k +            + o)/nI


                                            (n   - (k +         + cx)/n
       (25")
                        (1 + k)/fl + (V -            +    + (n - (k + 1))(B   +   oc)/n




Note that the   condition generating short-run overshooting (I.e. I > oc) implies also
intermediate—run overshooting, where over time we will observe nominal
appreciation. Applying the above equations we obtain that the dynamics of
intermediate—run adjustment are characterized by




                  P+k/k>0; L2Pt,/tk2>O; t+_'

                  txt.k/Ik<@ t2X/k2<O; xt1=6;


       (27)          Ie - pJ // k < 0 ; i2                         - p] /t k < 0
                                           -20-

                             k< 0     2 e/t k2 < 0           if   1 >   oc and



                   i         k>@2                   k2 > 0   if I       oc.




       Figure 3 summarizes the dynamics of adjustment of aggregate prices and
output'2. An important feature of our staggered framework is that the speed of

adjustment accelerates    during   the adjustment. Following the shock at time t the
monetary shock triggers persistent relative price and output shocks. Over time the
shocks to relative prices and output will die down at an accelerated rate, and the

rise in liquidity is absorbed via accelerated aggregate price adjustment. It can be
shown that smaller substitutability        will raise the curvature of the, adjustment
path. This in turn implies greater persistency of prices and output during the first
phase of the adjustment and a more abrupt adjustment towards the end of the
adjustment cycle. In terms of Figure 3 we will observe that a drop in                        is

associated with adjustment on the dotted (instead of on the solid) curves. It is
noteworthy that the result regarding the accelerated speed of adjustment differs
from   the    one obtained applying linear models, where typically the speed of

adjustment    drops during the cycle 13




        12. Note that equation (4) implies that the PPP ratio (i.e. e -          ) follows    a

time path similar to that of output (x).
        13.   See, for example, Dornbusch (1976).
X, p

 1




                                4



                            +

         x                          p




                                                 time
     t                                  t(n—1)


             FIGURE THREE
                                                   -21-
4.3 ADJUSTMENT TO REAL SHOCKS

         We turn now to the case of productivity shocks. We follow a procedure

similar to our analysis of nominal shocks, Suppose that we start in a long—run

equilibrium in period t-1, and consider the adjustment to a productivity shock at

time t, given by            i.       Applying the characteristics of a long—run equilibrium and


the corresponding money market equilibrium (equations (2), (4) and (6)) we obtain

that the 10n9-run effects of the productivity shock are




         (28)          1;                - ; ze     (1 -   cx)/c     (e   -
                                                                                    1/cc; Lw        1 -




The productivity shock implies a rise in output and a corresponding drop in prices.

To clear the induced excess supply of domestic goods we need a real depreciation.

There is ambiguity regarding the induced exchange rate and wage adjustment. Notice

that low substitutability (cx) or low output elasticity of demand f or money tends to

be associated with nominal depreciation, and low income elasticity of                       the demand

for   money (i.e.   <1) implies that money wages will go up'4.
         Following some tedious steps, it can be shown that the wage setting rule and

the corresponding prices are given by


                                 k

         (15) Wtflk =                  FJrt_(flJ) + (m - (-i)             -
                                                                              c)
                            j=1




                            k                        n

         (16') t,n—k                 Fjt(flJ) +            6jt-(n-J) + {m - (a-i)               -
                                                                                                    c)
                            j1                     jk+1


         14. Formally, depreciation requires that            1 > ccc, which    is   also   the condition
for   exchange rate overshooting to nominal shocks.
                                                    -22-




                                     I +   ( - I) (, +      + (j -:   +
       where   F -                                                                         and
                                     I +   (1_ ) ( +        + (j —        + ) —fl/

       where              F -        +         + (i - fl ($ +
                                (F

       We turn now to the analysis of the short— and intermediate—run adjustment.

Formally, the time path of the variables of interest is given by




                                          (j-) (+)(' - (kI))/n
                      -     - ____________________________________________
       (29) t+k
                                     I +   (- 1) (. + cx) + (n - (k+I)){($ + cx) -l}/n

                                         (k1)/n +    ( + )(- (k+i)/n)
                                                                                      <0
                                +    (_ ') ( + cx) + (n - (k1)){C     +   cx) -I)/n



      (30) et



      (31) et
                  -                  -



      (32)     x: _/                        >0



      (33)                      V        - ii         V    oce - p4) 1]
                                                -23-

                                      (1- U (n     -   (k +          +

                             1   +   (_ ') ($ +        + (n   -
                                                                  (k+1)){($   +   ) -.U/n

The impact effect of the gain in productivity is a drop in prices, a rise in output

and real depreciation. This real depreciation is needed to clear the incipient excess

supply induced by the rise in productivity. As can be seen from (29) -                       (33), the

dynamics     of adjustments to the new long—run equilibrium are determined by the
magnitude of the income elasticity of the demand for money (a). Note that (29)
Implies that if that elasticity is       smaller than unity the short             run drop in domestic

goods prices will exceed the long-run adjustment. This will also be the case where

employment     will increase in the short         run (see (33)).        Henceforth we will assume
that this condition is satisfied (i.e.. that           < 1). As is evident from (30) the path
of the nominal exchange rate Is determined by the sign of (1 - oU/o. In general,
small elasticities (i.e. o < 1)           are   associated with a nominal depreciation and

large elasticities with a nominal appreciation. The relative complexity of the
nominal exchange rate adjustment stems from the fact that the nominal exchange

rate    serves both as a component of the real exchange rate and as a factor
determining the price level. The expansion of output calls for appreciation to
accommodate the drop in domestic prices that is needed to clear the money market

and    for a depreciation needed to make domestic goods cheaper in order to clear the
domestic goods market. It is the balance of these two forces that determines the
path of the nominal exchange rate.

         Direct   calculation reveals that the degree of sta9gering (i.e. the contract

length n) affects the adjustment according to the relative size of the income

elasticity of the demand for money. Specifically, we demonstrated before that if

  <     1, nominal contracts will magnify the response to real shocks (relative to the
                                              -24--
long-run adjustment). Consequently, we expect that for            < I a longer pre-setting
horizon will increase the short-run Impact of the shock      on   prices, the exchange rate,

output   and employment. This can e verified y equation (29). which implies that:




                       ap+k
         (34)   sign              sign (   - I)
                       an


         Figure 4 summarizes the dynamics of adjustment. It is drawn f or the case
where     < I. As in    the   previous discussion, the effect of a staggered price path is
that   we observe an accelerating adjustment to the new long—run equilibrium, it is

noteworthy that for           < 1 a larger degree of substitutability has the effect of
magnifying      the short- and intermediate-run adjustment of prices and output to real

shocks, reducing the needed adjustment of relative prices15. These results are

summarized      in Figure 5 (drawn for < 1).




         15. This follow from the fact that       sign   a   a       sign ( - I).
e,   PIP   I




                                  time




-t
       e       (oct> 1)
                             P




                    FIGURE FOUR
)(, e-p,e,p

        e-p




                  e




              p




                  FIGURE FIVE
                                           -25-


 5. CONTRACT LENGTH

        Our previous discussion was conducted for the case where the contract length

 was exogenously given. We turn now to the analysis of the determinants of contract

 length16. Consider the case where each contract negotiation involves a cost,

Negotiating   the contract every n periods (n > 1) is associated      with deadweight

 losses in the labor market, because the employment subject to the pre—set wage is

sub—optimal. More frequent wage negotiation will reduce the net present value of the

expected deadweight losses in the labor market, but will raise the net present value

of the negotiation costs. The contract length is set to balance these two effects at

the margin, such that the rise in the net present value of expected losses resulting

from extending the contract by one period equals the drop in the net present value of

the negotiation costs17. Among the factors determining the contract horizon are the

substitutability between goods and the volatility of the shocks affecting the

economy. It can be shown that a higher volatility of the shocks and a greater goods

substitutability will raise the deadweight losses In the labor market for a given

contract length, implying thereby a shortening of the contract horizon18,



        18. we sketch here the framework described in Aizenman (1986, Appendix A).
The analysis there refers to the determination of the desired   pre—setting horizon of
goods prices in a staggered equilibrium. For a related analysis see Gray (1978).
        17. Note that we assume no coordination among the various producers in their
contract negotiation. Thus, in calculating the desired contract length from the point
of view of a producer k (denoted       n) the producer balances the marginal costs and

benefits assuming that other producers are following a policy of contract length n.
In his calculation the producer is            using the information regarding the
characteristics of the economy in an equilibrium where all producers follow a policy
of contract length n. The 'equilibrium' n is obtained where the desired       for eachì

producer coincides with the 'market' n.
       18. This is the result of the fact that a higher substitutability magnifies the
output effects (and consequently the change in the demand for labor) of a given shock
(as can be seen from (25) and (25').
                                          -26-
5. LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT IN THE PRESENCE OF MISALIGNMENT

         The purpose of this section is to review the role of labor market adjustment

 in the presence of exchange rate misalignment. We define exchange rate

misalignment as a major change In the real exchange rate to           a level that is not
consistent    with full employment In the presence of existing labor contracts. This

misalignment can be the result of large shocks. We start our discussion by

classifying   these shocks into   several categories. The first type of shocks is the

result   of a large realization of the nominal or real shocks specified before. The
second type are structural shocks that change the underlying parameters. like a
change in the substitutability between various goods, a change In the share of labor
in the GNP, changes in the covar lance structure of the shocks, etc.

         Our previous discussion specif led a framework that is applicable for an

economy    where the shocks are small enough to operate with contracts that pre-set
the wage path for several periods, Such a framework can be modified to reduce the

welfare consequences of the first type of shocks significantly. Throu9h out our

discussion we have assumed simple non-contingent labor contracts. The implicit

rationale for this assumption is that some of this information may be costly,

unobservable or may be adversely     affected by   the   producer. This rationale suggests
that   priority should be given to contingencies that use public information that is

available in a frequency that exceeds the frequency of wage negotiation. A possible

candidate that should enhance adjustment to the first type of shocks is wage

indexation   to the nominal GNP.19 To verify this point, note that (I) and (5) imply
that if we start from a long—run equilibrium the effect of various shocks is given
by;




         19. For a discussion of wage indexation to nominal GNP see Marston and
Turnovsky (1985) and Aizenman and Frenkel (1986).
                                         -27-
        (35) E: +-tc-w
The change in employment can be approximated as the change in nominal GNP (the

first term) plus the change in the markup (- &) minus the change in wage. Equation
(35) implies that whenever there are no structural shocks affecting the markup rate
a wage rule that will index the wage to nominal income (i.e. w = (j + )) wilt
stabilize employment.

       Suppose now that the economy is subjected to the second type of shocks, i.e.

structural shocks that affect the markup. Equation (35) suggests that if these shocks

are public information in the short run, wage adjustment at a rate equal to the
change in the markup will stabilize employment (i.e. tw - óc ). Unlike the case
where shocks are of the first type, however, one expects structural shocks to be
harder to identify and indexation to a simple aggregate like nominal GNP will not
suffice. in these circumstances, adjustment can be enhanced by changing the
frequency of wage negotiation. For example, as analyzed in .4, a structural shock in
the form of a rise in the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods or   a

rise in the volatility   of real and monetary shocks calls for more frequent   wage

negotiations.
                                               -28-



7. CONCLUDING REMARKS

         This paper analyzed dynamics of adjustment in the presence of staggered
labor contracts in a monopolistic competitive economy. One of the key assumptions

used In this paper concerns the timing of contracts decisions. It was assumed that
the   various producers are distributed uniformly over time, so that       at   each point In

time an equal fraction of the producers (1/n) determine the time path of wages. With

this assumption the complexity of the problem was reduced significantly. In

practice, however, it is    evident that      in many industries the pricing decisions are

made at specific periods of time that are determined frequently by Industry specific

considerations   (like the season of   the year, the end and the beginning of the school

year, and the like). Furthermore, it was assumed that each producer sets wages for

precisely    n periods. Again, in   reality   one typically observes that the length of the

wage cycle differs across sectors in the economy. Such considerations were not

allowed in the present analysis, and their incorporation would constitute a useful

extension.
                                               -29-
                                        REFERENCES


 Aizenman,     Joshua, "Monopolistic Competition. Relative Prices and Output
                 Adjustment in the Open Economy," NBER Working Paper no. 1787.
                 January 1986. forthcoming, American Economic Review

 Aizenman, Joshua and Jacob A. Frenkel, "Supply Shocks, Wage Indexation and
             Monetary Accommodation," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking
                August 1986.

Blanchard, Olivier, J. , "Wage Indexation Rules and the Behavior of the Economy."
              Journal of Political Economy . August 1979.

Dixit, Avinash and Joseph Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimal Product
              Diversity," American Economic Review , June 1977, 67, 297-388.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics: Journal of Political
            Economy 84, 1976. 1161-76.

                        "Exchange Rate and Prices", NBER Working Paper no. 1769, 1985.

Flood. Robert P. and Hodrick, Robert J. "Optimal Price and Inventory Adjustment in
                                           ,


               an Open Economy Model of the Business Cycle," Quarterly Journal of
               Economics August 1985, 100, 887-914.

Fischer, Stenly, "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability,     in Karl Brunner and
                Allan H. Me!tzer, eds., Stabilization of Domestic and International
                Economy, Vol. 5, Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, a
                supplementary     series to the Journal of Monetary Economics , Suppl.
                1977,   107-47.

Frenkel, Jacob A. , "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parity During the 1970's,"
             EuroDean Economic Review , February 1981, 16, 145-165.

Giovariini, Alberto. "Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices," Working paper,
                Columbia University, 1985.


Helpman. Elhanan and Paul    Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade , MIT Press,
                1985.


Marston,   Richard C. and Stephen J. Turnovsky, "Imported Material Prices, Wage Policy
                 and Macro-economic Stabilization," Canadian Journal of Economics
                May 1985.
                                          -30-


Mussa, Michael, "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational Model
                of   the Inflationary Process," American Economic Review , December
                1981, 71, 1020 - 27.

Rotemberg, Joulio, J. Sticky Prices in the United States, Journal of Political
                Economy.   December 1982, 90 1187-1211.

Sheshinskl, Eytan and Weiss, Yoram, "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment:
                Review of Economics Studies. June 1977, 44, 287-304.

Svennson, Lars E. 0., "Sticky Goods Prices, Flexible Asset Prices, Monopolistic
                Competition and Monetary Policy," Review of Economic Studies , 1986,
                385 - 405.

Svennson, Lars E. 0. and Sweder van Wijnbergen. "International Transmission of
                Monetary PolIcy," Working paper no. 362, University of Stockholm,
                1986.


Taylor,   John B. , "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contacts," Journal of Political
                Economy , February 1980, 88, 1 - 23.
