                                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                                                TOILETS CAN WORK:
6+257$1'0(',80581+($/7+,03$&762)$''5(66,1*&203/(0(17$5,7,(6
AND EXTERNALITIES IN WATER AND SANITATION

                                                        Esther Duflo
                                                     Michael Greenstone
                                                     Raymond Guiteras
                                                      Thomas Clasen

                                                    Working Paper 21521
                                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w21521


                                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                September 2015




            We thank Chitraleka Choudhary, Joe Madiath and Sojan Thomas of Gram Vikas for many discussions.
            Gram Vikas had no role in the design or execution of this paper. Silvia Robles, Shobhini Mukerji,
            Stefanie Stantcheva, Niveditha Subramanian and, especially, Joe Shapiro provided outstanding research
            assistance. We thank Maureen Cropper, Bryan Hardy, Dan Stuart and Stephanie Rennane and seminar
            participants at Columbia University, Georgetown University and the University of Maryland for helpful
            comments. Raymond Guiteras gratefully acknowledges funding from the NSF’s Graduate Research
            Fellowship and the George and Obie Schultz Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
            and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

            NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
            reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
            NBER publications.

            © 2015 by Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Raymond Guiteras, and Thomas Clasen. All rights reserved.
            Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
            that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toilets Can Work: Short and Medium Run Health Impacts of Addressing Complementarities
and Externalities in Water and Sanitation
Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Raymond Guiteras, and Thomas Clasen
NBER Working Paper No. 21521
September 2015
JEL No. I15,O13,Q53,Q56

                                            ABSTRACT

Poor water quality and sanitation are leading causes of mortality and disease in developing countries.
However, interventions providing toilets in rural areas have not substantially improved health, likely
because of incomplete coverage and low usage. This paper estimates the impact of an integrated water
and sanitation improvement program in rural India that provided household-level water connections,
latrines, and bathing facilities to all households in approximately 100 villages. The estimates suggest
that the intervention was effective, reducing treated diarrhea episodes by 30-50%. These results are
evident in the short term and persist for 5 years or more. The annual cost is approximately US$60
per household.


Esther Duflo                                       Raymond Guiteras
Department of Economics, E17-201B                  Department of Economics
MIT                                                3114 Tydings Hall
77 Massachusetts Avenue                            University of Maryland
Cambridge, MA 02139                                College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                                           guiteras@econ.umd.edu
eduflo@mit.edu
                                                   Thomas Clasen
Michael Greenstone                                 Rollins School of Public Health
University of Chicago                              Emory University
Department of Economics                            Grace Crum Rollins Building
1126 E. 59th Street                                1518 Clifton Road
Chicago, IL 60637                                  Atlanta, Georgia 30322
and NBER                                           and Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases
mgreenst@uchicago.edu                              London School of Hygiene and TropicDO0HGLFLQH
                                                   Thomas.Clasen@lshtm.ac.uk
  Poor sanitation is widely considered a major obstacle to well-being in many parts of the world.
An estimated 748 million people lack access to improved sources of water, and more than 2.5
billion lack improved sanitation (WHO - UNICEF 2014). In India, open defecation is still practiced
by 65% of the rural population and only 14% of the rural population have piped-in water to the
household (WHO - UNICEF 2014). By some estimates, lack of safe water, inadequate sanitation,
and poor hygiene practices cause 1.1 million deaths from diarrhea each year, representing 1.5% of
the global burden of disease (Prüss-Ustün et al. 2014), similar to HIV-AIDS. Open defecation in
India may be responsible for approximately 9% of total infant mortality, or 6.5 deaths per 1,000
infants per year (Geruso and Spears 2015).
  This challenge to well-being has not gone unnoticed. Bill Gates talks of “reinventing the toilet”
and has put the weight of his foundation behind this effort (Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 2011,
Gates III 2012). Building on his 2013 campaign statement “pehle shauchalaya, phir devalaya”
(“toilets first, temples later”), current Prime Minister Narendra Modi has launched the Swachh
Bharat (“Clean India”) Mission, aimed at ending open defecation by 2019 (Times of India 2013,
Modi 2014). Swachh Bharat proposes to provide toilets to all 110 million rural households that
currently do not have one, at a cost of US$ 22.0 billion (Ministry of Rural Development 2014,
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 2014).
  However, the evidence that increasing sanitation coverage alone in rural areas would reduce
diarrhea and save lives is surprisingly thin. Infrastructure-based (i.e. connected to sewerage)
solutions have proved effective in urban environments when combined with improvements in
water supply (Cutler and Miller 2006, Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005). However,
interventions promoting on-site sanitation without sewerage, as is typically implemented in rural
and other low-density settings, have not been as effective as sewerage (Wolf et al. 2014). Two
recent cluster-randomized trials evaluating sanitation-only interventions in rural India, one in
Orissa (Clasen et al. 2014) and the other in Madhya Pradesh (Patil et al. 2014) find only modest
impacts of latrine construction on latrine usage, and no impacts on health.
  Part of the issue is that these sanitation-focused efforts have not fully taken on board two factors
that play a key role in water and sanitation: complementarities and externalities. Epidemiological
complementarities between water and sanitation interventions may arise because there are multiple
pathways for transmission of water-borne disease (Clasen et al. 2007, Waddington and Snilstveit
2009). A behavioral complementarity can occur if providing water encourages latrine use –




                                                  1
without convenient access to water, it may be difficult to keep a latrine clean, and poor
maintenance may discourage use (Barnard et al. 2013). Furthermore, willingness to pay for the
convenience of piped water in the home appears to be high (Devoto et al. 2012), in contrast to a low
willingness to pay for improvements in water quality by itself (Kremer et al. 2011, Berry, Fischer, and
Guiteras 2012) and latrines by themselves (Gupta et al. 2014, Patil et al. 2014). Externalities emerge
because pathogens can re-contaminate water sources as long as any open defecation persists.
  The design of sanitation interventions clearly reflects the importance of achieving near-universal
use. For example, the most popular education effort, “community-led total sanitation” (CLTS)
emphasizes eliminating open defecation completely from villages. Similarly, India’s Total
Sanitation Campaign included monetary incentives for leaders of villages that become “open-
defecation free” (Spears 2012). However, interventions typically fall short of achieving high levels
of use or eliminating open defecation (Barnard et al. 2013, Clasen et al. 2014, Patil et al. 2014,
Gertler et al. 2015, Guiteras, Levinsohn, and Mobarak 2015), and interventions focused on
sanitation alone clearly neglect complementarities across water and sanitation. Dealing with these
two issues simultaneously would require significant infrastructure investment in rural areas, and
the idea has typically been written off as un-realistically expensive: current approaches instead
favor individual investment and behavior change interventions (Zwane and Kremer 2007, Perez et
al. 2012, WHO - UNICEF 2014).
  In this paper, we provide what we believe is the first piece of rigorous evidence on the impact
of providing universal access within a village to hygienic latrines and in-home piped water at the
same time, at a reasonable cost. The design of the program we evaluate takes externalities and
complementarities seriously: Infrastructure is built to insure that every household in the village is
connected to a local water and sanitation network, and every household is provided with a pour-
flush toilet and piped water, with taps in the home and the toilet. Villages are brought into the
program only when they agree to pay a (subsidized) fee to connect 100% of the houses and to
contribute to an endowment that will pay for maintenance and future additions. The system is
turned on only when the work is completed. Mindful of the externalities, the NGO insists on 100%
participation among households in each village to ensure there is no slippage. The approach is
uncommon but is not “gold plated”: the program is run in rural Orissa, one of the poorest parts of
India, using an elevated water tank and gravity, it costs only US$ 60 per household per year.




                                                  2
  Three features of the program permit credible estimation of causal effects: first, in each village,
piped water services were activated for all households at the same time, and sanitation coverage
increased rapidly when that happens (see figure 1); second, the implementer collected monthly
data on outcomes beginning two years or more before the activation of services and continuing for
up to five years after — our primary outcome is doctor or nurse visits for diarrhea, for which there
is a clear pathophysiological connection to clean water and sanitation; third, services were
activated in different months in different villages. Together, these features permit the estimation
of credible treatment effects, based on differences in outcomes before and after the sharp change
in environmental conditions and controlling for village fixed effects, village-specific trends in
outcomes, and month-by-year fixed effects. In addition, the long follow-up period provides a rare
opportunity to test whether the effect persists in the medium run.
  We find substantial reductions in water-related disease: episodes of severe diarrhea declined by
30-50%. Impacts appear immediately and persist for at least five years, which is as long as the data
allow. Further, there is also evidence, albeit smaller in magnitude and estimated less precisely, of
declines in the incidence of malaria and fever, for which there are possible pathophysiological
relationships, although less direct than for diarrhea. These results show that comprehensive, if no-
frills, water and sanitation infrastructure can significant reduce water-related morbidity in rural
areas.

                                               I. Background

                A. The Consequences of Clean Water and Sanitation for Human Health

  In this sub-section, we provide a brief overview of the basic biomedical science of water-related
disease and the mechanisms by which clean water, sanitation and hygiene can improve health. Our
discussion is based on Curtis, Cairncross, and Yonli (2000) and Cairncross and Valdmanis (2006),
to which we refer the interested reader for more detail.
  Many conditions fall under the designation of “water-related disease.” The most common
classification system for these diseases, the Bradley Classification (White, Bradley, and White
1972), organizes them by mode of transmission. These modes are:
         •   Waterborne: pathogen is ingested from drinking-water (includes fecal-oral diseases such
             as diarrhea and typhoid fever);




                                                     3
      •   Water-washed: pathogen can be transmitted from person to person because of poor
          hygiene (includes fecal-oral diseases and skin and eye infections such as scabies and
          trachoma);
      •   Water-based: pathogen is transmitted by a host that lives in the water (includes
          schistosomiasis and guinea worm);
      •   Water-related insect vector: pathogen is transmitted by an insect that breeds in water
          (includes malaria and dengue).
  These categories are clearly not mutually exclusive, since most fecal-oral diseases are both
waterborne and water-washed. We focus on fecal-oral disease, diarrhea in particular, since reviews
typically estimate that nearly 90% of deaths preventable by improvements to water, sanitation and
hygiene are in the fecal-oral group (Prüss-Üstün et al. 2008). However, it is important to note that
it is possible for changes in environmental conditions to affect any of these categories. For
example, improvements in water supply could not only reduce waterborne disease by improving
water quality, but also reduce water-washed disease by increasing water availability for personal
hygiene, or reduce water-based disease if people no longer need to enter or approach water bodies
to collect water themselves. Similarly, improvements in sanitation could reduce exposure to water-
related insect vectors during open defecation.
  The World Health Organization defines diarrhea as the passage of three or more loose or liquid
stools per day, or more frequent passage than is normal for the individual (World Health
Organization 2013). Diarrhea can be the result of several bacterial, viral or parasitic organisms.
These specific diseases are classified together because of their similar symptoms and their shared
mode of transmission: a pathogen in feces, usually human although occasionally animal, which is
ingested by and causes infection in a new human host. There are several pathways for transmission,
which are summarized in the famous F-diagram of Wagner and Lanoix (1958): pathogens enter
the environment in feces, and are transmitted via fluids, fingers, flies, or field crops to a new host,
either directly or through food. (See Figure A3 in the Appendix.) An important feature of this
model is the distinction between primary and secondary barriers to transmission. Primary barriers
are those that prevent feces and their associated pathogens from entering the environment. These
include safe disposal of feces and removing fecal material from hands after defecation or contact
with child’s feces. Secondary barriers are those that stop pathogens that have entered the
environment from reaching and infecting a new host. These barriers include protecting or treating



                                                  4
water, handwashing and safe preparation and storage of food. Because most types of diarrheal
disease resolve within two weeks (World Health Organization 2013), it is possible for the number
of cases to respond quickly to changes in environmental conditions.
  The F-diagram helps understand how various interventions and technologies could plausibly
affect diarrheal disease. Sanitation can be effective if it prevents feces from entering the
environment, which requires facilities that are technically adequate (i.e. isolate fecal matter from
the water supply and other vectors such as flies) and are widely available and used. An
improvement to water supply can affect several pathways: an increase in quantity and convenience
can increase handwashing; treatment or source protection can operate as a secondary barrier by
preventing pathogens from entering the water or removing or killing pathogens that have entered
the water.
  The F-diagram is also useful in making clear the interdependence of different interventions and
behaviors (Eisenberg et al. 2012). In a community with a high load of fecal-oral pathogens and
several modes of transmission, any intervention that blocks one transmission mechanism may have
little effect on health on its own, but a combination of such interventions may be effective (Pruss-
Ustun et al. 2004). This is especially likely where levels of fecal-oral pathogens are high, since the
relationship between dose and infection probability is likely to be relatively flat at high levels of
exposure (Eisenberg et al. 2012). Alternatively, the effects of interventions could be independent,
especially in places with intermediate pathogen levels (where the relationship between pathogen
levels and infection is believed to be roughly log-linear (VanDerslice and Briscoe 1995)), where
the interventions operate on independent mechanisms (Cairncross and Valdmanis 2006) and
without significant feedback between transmission mechanisms (Eisenberg, Scott, and Porco
2007). Finally, it is even possible for interventions to be substitutes, especially in contexts where
exactly one transmission mechanism is dominant, or where there is substantial overlap in the
transmission mechanisms targeted by separate interventions.
  The evidence on interdependence is scarce. Simulation studies suggest that complementarities,
independence or substitution are all possible, depending on the context and interventions combined
(Eisenberg et al. 2012, Eisenberg, Scott, and Porco 2007). Some observational studies have found
evidence for positive interactions, in particular that the benefits of clean water are greater when
sanitary conditions are good (VanDerslice and Briscoe 1995). However, meta-analyses have not
detected systematically greater effects of combined interventions than individual interventions,




                                                  5
although precision is limited by the small number of high-quality studies (Fewtrell et al. 2005,
Clasen et al. 2007). To our knowledge, only one randomized trial, currently in the field, has
explicitly randomized the interaction of water, sanitation and hygiene interventions (Arnold et al.
2013).

                          B. The Rural Health and Environment Program

  This paper evaluates the Rural Health and Environment Program (RHEP), a village-level
intervention that promotes adoption of household latrine and bathing facilities, a community water
tank, and a distribution system that supplies piped water to household taps. RHEP was developed
by Gram Vikas (GV), an Indian non-governmental organization, and implemented in villages in
Orissa, one of the poorest states in India.
  Pre-intervention water supplies consisted mainly of village ponds and open streams. Open
defecation was the norm, as is typical of Orissa, where historically only 10% of the population has
had access to safe water and sanitation (Government of India 2012). RHEP was first piloted in 5
villages (340 households) in 1992. It was then expanded in four phases, adding 40 villages (3,000
households) from 1995-1998, 27 villages (2,000 households) from 1999-2001, 38 villages (3,000
households) from 2001-2003 and 160 villages (8,000 households) from 2003-2006 (Gram Vikas
2001, 2005). We study the 96 villages from these four phases for which we can determine the exact
month in which the water system was activated and from which a sufficient number of monthly
observations of health outcomes were obtained. See Section II.B. for details on sample selection.
  Because the timeline is important for the research design, we detail the typical sequence of
events for implementing RHEP in a village (Gram Vikas 2001, 2004, 2005, Keirns 2007). First,
GV extension workers identify a village well-suited to the program. Desirable characteristics are
a strong sense of community and good village leadership. Next, GV representatives meet
informally with village leadership. If there is interest in starting a program, a series of village
meetings are held to build participation and obtain 100% consensus for participation in the
program. This process usually takes 3-6 months, but can take up to 18 months, in particular in
villages with several caste groups that will need to share water and sanitation infrastructure. GV
insists on 100% participation because of the strong externalities inherent in sanitation: if even a
few villagers do not participate, they can transmit disease to their neighbors.




                                                 6
  Once the village has reached 100% consensus, GV and the village enter a formal agreement. At
this time, data collection begins, along with construction. Villagers begin construction of
household latrine and bathing facilities, using their own labor and locally acquired materials. Once
all households in the village complete the external structures of their latrines and bathing houses
up to the roof, GV subsidizes inputs the villagers cannot provide themselves, e.g. ceramics and
piping materials. When completed, household facilities consist of a water-sealed pit latrine and a
private bathing area, both enclosed by a masonry superstructure with roof and separate doors. 1,2
  The water supply system has several components. The first is a suitable water source, usually a
protected dug well or a deep tube well. The second is a village overhead water tank, with a capacity
of approximately 80,000 liters, and a pump to lift water from the well into the tank. The third is
the gravity distribution system, which pipes water from the tank to individual households. Finally,
three taps are installed for each household, one each for the latrine and bathing room and one inside
the home. 3 Villagers supply unskilled labor and locally available materials while GV provides
skilled labor and specialized materials. Construction of the water supply requires 3-4 months of
work, but usually takes one calendar year or more to complete because work is not continuous –
villagers usually supply their own labor outside of the planting and harvest seasons.
  Although some households inevitably complete their sanitary houses sooner than others, GV
does not activate the water supply until all sanitary facilities are complete. GV believes that
households are primarily interested in getting running water for their home, and this is what leads
them to agree to pay their share of the entire water and sanitation system. 4 Furthermore, social
pressure or cross-subsidization can help push lagging households towards completion, and these


  1
     Latrines constructed during RHEP are pour-flush, consisting of a concrete squatting slab and a water seal (i.e. a
U-pipe filled with water) with piping leading to a soak pit approximately 20 feet away from the slab. Typically, 1-3
liters of water are required for adequate flushing. The water seal blocks odors, which can discourage use, and flies,
which can transfer pathogens. In almost all cases, RHEP uses a dual pit design, in which two pits are used alternately:
the first pit is used until it fills, then it is sealed and a Y-junction redirects waste to the second pit. The first pit is left
sealed for at least 12 months, until the waste can be safely removed. Each pit takes 3-5 years to fill (Keirns 2007).
These latrines, if properly used and maintained, satisfy the standard WHO definition of “improved sanitation,” in that
they ensure hygienic separation of human excreta from human contact (WHO – UNICEF 2013).
   2
     The bathing facility – a simple 20 sq. ft. room with a tap and a drain – is somewhat unusual for a water and
sanitation intervention. Because of the high prevalence of gynecological and skin diseases, GV, attributing these
diseases to the need to bathe in the polluted waters of local ponds, deemed it important for women to have a private
space and clean water for bathing.
   3
     The use of a protected source and a piped household connection means that the level of service meets the WHO
– UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme’s highest standard, “piped connection on premises” (WHO – UNICEF 2013).
In addition, the water is treated by periodically adding chlorine powder to the tank.
   4
     The evidence of high willingness to pay for water at home is consistent with Devoto et al. (2012).



                                                               7
forces would be muted if leading households received water service (Jenkins and Curtis 2005).
Crucially for the research design, water service is activated suddenly and simultaneously for all
households in the village. Sanitation coverage also increases rapidly, since access to piped water
facilitates the use of the pour-flush toilets. Following construction, villagers are responsible for
operational costs. GV provides some training for villagers to provide maintenance and advises
village committees on governance, but does not provide further subsidies or other direct inputs.
  Using GV records, we estimate that the total cost of implementing RHEP in a typical village of
50 households was approximately US$60 per household per year, as compared to annual
household consumption of approximately US$740. Of this $60 annual cost, we estimate that
annual maintenance costs are about $11 with the annuitized value of the upfront capital cost
accounting for the remainder. Details of this calculation, which includes the value of villagers’
labor, Gram Vikas personnel time and external subsidy, are provided in the Appendix.

                                  II. Data and Sample Selection

                                              A. Data

  The implementation and outcome data were obtained from GV’s internal “Monthly Progress
Reports” (MPRs). MPRs are compiled on a monthly basis by GV personnel, either during monthly
(or more frequent) visits or by GV staff residing on-site. MPRs contain detailed information on
the status of RHEP (e.g. water tank construction, number of households with and without
completed latrine and bathing facilities, number of households using their latrine), allowing exact
identification of the month in which water improvement begins. Outcome data are recorded each
month by the GV village supervisor, who draws on a variety of sources, including monthly or more
frequent visits to individual households, consultation with the local health clinic (when one exists),
and the village health committee. The data collection starts as soon as a village is enrolled in the
program, well before the construction is finished.
  It is important to note that diarrhea episodes are only recorded if a resident is “checked” or
“treated.” “Checked” means that the villager went for a consultation with a medical professional,
i.e. a health worker or a doctor. “Treated” means that the villager received treatment for the
condition, again from either a health worker or a doctor. This excludes cases for which a villager
does not seek a medical consultation, or cases when a villager seeks treatment via home remedies




                                                  8
or local healers. As a result, our measures underestimate the overall morbidity associated with
diarrhea, but are likely to represent more severe cases that are more highly correlated with
mortality and serious sequelae (Kotloff et al. 2013). This outcome may also be less susceptible to
courtesy bias than caretaker reporting, which is the measure most frequently used in assessing the
impact of environmental interventions on diarrhea (Schmidt et al. 2011). This is particularly
important in our case since the data is maintained by GV. We focus on the “treated” measure in
our analysis but the results using the “checked” variable are similar. 5

                                                B. Sample Selection

  A village is included in the analysis if the month in which the water supply is activated can be
identified. There are 96 such villages, with approximately 5,500 village-by-month observations
total. The average village contains approximately 90 households and 500 residents. We use τ to
indicate the month relative to the month in which the water switches on, so τ = −1 is one month
before the water turns on, τ = 0 is the month the water turns on, τ = 1 is one month after, etc.
  We analyze three samples. Sample A includes all observations with known τ , i.e. all
observations from villages in which the month of water supply activation is known. Sample B uses
only observations from 2 years prior to 5 years after the activation of the water supply, i.e.
τ ∈ {−24, −23, , +59} , and includes only villages for which there are at least six observations
before and six observations after the activation of the water supply. Sample C uses only
observations within one year of activation of the water supply, i.e. τ ∈ {−12, −11, , +11} , and

includes only villages with observations in at least six of the 12 months before and six of the 12
months after activation. The tradeoffs among the samples are between sample size (largest in
Sample A) and using a sample closer to a balanced panel (closest in Sample C).
  Table 1 provides descriptive statistics. In Figure 1, we show the rapid improvement in
environmental conditions. Among villages in Sample B, the median share of households using a



  5
     Other diseases monitored include malaria, fever, typhoid, jaundice, cold and cough, night blindness, scabies, TB
and leprosy. We do not focus on these because they are either too scarce for any reasonably-sized treatment effect to
be detected, are not consistently collected, or are only weakly or indirectly related to water and sanitation conditions.
Similarly, data are recorded on mortality and child mortality, but given the rarity of these events, we do not have
statistical power to detect any reasonably-sized effect. We did detect an association between the initiation of services
and a reduction in malaria, which we discuss in Section IV.C.



                                                           9
latrine increases from less than 0.2 six months before water services are activated to over 0.9 just
three months after. 6 Similarly, no villages had piped water before the water tank was activated, but
full piped water service in 93.9% of village-month observations in the post-intervention period.
  The patterns in Figure 1 mean that the period that begins with τ = 0 can be used to determine
the impact of a combined water and sanitation intervention that accounts for complementarities
and externalities. Precision issues preclude definitive statements, but the months immediately
preceding τ = 0 when the usage rate of latrines was increasing rapidly (recall Figure 1) can be
used to qualitatively assess whether latrines by themselves (i.e., without access to piped water)
affect morbidity rates. A comparison of these months with the months after water is turned on
provides a sense of the importance of complementarities in water and sanitation interventions.

                            III. Econometric Methods and Empirical Results

                                               A. Empirical Strategy

  We start by presenting the results from an unrestricted event study, estimating
                                              +11
                                  =yvt       ∑ατ
                                             s = −12
                                                       s
                                                           vs   + cv + ct + ε vt ,   (1)

where yvt denotes the outcome of interest, i.e. monthly cases of treated diarrhea, for village v in

month t, τ vs is an indicator for the sth month after the water improvement begins (starting at zero,

i.e. τ = 0 is the month in which the water turns on) in village v, cv is a fixed effect for village v ,

ct is a fixed effect for year-by-month t and ε vt is the disturbance term for village v in month t.

The τ v ,−1 indicator is omitted, so estimates of the coefficients α s are interpreted as the mean of

the outcome variable relative to the month before the water supply is activated.
  The village fixed effects cv control for any time-invariant mean differences across villages,
whether from observable or unobservable confounders. Multiple observations in each month from
different villages allows for the estimation of month-by-year fixed effects ct , which control for
aggregate monthly shocks (e.g., due to weather) across villages in the sample. Because the



  6
   The sample in Figure 1 is additionally restricted to villages with at least 6 observations of latrine coverage and the
operational status of the water tank both before and after the activation of services.



                                                                  10
intervention occurred in different months in different villages, it is possible to separately identify
the program and time effects.
  Most important, the combination of (a) the sudden change in the availability of water in month
τ v ,0 and sanitation in the surrounding months and (b) the possibility of a rapid response of diarrhea
to a change in the environment together give a sharp prediction of a swift change in the number of
diarrhea cases. In terms of the econometric model, this prediction is of negative values of α 1 , α 2
, etc. Since there are relatively few observations for each 𝜏𝜏 and no restrictions are imposed on the
month-by-month effects, these estimates are unlikely to be very precise. However, this regression
will be informative about the integrity of the research design, since it allows for visual inspection
of pre-program trends that could cause bias. Further, it permits visual examination of the evolution
of any treatment effects and informs the choice of econometric model to summarize them (e.g.,
mean shift versus mean shift plus trend break).
  Motivated by the results of fitting equation (1), we fit the following equation:


                          yvt α POSTvt + cv + ct + ε vt ,
                          =                                    (2)

where POSTvt indicates that the water supply has turned on in village v in month t, and all other
variables are as in equation (1). This collapses the month-by-month estimates from equation into
a single summary measure of the program’s impact. For example, in Sample C, α̂ represents an
estimate of the program’s impact in the first year, relative to the mean in the year leading up to the
activation of services.
  We also estimate two key variants of equation (2). In the first, we add a village-specific time
trend ϕv cvτ vt . This separates the impact of the program from other ongoing trends, to the extent
that these trends are roughly linear. However, this would not adequately control for other programs
or behaviors that switch on abruptly and simultaneously with RHEP. We revisit this possibility
below. In the second, we test for the persistence of program effects by separating the POSTvt

indicator into two indicators for sub-periods, 1{0 ≤ τ vt < 36} , i.e. the first three years of the

program, and 1{τ vt ≥ 36} , the period beyond three years.

  In all regressions, the standard errors are clustered at the village level (Bertrand, Duflo, and
Mullainathan 2004). Each village-by-month observation is weighted by the inverse of the number




                                                  11
of observations on that village, so that each village receives equal weight in the estimation. The
results are insensitive to alternative weighting strategies, as described below and in the appendix.

                                               B. Results

  Several key findings are evident in Figure 2, which plots point estimates and 95% confidence
intervals for α −12 , α −11 , , α +11 in equation (1) for Sample C. First, although it is demanding of the
data to estimate separate event study coefficients for each month, the downward shift after the
water turns on is evident visually. Second, the post-treatment effect appears roughly constant over
time, suggesting that a mean shift model is appropriate. Third, there is no noticeable downward
trend prior to the start of improved water, which supports the validity of the research design.
Fourth, although latrine coverage increased in the months immediately preceding the activation of
water (see figure 1), there is no observable reduction in diarrhea in these months. That is, increases
in latrine coverage that did not achieve near-universal coverage and were not accompanied by
piped water did not have immediate effects on diarrhea.
  Figure 3 plots the results of a similar exercise, this time including indicators for each of the 24
months prior to and each of the 60 months following the initiation of services. This is the result of
estimating equation (1) with sample B.
  The results are similar: there is a discernable improvement after the water supply is activated
and no pre-intervention trend is visible. Furthermore, this improvement persists with similar
magnitude for the full five years post water activation. The monthly estimates become less precise
over time, because the number of observations that identify the treatment effect declines several
years after activation.
  Table 2 reports results from the estimation of equation (2), summarizing the program’s overall
impact. There are large and statistically significant reductions across all three samples. Estimates
of the effect on the number of cases per village-month range from -0.45, relative to a pre-
intervention mean of 1.18 (Sample C), to -0.59, relative to a pre-intervention mean of 1.08 (Sample
A). The lower panel reports estimates after adjustment for village-specific linear trends and shows
that the results are robust.
  Table 3 reports on formal tests of the persistence of the program’s effect. The evidence for
persistence is strong: while the point estimates for diarrhea are somewhat smaller in absolute value
in the period τ vt ≥ 36 than in the period 0 ≤ τ vt < 36 , the null hypothesis that the two estimated



                                                    12
coefficients are equal is not rejected in either sample (p-value ≈ 0.3 ). Further, the estimate for the
latter period is still economically and statistically significant.
  We tested the robustness of these findings by repeating the analysis using different specifications
(i.e., different weighting schemes, additional fixed effects, and different sample selection criteria),
alternative definitions of key variables (i.e., activation of water supply and diarrhea checked rather
than treated), and choices made in cleaning the data. Results of these robustness checks are
summarized in Figure 4. Exact results vary, but the pattern of statistically and economically
significant health improvements is robust: in 14 of 16 specifications, the estimate is significant at
the 95% level. Further details are provided in Section A1 of the Appendix.

                                         C. Threats to validity

  This subsection discusses threats to validity of the paper’s primary results.

Identification assumption.—This paper’s identification assumption is that no other determinants
of diarrheal disease change abruptly and at the same time as the activation of water and sanitation.
One potential threat to this assumption is that GV works with RHEP villages on other projects,
such as building schools, skills training, aquaculture and sustainable forestry. However, these
programs are unlikely to cause bias, because their timing is not coordinated with activating the
water supply and they are implemented more gradually. Furthermore, our results are robust to the
inclusion of village-specific linear time trends in the regression analysis, which absorb the impact
of these other programs to the extent that they arrive gradually and have approximately linear
effects on outcomes over time.

Data collection.—This study relies on outcome data collected by the implementer and not
independently verified. The implementer may have incentives to exaggerate the beneficial impact
of the project. While we cannot rule out bias entirely, several considerations mitigate this
possibility. First, the purpose of the data was to provide information on the project’s
implementation and conditions in the village to help GV’s programming. GV did not collect these
data for an evaluation, as evidenced by the fact that they had not previously been used in this way,
despite having been collected for many years. In fact, the paper forms were locked in a closet when
they were uncovered by the research team during a visit to discuss an unrelated evaluation (Hanna,
Duflo, and Greenstone 2014). Second, GV personnel were not compensated on the basis of the



                                                   13
outcome, and were subject to sanction for misreporting. Third, and perhaps most importantly, the
focus is on cases for which treatment was sought or received, which is more easily verifiable data.

Observed reduction in malaria.—Our analysis also finds an association between the initiation of
services and a reduction in reported cases of malaria. Table 4 presents the results of estimating
equation (2) using cases of malaria treated as the dependent variable (columns (1)-(3)). The effect
sizes, relative to the pre-intervention means, are slightly smaller than the effects found on diarrhea,
but are economically important and statistically significant. Robustness checks are provided in
Section A2 and Figure A1 of the Appendix. Because there is no direct biological mechanism
linking clean water and malaria, this finding could indicate reporting bias that would in turn raise
doubts about the validity of the estimated impact on diarrhea. Our ability to conduct placebo tests
is limited by the fact that Gram Vikas’s data-collection efforts naturally focused on water-related
diseases. However, data were regularly collected on tuberculosis, which is not plausibly water-
related, and we do not find any significant effect on cases of tuberculosis, although precision is
limited. See Tables A2 and A3 in the Appendix.
  Alternatively, the improved sanitation program may have reduced the incidence of malaria
through an indirect channel. First, in-home water and on-site toilets may reduce exposure to
malaria vectors, since such exposure can occur during trips for open defecation, water collection,
or bathing or washing clothes in local ponds (Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). Second, malaria
is endemic in the area. A reduction in diarrheal disease reduces insults to immune function, which
could in turn reduce co-morbidity from other infectious diseases (Schmidt et al. 2009, Walker and
Black 2009). A related possibility is that the intervention may have reduced cases of fever
misreported as malaria: since malaria is not often diagnosed rigorously, many reported cases could
in fact be fever caused by water-borne infections (Cohen, Dupas, and Schaner 2014). Consistent
with this hypothesis, when we estimate equation (2) using cases of fever treated as the dependent
variable (columns (4)-(6) of Table 4), we observe an economically large, although generally
statistically insignificant, association of a reduced number of cases of fever with the initiation of
program services. Robustness checks are provided in Section A2 and Figure A1 of the Appendix.




                                                  14
                                           V. Conclusion

  This study exploits detailed knowledge of features of a community-level, infrastructure-based
water and sanitation intervention to obtain quasi-experimental estimates of the program’s causal
effects. We find that the program reduced severe cases of diarrhea by approximately 30% to 50%.
  These positive and large results differ from the null findings of two recent cluster-randomized
trials evaluating sanitation-only interventions in rural India, one in Orissa (Clasen et al. 2014) and
the other in Madhya Pradesh (Patil et al. 2014). We do not view our results as contradictory, for
two reasons. First, RHEP is a package of a communal water tank, piped water to the home, and
household latrines and bathing facilities. This evaluation therefore does not provide information
on the effectiveness of the individual components, but the contrast with the RCT results suggests
that this “full package” is important. Second, latrine use was relatively low in the two RCTs, which
likely limited their health impact (Brown and Clasen 2012). We speculate that providing a tap for
piped water at the toilet reduced barriers to maintenance and hygienic use, but further research is
needed to understand the factors that motivate or impede use of sanitation facilities (Coffey et al.
2014, Gertler et al. 2015).
  To what extent can this approach be generalized? As of March 2013, Gram Vikas water and
sanitation programs reached 1,200 villages in Orissa, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, and
started to expand in the Gambia and Tanzania (Gram Vikas 2013). As noted above, the cost per
household is relatively low, especially the annual maintenance costs (about $11). A complete cost-
benefit assessment would require monetizing all of the program’s benefits, for which data are not
available. These other benefits may include reductions in the incidence of other morbidities such
as stunting or soil-transmitted helminth infections (Spears, Ghosh, and Cumming 2013, Strunz et
al. 2014), decreases in time spent collecting water (Pattanayak et al. 2010, Kremer et al. 2011,
Devoto et al. 2012), and the amenity value of private toilets.
       However, there may be non-monetary limits to the approach. GV partners only with
villages it believes capable of building the institutional capacity to complete the project with 100%
participation and to sustain the facilities after construction is finished. These are important and
perhaps unusual characteristics of a village, and they may limit external validity: a program
technically similar to RHEP but targeted at villages lacking these characteristics may be less
successful, because it would fail to capture complementarities and externalities. Gram Vikas is
also a widely recognized NGO, and some of their ability to build consensus and convince villagers


                                                 15
may not be easy to reproduce, though it is worth noting that their power to persuade did not extend
to convincing people to use smokeless stoves (Hanna, Duflo, and Greenstone 2014).
       Therefore this paper is best seen as a “proof of concept”: an infrastructure-based approach
can significantly reduce diarrhea and other morbidity rates in rural areas, if it is universal and
includes both in-home water and sanitation facilities. There may be different ways to get there
(low financial cost but high social capital like here, or higher financial investment), but this
approach is rare in offering demonstrated effectiveness over the short and medium run. It seems
unwise to write off rural infrastructure-based interventions, as has been the case in many policy
conversations (Clasen and Haller 2008, WHO - UNICEF 2014).



                                         REFERENCES

Arnold, Benjamin F, Clair Null, Stephen P Luby, Leanne Unicomb, Christine P Stewart, Kathryn
       G Dewey, Tahmeed Ahmed, et al. 2013. Cluster-randomised controlled trials of individual
       and combined water, sanitation, hygiene and nutritional interventions in rural Bangladesh
       and Kenya: the WASH Benefits study design and rationale. BMJ Open no. 3.
Barnard, Sharmani, Parimita Routray, Fiona Majorin, Rachel Peletz, Sophie Boisson, Antara
       Sinha, and Thomas Clasen. 2013. Impact of Indian Total Sanitation Campaign on Latrine
       Coverage and Use: A Cross-Sectional Study in Orissa Three Years following Programme
       Implementation. PLoS ONE no. 8 (8).
Berry, James M., Greg M. Fischer, and Raymond P. Guiteras. 2012. Eliciting and Utilizing
       Willingness to Pay: Evidence from Field Trials in Northern Ghana.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We Trust
       Differences-in-Differences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics no. 119
       (1):249-275.
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 2011. Gates Foundation Launches Effort to Reinvent the Toilet.
Brown, Joe, and Thomas Clasen. 2012. High Adherence Is Necessary to Realize Health Gains
       from Water Quality Interventions. PLoS ONE no. 7 (5).
Cairncross, Sandy, and Vivian Valdmanis. 2006. "Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene
       Promotion." In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, edited by Dean T.
       Jamison, Joel G. Breman, Anthony R. Measham, George Alleyne, Mariam Claeson, David
       B. Evans, Prabhat Jha, Anne Mills and Philip Musgrove. Washington (DC): World Bank.
Clasen, Thomas, Sophie Boisson, Parimita Routray, Belen Torondel, Melissa Bell, Oliver
       Cumming, Jeroen Ensink, et al. 2014. Effectiveness of a rural sanitation programme on
       diarrhoea, soil-transmitted helminth infection, and child malnutrition in Odisha, India: a
       cluster-randomised trial. The Lancet Global Health no. 2:e645-e653.
Clasen, Thomas F., and Laurence Haller. 2008. Water Quality Interventions to Prevent Diarrhoea:
       Cost and Cost-Effectiveness. World Health Organization.




                                                16
Clasen, Thomas, Wolf-Peter Schmidt, Tamer Rabie, Ian Roberts, and Sandy Cairncross. 2007.
        Interventions to improve water quality for preventing diarrhoea: systematic review and
        meta-analysis. BMJ no. 334 (7597):782.
Coffey, Diane, Aashish Gupta, Payal Hathi, Dean Spears, Nikhil Srivastav, and Sangita Vyas.
        2014. Culture and the health transition: Understanding sanitation behavior in rural north
        India.
Cohen, Jessica, Pascaline Dupas, and Simone Schaner. 2014. Price Subsidies, Diagnostic Tests,
        and Targeting of Malaria Treatment Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Curtis, Valerie, Sandy Cairncross, and Raymond Yonli. 2000. Review: Domestic hygiene and
        diarrhoea – pinpointing the problem. Tropical Medicine & International Health no. 5:22-
        32.
Cutler, David M., and Grant Miller. 2006. "Water, Water Everywhere: Municipal Finance and
        Water Supply in American Cities." In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America's
        Economic History, edited by Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, 153-184. Chicago,
        IL: University of Chicago Press.
Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Parienté, and Vincent Pons. 2012.
        Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco. American Economic
        Journal: Economic Policy no. 4 (4):68-99.
Eisenberg, Joseph N.S., James C. Scott, and Travis Porco. 2007. Integrating Disease Control
        Strategies: Balancing Water Sanitation and Hygiene Interventions to Reduce Diarrheal
        Disease Burden. American Journal of Public Health no. 97:846-852.
Eisenberg, Joseph N.S., James Trostle, Reed J.D. Sorensen, and Katherine F. Shields. 2012.
        Toward a Systems Approach to Enteric Pathogen Transmission: From Individual
        Independence to Community Interdependence. Annual Review of Public Health no.
        33:239-257.
Fewtrell, Lorna, Rachel B. Kaufmann, David Kay, Wayne Enanoria, Laurence Haller, and John
        M. Colford Jr. 2005. Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhoea in
        less developed countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Infectious
        Diseases no. 5 (1):42-52.
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul Gertler, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2005. Water for Life: The Impact of
        the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality. Journal of Political Economy no.
        113 (1):83-120.
Gates III, William H. 2012. Reflections on the Reinventing the Toilet Challenge.
Gertler, Paul, Manisha Shah, Maria Laura Alzua, Lisa Cameron, Sebastian Martinez, and Sumeet
        Patil. 2015. How Does Health Promotion Work? Evidence From The Dirty Business of
        Eliminating Open Defecation. NBER Working Paper no. 20997.
Geruso, Michael, and Dean Spears. 2015. Neighborhood Sanitation and Infant Mortality. National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series no. No. 21184.
Government of India. 2012. Houses, Household Amenities and Assets: Latrine Facilities.
Gram Vikas. 2001. Rural Health and Environment Programme. Gram Vikas.
Gram Vikas. 2004. Rural Health and Environment Programme in Orissa. Gram Vikas.
Gram Vikas. 2005. Annual Report 2004-2005. Gram Vikas.
Gram Vikas. 2013. Annual Report 2012-2013. Gram Vikas.
Guiteras, Raymond, James Levinsohn, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. 2015. Encouraging
        sanitation investment in the developing world: A cluster-randomized trial. Science no. 348
        (6237):903-906.




                                               17
Gupta, Aashish, Dean Spears, Diane Coffey, Nidhi Khurana, Nikhil Srivastav, Payal Hathi, and
        Sangita Vyas. 2014. Revealed Preference for Open Defecation. Economic and Political
        Weekly no. 49:43-55.
Hanna, Rema, Esther Duflo, and Michael Greenstone. 2014. Up in Smoke: The Influence of
        Household Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves. Manuscript,
        Harvard University. Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Jenkins, Marion W., and Val Curtis. 2005. Achieving the ‘good life’: Why some people want
        latrines in rural Benin. Social Science & Medicine no. 61 (11):2446-2459.
Keirns, Pamela. 2007. Water supply and sanitation services for the rural poor: the Gram Vikas
        experience. Rugby, UK: Practical Action Publishing.
Keiser, Jennifer, Burton H. Singer, and Jürg Utzinger. 2005. Reducing the burden of malaria in
        different eco-epidemiological settings with environmental management: a systematic
        review. The Lancet Infectious Diseases no. 5 (11):695-708.
Kotloff, Karen L., James P. Nataro, William C. Blackwelder, Dilruba Nasrin, Tamer H. Farag,
        Sandra Panchalingam, Yukun Wu, et al. 2013. Burden and aetiology of diarrhoeal disease
        in infants and young children in developing countries (the Global Enteric Multicenter
        Study, GEMS): a prospective, case-control study. The Lancet no. 382 (9888):209-222.
Kremer, Michael, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Peterson Zwane. 2011. Spring
        Cleaning: Rural Water Impacts, Valuation, and Property Rights Institutions. The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics no. 126 (1):145-205.
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 2014. Restructuring of the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan into
        Swachh Bharat Mission. Press Information Bureau, Government of India.
Ministry of Rural Development. 2014. Government to spend about 2 lakh Crore rupees for Swachh
        Bharat Mission More than 11 crore toilets will be built in 5 years. Press Information
        Bureau, Government of India.
Modi, Narendra. 2014. English rendering of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi’s address at the
        launch of Swachh Bharat Mission at Rajpath. Press Information Bureau, Government of
        India.
Patil, Sumeet R., Benjamin F. Arnold, Alicia L. Salvatore, Bertha Briceno, Sandipan Ganguly,
        John M. Colford, Jr, and Paul J. Gertler. 2014. The Effect of India's Total Sanitation
        Campaign on Defecation Behaviors and Child Health in Rural Madhya Pradesh: A Cluster
        Randomized Controlled Trial. PLoS Med no. 11:e1001709.
Pattanayak, Subhrendu K., Christine Poulos, Jui-Chen Yang, and Sumeet Patil. 2010. How
        valuable are environmental health interventions? Evaluation of water and sanitation
        programmes in India. Bulletin of the World Health Organization no. 88 (7):535-542.
Perez, Eduardo, Jason Cardosi, Yolande Coombes, Jacqueline Devine, Amy Grossman, Craig
        Kullmann, C Ajith Kumar, et al. 2012. What Does It Take to Scale Up Rural Sanitation?
        In Water and Sanitation Program Working Paper: World Bank.
Prüss-Ustün, Annette, Jamie Bartram, Thomas Clasen, John M. Colford, Oliver Cumming, Valerie
        Curtis, Sophie Bonjour, et al. 2014. Burden of disease from inadequate water, sanitation
        and hygiene in low- and middle-income settings: a retrospective analysis of data from 145
        countries. Tropical Medicine & International Health no. 19 (8):894-905.
Prüss-Üstün, Annette, Robert Bos, Fiona Gore, and Jamie Bartram. 2008. Safer water, better
        health: costs, benefits and sustainability of interventions to protect and promote health.
        Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.




                                               18
Pruss-Ustun, Annette, David Kay, Lorna Fewtrell, and Jamie Bartram. 2004. "Unsafe water,
        sanitation and hygiene." In Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and
        Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors, edited by Majid
        Ezzati, Alan D. Lopez, Anthony Rodgers and Christopher JL Murray. World Health
        Organization.
Schmidt, Wolf-Peter, Benjamin F Arnold, Sophie Boisson, Bernd Genser, Stephen P Luby,
        Mauricio L Barreto, Thomas Clasen, et al. 2011. Epidemiological methods in diarrhoea
        studies—an update. International Journal of Epidemiology no. 40 (6):1678-1692.
Schmidt, Wolf-Peter, Sandy Cairncross, Mauricio L Barreto, Thomas Clasen, and Bernd Genser.
        2009. Recent diarrhoeal illness and risk of lower respiratory infections in children under
        the age of 5 years. International Journal of Epidemiology no. 38 (3):766-772.
Spears, Dean. 2012. Effects of Rural Sanitation on Infant Mortality and Human Capital: Evidence
        from a Local Governance Incentive in India. In Princeton University Research Program in
        Development Studies.
Spears, Dean, Arabinda Ghosh, and Oliver Cumming. 2013. Open Defecation and Childhood
        Stunting in India: An Ecological Analysis of New Data from 112 Districts. PLoS ONE no.
        8 (9):e73784.
Strunz, Eric C, David G Addiss, Meredith E Stocks, Stephanie Ogden, Jürg Utzinger, and Matthew
        C Freeman. 2014. Water, sanitation, hygiene, and soil-transmitted helminth infection: a
        systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS medicine no. 11 (3):e1001620.
Times of India. 2013. Build toilets first and temples later Narenda Modi says. Times of India.
VanDerslice, James, and John Briscoe. 1995. Environmental Interventions in Developing
        Countries: Interactions and Their Implications. American Journal of Epidemiology no.
        141:135-144.
Waddington, Hugh, and Birte Snilstveit. 2009. Effectiveness and sustainability of water,
        sanitation, and hygiene interventions in combating diarrhoea. Journal of Development
        Effectiveness no. 1 (3):295-335.
Wagner, Edmund G., and J.N. Lanoix. 1958. Excreta Disposal for Rural Areas and Small
        Communities, WHO Monograph Series. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
Walker, Christa L Fischer, and Robert E Black. 2009. Commentary: What is the role of co-
        morbidity in child mortality? International Journal of Epidemiology no. 38 (3):772-774.
White, Gilbert F., David J. Bradley, and Anne U. White. 1972. Drawers of water: University of
        Chicago Press.
WHO - UNICEF. 2014. Progress on sanitation and drinking-water - 2014 update. Geneva: World
        Health Organization and UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme on Water and Sanitation.
Wolf, Jennyfer, Annette Prüss-Ustün, Oliver Cumming, Jamie Bartram, Sophie Bonjour, Sandy
        Cairncross, Thomas Clasen, et al. 2014. Systematic review: Assessing the impact of
        drinking water and sanitation on diarrhoeal disease in low- and middle-income settings:
        systematic review and meta-regression. Tropical Medicine & International Health no. 19
        (8):928-942.
World Health Organization. 2013. Diarrhoeal disease.
Zwane, Alix Peterson, and Michael Kremer. 2007. What Works in Fighting Diarrheal Diseases in
        Developing Countries? A Critical Review. World Bank Research Observer no. 22:1-24.




                                               19
Tables

                                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                              Sample A      Sample B     Sample C
                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)
 Village characteristics:
 Number of villages                                              96           75            73
 Number of households per village                                88.4         91.6         102.2
                                                                (60.0)       (61.4)        (70.4)
 Village population                                             493.3        509.0         527.0
                                                               (327.2)      (324.2)       (327.6)

 Observation counts:
 Num. of months betw. first obs. and initiation of service       16.4         17.6          11.5
                                                                 (9.7)        (5.4)         (1.2)
 Num. of obs. before initiation of service                       17.4         17.0          11.3
                                                                 (8.3)        (5.3)         (1.3)
 Num. of months betw. initiation of service and last obs.        48.3         42.7          11.9
                                                                (33.2)       (16.8)         (0.7)
 Num. of obs. after initiation of service                        45.4         41.2          11.8
                                                                (31.5)       (16.5)         (0.8)

 Health outcomes (per village-month observation):
 Number of cases of diarrhea                                      0.64          0.68         0.87
                                                                 (1.44)        (1.45)       (1.59)
 Number of cases of malaria                                       0.96          0.99         0.90
                                                                 (2.11)        (2.12)       (1.94)
 Number of cases of fever                                         2.70          2.66         2.58
                                                                 (3.68)        (3.76)       (3.69)
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the number of villages and their characteristics, ob-
servation counts and timing, and health outcomes. The sample used varies by column. Column (1)
(“Sample A”) includes all observations from villages for which the month of water activation is known.
Column (2) (“Sample B”) uses only observations from up to 24 months before to up to 59 months
after the water supply is activated, and only villages which have at least 6 observations before and
after. Column (3) (“Sample C”) uses only observations in a one-year window around the activation
of the water supply (12 months before through 11 months after), and restricts the sample to villages
with at least 6 observations within this window on both sides. Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                 20
                     Table 2: The Effect of Water Improvement on Diarrhea

                                                    Sample A      Sample B       Sample C
                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)
               Panel A: Mean shift
               Post-intervention                     -0.585∗∗∗     -0.587∗∗∗      -0.433∗∗
                                                      (0.125)       (0.138)       (0.174)
               Num. observations                       5,408         4,077         1,605
               Num. villages                             95            74            71
               Mean outcome pre-treatment              1.076         1.091         1.180
               Panel B: Mean shift with village-specific trend
               Post-intervention               -0.571∗∗∗    -0.550∗∗∗             -0.407∗∗
                                                (0.129)      (0.158)              (0.183)
               Num. observations                 5,408        4,077                1,605
               Num. villages                       95           74                   71
               Mean outcome pre-treatment        1.076        1.091                1.180
Note: Panel (A) presents estimates of Equation (2) in the text. Panel (B) additionally controls for village-
specific linear trends. The dependent variable is the number of cases of diarrhea reported as treated
in a month. “Post-intervention” denotes the average effect of the intervention, corresponding to α in
Equation (2). Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each ob-
servation from village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village
v. The sample used varies by column. Column (1) includes all observations from villages for which
the month of water activation is known (Sample A in the text). Column (2) uses only observations
from up to 24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages
which have at least 6 observations before and after (Sample B in the text). Column (3) only uses ob-
servations in a one-year window around the activation of the water supply (12 months before through
11 months after), and restricts the sample to villages with at least 6 observations within this window
on both sides (Sample C in the text). All regressions include village and month-by-year fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                    21
                     Table 3: Effect of Program by Post-Intervention Period

                                                             Sample A       Sample B
                                                                (1)           (2)
                       Months 0-35                            -0.552∗∗∗     -0.539∗∗∗
                                                               (0.133)       (0.147)
                       Months 36+                              -0.423∗∗      -0.406∗
                                                               (0.211)       (0.229)
                       Num. observations                        5,408         4,077
                       Num. villages                              95            74
                       Mean outcome pre-treatment               1.076         1.091
                       p-value: coeffs. are equal               0.293         0.316
Notes: This table reports estimates of a variant of Equation (2), in which we estimate the effect separately
for months 0-35 and beyond month 36. The dependent variable is the number of cases of diarrhea reported as
treated in a month. “Months 0-35” denotes the average effect over months 0-35, and “Months 36+” denotes
the average effect beyond month 36. Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS
regression. Each observation from village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations
of village v. The sample used varies by column. Column (1) includes all observations from villages for which
the month of water activation is known (Sample A in the text). Column (2) uses only observations from up to
24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages which have at least
6 observations before and after (Sample B in the text). All regressions include village and month-by-year fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                      22
               Table 4: The Effect of Water Improvement on Malaria and Fever

    Outcome variable:                            Malaria                             Fever
                                    Sample A    Sample B    Sample C   Sample A    Sample B    Sample C
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
    Panel A: Mean shift
    Post-intervention                -0.468∗∗    -0.528∗∗    -0.494∗      -0.392     -0.622∗      -0.329
                                     (0.189)     (0.238)     (0.275)     (0.303)     (0.347)     (0.414)
    Num. observations                 4,572       3,360       1,133       4,571       3,359       1,133
    Num. villages                       94          75          55          94          75          55
    Mean outcome pre-treatment        1.328       1.280       1.150       3.159       2.888       2.748
    Panel B: Mean shift with village-specific trend
    Post-intervention               -0.465∗∗       -0.290    -0.527∗      -0.269      -0.472      -0.332
                                     (0.213)      (0.231)    (0.304)     (0.353)     (0.400)     (0.396)
    Num. observations                 4,572        3,360      1,133        4,571      3,359       1,133
    Num. villages                      94            75         55          94          75          55
    Mean outcome pre-treatment        1.328        1.280      1.150       3.159       2.888       2.748

Note: Panel (A) presents estimates of Equation (2) in the text. Panel (B) additionally controls for village-
specific linear trends. In columns (1) - (3), the dependent variable is the number of cases of malaria treated
in a month; in columns (4) - (6), the dependent variable is the number of cases of fever treated in a
month; “Post-intervention” denotes the average effect of the intervention, corresponding to α in Equation
(2). Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each observation from
village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village v. The sample
used varies by column. Columns (1) and (4) (“Sample A”) include all observations from villages for which
the month of water activation is known. Columns (2) and (5) (“Sample B”) use only observations from
up to 24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages which
have at least 6 observations before and after. Columns (3) and (6) (“Sample C”) use only observations
in a one-year window around the activation of the water supply (12 months before through 11 months
after), and restricts the sample to villages with at least 6 observations within this window on both sides.
Standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                      23
Figures

                            Figure 1: Evolution of latrine use and water provision

                     1.00



                     0.80



                     0.60
             Share




                     0.40



                     0.20



                     0.00
                              -20            0                20               40              60
                                        Months since village began using water tank

                                     Latrines in use              Water tank operational


Notes: this figure shows the evolution of village-level latrine coverage around the time at which water services
are activated. The x-axis represents time in months, relative to the month in which the village’s water tank
is activated. The water tank is activated in month τ = 0. The series “Latrines in use” plots the median
village-level share of households that own and use a latrine. Pre-intervention mean: 0.189; post-intervention
mean: 0.966. The series “Water tank operational” plots the share of villages with their water tank fully
operational. Pre-intervention mean: 0; post-intervention mean: 0.939. The sample consists of villages in
“Sample B”, as defined in the text, with the additional restriction that there be at least 6 observations
of both latrine ownership and use and the operational status of the water tank both before and after the
activation of services in the window −24 ≤ τ ≤ 59. This sample consists of 54 villages.




                                                        24
     Figure 2: Event Analysis Within Twelve Months of Beginning Water Improvement
                     Impact on Cases of Diarrhea Treated Per Month



                     1
                     .5
             Estimated impact
              −.5    −1 0
                     −1.5




                                −12    −6             −1                         6             11
                                        Months since initiation of service (τ)

                                              Point Estimate               95% CI


Notes: this figure describes the month-by-month estimated impact of the intervention by plotting parameter
estimates for each value of τ in Equation (1) in the text. The dependent variable is the number of cases
of diarrhea treated in a given month. τ represents the month relative to initiation of service, with τ0 the
month in which service began. All estimates are relative to the month prior to the initiation of service, so the
estimate on τ−1 is normalized to zero. The regression includes village fixed effects and month-by-year fixed
effects. Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each observation from
village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village v. The dashed lines
represent 95% confidence intervals for the individual estimates. The sample is “Sample B”: only observations
from up to 24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages with at
least 6 observations before and 6 observations after the activation of services. Standard errors are clustered
at the village level.




                                                      25
 Figure 3: Event Analysis from Two Years Before to Five Years After Water Improvement
                    Impact on Cases of Diarrhea Treated Per Month



                     3
                     2
             Estimated impact
                 0   −1
                     −2  1




                                −24   −12   −1         12          24          36      48      59
                                            Months since initiation of service (τ)

                                                 Point Estimate               95% CI



Notes: this figure describes the month-by-month estimated impact of the intervention by plotting parameter
estimates for each value of τ in Equation (1) in the text. The dependent variable is the number of cases
of diarrhea treated in a given month. τ represents the month relative to initiation of service, with τ0 the
month in which service began. All estimates are relative to the month prior to the initiation of service, so the
estimate on τ−1 is normalized to zero. The regression includes village fixed effects and month-by-year fixed
effects. Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each observation from
village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village v. The dashed lines
represent 95% confidence intervals for the individual estimates. The sample is “Sample B”: only observations
from up to 24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages with at
least 6 observations before and 6 observations after the activation of services. Standard errors are clustered
at the village level.




                                                          26
                                                Figure 4: Estimated Impact on Cases of Diarrhea
                                                               Robustness Checks



                      .5     0
              Estimated impact
             −1     −.5
                      −1.5
                                  e

                                               d

                                                         d

                                                                 p.

                                                                           FE

                                                                                       FE

                                                                                                  36


                                                                                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                                                               00

                                                                                                                                                               05


                                                                                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                                                                                ro

                                                                                                                                                               ng

                                                                                                                                                                ta

                                                                                                                                                               ed


                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                               te
                                 lin

                                            ke

                                                     te




                                                                                                          <3




                                                                                                                                                              et
                                                                po




                                                                                                                                                            da
                                                                                                                                                            ze
                                                                                             τ≥




                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                            si




                                                                                                                                                            et
                                                                                                                                                            la
                                                   gh




                                                                                                                                                           pl
                         se




                                                                         th

                                                                                   ar
                                        ec




                                                                                                                                                         −2
                                                                                                       .τ




                                                                                                                                                           s




                                                                                                                                                         pl

                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                          ge




                                                                                                                                                        3/

                                                                                                                                                        or

                                                                                                                                                       ith




                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                              .
                                                                     on

                                                                                ye
                                                ei




                                                                                                                                                       m
                   Ba




                                                                                           ax
                                       ch




                                                                                                     ax




                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                              97




                                                                                                                                                     co
                                                                                                                                                     −0
                                             nw




                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                         lla




                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                    m

                                                                              y−




                                                                                                                                                   co
                                                                                                                                                   ith
                                                                                       m

                                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                                                  ea
                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                 00
                                 es




                                                                                                                                                01




                                                                                                                                                ng
                                                        vi




                                                                                                                                                  s
                                            U




                                                                           −b
                                                                n




                                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                    ith




                                                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                               ith




                                                                                                                                              nk
                                                                                                                                               cl
                           as




                                                                                                                                              /2
                                                               io




                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                                            20
                                                     y




                                                                                                                                             si

                                                                                                                                           ro
                                                                         ct




                                                                                                                                         un
                                                   tb




                                                                                   w




                                                                                                                                         04
                                                                                            w
                                                             ct




                                                                                                                                         ta

                                                                                                                                          tri
                        C




                                                                                                                                         is
                                                                                                       ro
                                                                     tri




                                                                                                                                       ze
                                                                                                               m
                                                          lle




                                                                                                                                       la
                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                s

                                                                                           s
                                                gh




                                                                                                     .f




                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                     se
                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                    is

                                                                              ge

                                                                                       ge




                                                                                                              ro
                                                        co




                                                                                                                                    of
                                                                                                  bs




                                                                                                                                   ce

                                                                                                                                   ce




                                                                                                                                   at
                                                                 D
                                             ei




                                                                                                                                  ro




                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                            .f
                                                                          lla

                                                                                     lla
                                                     a−




                                                                                                                               :w
                                            W




                                                                                               O




                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                la

                                                                                                                                la
                                                                                                                               .f
                                                                                                       bs
                                                                         Vi

                                                                                   Vi




                                                                                                                            ep

                                                                                                                            ep
                                                                                                                            bs




                                                                                                                            90
                                                   at




                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                      O




                                                                                                                          en
                                                D




                                                                                                                          R

                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                              O




                                                                                                                         t:
                                                                                                                       tm

                                                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                    ea

                                                                                                                   tm
                                                                                                                 Tr

                                                                                                                ea
                                                                                                             Tr
Notes: this figure reports estimated treatment effects, with 95% confidence intervals, for each of a series
of variants on Equation (2) in the main text. The variant for each specification is described briefly by the
label on the x axis, and in greater detail in the text of the Supporting Information. In all cases, the sample
corresponds to Sample B in the main text, consisting of observations from two years before to five years after
the initiation of services (−24 ≤ τ ≤ 59), and including only villages with at least six observations before
and six observations after the initiation of services. All regressions include village and month-by-year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.




                                                                                                            27
  Short and Medium Run Health Impacts of Addressing
   Complementarities and Externalities in Water and
                      Sanitation
                  Online Appendix
         Esther Duflo∗           Michael Greenstone†               Raymond Guiteras‡§
                                         Thomas Clasen¶

                                           August 2015


   This document contains supplementary materials for the paper “The Short- and Medium-
Run Impacts of In-Home Water Supply and Sanitation on Diarrhea in Rural India.” It is
organized as follows: Section A1 provides detail on the robustness checks; Section A2 dis-
cusses results for malaria and fever; Section A3 describes the data-cleaning process in detail;
Section A4 provides an approximate calculation of program costs.




  ∗
     Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02142, USA and
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge MA 02138, USA.
   †
     University of Chicago, Department of Economics, Chicago IL 60637, USA and National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge MA 02138, USA.
   ‡
     Department of Economics, University of Maryland, College Park MD 20742 USA.
  §
     To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: guiteras@econ.umd.edu
  ¶
     Department of Environmental Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
USA and Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
London WC1E 7H, UK.


                                                 A1
A1      Robustness Checks
In this section, we provide further detail on the series of robustness checks provided in
Figure 3 of the main text. Each is describe a series of robustness checks estimating variants
on Equation (2). We re-estimate Equation (2) in the following ways:

  1. “Baseline”: replicates Table 2, Panel A, Column (2) for comparison;

  2. “Cases checked”: use the number of cases checked (rather than treated) in a month as
     the dependent variable;

  3. “Unweighted”: no weighting. That is, each observation receives equal weight, so each
     village effectively is weighted by the number of observations;

  4. “Weight by village population”: weight each village by its mean population;

  5. “Data-collection month fixed effects”: include fixed effects for the number of months
     since data collection began;

  6. “District-by-year fixed effects”: include fixed effects for each district-year (19 districts,
     11 years, although not all districts are in the dataset in all years);

  7. “Villages with max. τ ≥ 36”: include only villages with 3 years of post-intervention
     data or more;

  8. “Villages with max. τ < 36”: include only villages less than 3 years of post-intervention
     data;

  9. “Obs. from 1997-2000”: include only data from the “early” phase of the program,
     1997-2000;

 10. “Obs. from 2001-03/2005”: include only observations from 2001 through March 2005.
     Two potentially important differences exist between the data up to and including fiscal
     year 2004/05 (ending in March 2005) and thereafter (see “Obs. in 04/2005 or later”
     below). First, Gram Vikas consistently entered hard-copy forms into a database be-
     ginning in April 2005, so most of the subsequent data come from this database, rather
     than the data we created from scanning old paper forms. Second, our first discussions
     with Gram Vikas about an evaluation took place in July 2005. This could have in-
     troduced bias into data collection, although methods did not change and the field and
     implementation staff were unaware of the evaluation;



                                              A2
 11. “Obs. from 04/2005 or later”: include only observations from April 2005 or later. See
     above discussion under “Obs. from 2001-03/2005” above;

 12. “Replace missing with zero”: if the outcome variable is missing in a village-month
     observation, code it as zero.

 13. “Replace zero with missing”: if the outcome variable is recorded as zero in a village-
     month observation, code it as missing;

 14. “Use uncleaned data”: use raw data as entered, without data cleaning;

 15. “Treatment: water tank completed”: define the intervention as having started when
     construction of the village’s water tank is complete;

 16. “Treatment: 90% of latrines complete”: define the intervention as having started when
     90% of households in a village have completed their latrine.


A2       Results for Malaria and Fever
Figures A1 and A2 present the results of the same series of robustness checks as those
conducted for cases of diarrhea (described in Section A1, with results reported in Figure
3 of the main text). Data on cases of malaria and fever were not systematically collected
during the period 1997-2000, so the “Obs. from 1997-2000” specification is dropped. For
both malaria and fever, 5 of 15 specifications are statistically significant at the 95% level, as
compared to 14 of 16 for diarrhea.


A3       Data Cleaning
This appendix describes preparation of the data for analysis. The original data were collected
in three separate formats – one format for 1997-1999, one for 2000-2001, and another for
2002-2005 – where each format presented a slightly different set of variables. The original
handwritten survey data were scanned and transmitted to a data firm in India, which entered
them into electronic records using double-entry for accuracy. The original records called for
English entries, but data were sometimes recorded in Oriya (the predominant language in
Orissa). Our data entry company assigned Oriya-literate employees to our project. Gram
Vikas also converted paper records to electronic format starting in 2002. Comparison of
the 2002–2005 data entered by GV to that entered by the data firm indicates that the data
firm’s version had fewer errors, so for 2002–2005 we mainly use the Indian firm’s version of


                                              A3
the data, though we fill in some gaps (mainly from paper records that were lost) with the
GV-entered data. Because we only scanned the paper records through 2005, all 2006 and
2007 data come from GV’s data-entry. Although all forms reported deaths, the total number
of reported deaths was extremely small and hence not used in analysis.
    The most relevant differences between the survey forms are diarrhea variables included
in 1997-1999 and excluded from other forms, and other variables which appear in all forms
except those used in 1997-99. The 1997-1999 form does not report on any illnesses other
than diarrhea, but it does report the number of cases of diarrhea for children, the number of
days that children suffer diarrhea, and the number of working days lost to diarrhea. Other
forms do not report these more detailed diarrhea measures. Also, the 1997-1999 data do not
report school attendance, the number of households, number of individuals, or the number
of children.
    Basic data cleaning steps included the following:

   • correction of village names and code numbers;

   • correction of incorrectly entered dates;

   • conversion of numbers entered as strings;

   • while most villages have continuous panels – every consecutive month is observed –
     some observations were distant temporal outliers and appeared a year or more after all
     other observations from the same village. Those outliers generally have values differing
     substantially from the other values in the village, so we exclude them from the analysis.

By comparing against images of the original handwritten monthly survey documents we
conclude that most of these anomalies came from the original paper data forms recorded by
the supervisor, rather than from data-entry errors.
   The data offer several potential indicators of the initiation of service:

   • each month, the surveyor indicated whether the village water tank had begun opera-
     tion;

   • each month, the surveyor indicated whether construction of the village water tank had
     been completed;

   • each month, the surveyor recorded the number of latrines the village had built.

The paper focuses on the first, since it is the operation of the water tank, rather the con-
struction of infrastructure, that should affect environmental conditions and health. In the


                                             A4
robustness checks described in Section A1, we provide estimates using alternative indicators
for the initiation of service.
    The main estimates also reflect cleaning of the underlying data for all variables. Much of
the cleaning uses redundant information in the village-level data. For example, population
levels in a village are smooth, so comparing adjacent time periods clarifies when outlier
population values are typos. Specifically, the following general rules for cleaning the data
represent some of the more important:

   • for all variables, extreme outlier values which can be identified as obvious typos are
     corrected, while outliers which cannot be assigned a certain correct value are coded to
     be missing;

   • water tank variables (tank construction, usage, latrine construction) nondecreasing by
     default. That is, once a village’s water tank is reported as functional, it is coded as
     functional in all future periods unless it is specifically reported to be non-functional
     (e.g. if there is a maintenance problem). This is because MPRs often skipped the
     section on water tank construction if the tank had already been in use for many months.
     As discussed in the main text, treatment is defined as the period after initiation of
     services, so a village is coded as “treated” in all months after the first month in which
     the water tank is operational, whether or not the tank is working in that particular
     month;

   • population values (households, adults, children) which have the value zero are recoded
     to missing. The total village population must roughly equal the number of children
     plus the number of adults.


A4      Program Costs
Table A1 presents a calculation of approximate costs per household in a typical village of
50 households, based on Gram Vikas (2004) and Gram Vikas (2005). Costs calculated for a
village of 50 households, and Indian rupees are converted to US dollars at the average 1997–
2006 market exchange rate of 45 INR/USD. The cost components are construction of toilets
and bath houses, construction of water supply and project development costs (primarily GV
staff time spent in organizing and capacity-building), distinguishing between villagers’ con-
tributions and inputs purchased with external funds. The value of villagers’ labor is assessed
at US$1 per day, the local agricultural day labor wage. This may be an overstatement since
most work takes place outside the planting and harvest seasons, i.e. in times in which the


                                             A5
opportunity cost of villagers’ time is lower. The approximate construction cost per household
is $440 with annual maintenance costs of roughly $11. Assuming an interest rate of 10% per
year and given the intended useful 20-year life of the tank and sanitary facilities, the equiv-
alent annuity cost is approximately $58 per household per year. Average 2007–2008 annual
household consumption in rural Orissa is reported in National Sample Survey Organisation
(2010) as $738, converted to US dollars at the 2007–2008 exchange rate of 40 INR/USD.




                                              A6
References
Valerie Curtis, Sandy Cairncross, and Raymond Yonli. Review: Domestic hygiene and
  diarrhoea – pinpointing the problem. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 5(1):22–
  32, January 2000. ISSN 1365-3156. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.2000.00512.x. URL http:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2000.00512.x/abstract.

Gram Vikas. Rural health and environment programme in Orissa, 2004.

Gram Vikas. Annual report 2004–2005, 2005.

National Sample Survey Organisation. Household consumer expendiature in India, 2007–08.
  Report 530, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India,
  March 2010.




                                           A7
Tables

                      Table A1: Approximate Costs per Household (US$)

                                                       Household     External     Total
                Construction costs:
                Toilet and bath house                         66.7        77.8    144.4
                Water supply                                  72.2       105.6    177.8
                Project development                                      116.7    116.7
                Total                                        138.9       300.0    438.9

                Maintenance (annual)                                               11.1

                Assumed Interest Rate                                              10%
                Assumed Useful Life (years)                                          20

                Net Present Value of Costs                                        542.8
                Equivalent 20-year Annuity                                         57.8

                Annual household consumption                                      737.9

Notes: Information from Gram Vikas (2004) and Gram Vikas (2005). Costs calculated for a village of 50
households. Figures in Indian rupees converted to US dollars at the mean 1997–2006 market exchange rate
of 45 INR/USD. Project development costs are primarily wages paid to Gram Vikas staff during startup and
data collection. Average 2007–2008 annual household consumption in rural Orissa from National Sample
Survey Organisation (2010), converted to US dollars at the 2007–2008 average exchange rate of 40 INR/USD.




                                                  A8
                       Table A2: Placebo Check: Effect on Tuberculosis

                                                 Sample A      Sample B     Sample C
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)
              Panel A: Mean shift
              Post-intervention                     -0.052       -0.012        -0.087
                                                   (0.056)      (0.063)       (0.071)
              Num. observations                      2,960       2,315          836
              Num. villages                           88           74            51
              Mean outcome pre-treatment             0.145        0.096        0.056
              Panel B: Mean shift with village-specific trend
              Post-intervention                 0.087        0.115             -0.081
                                               (0.069)      (0.081)           (0.080)
              Num. observations                 2,960        2,315               836
              Num. villages                       88          74                  51
              Mean outcome pre-treatment        0.145        0.096              0.056
Note: Panel (A) presents estimates of Equation (2) in the text. Panel (B) additionally controls for
village-specific linear trends. The dependent variable is the number of cases of tuberculosis reported
in a month. “Post-intervention” denotes the average effect of the intervention, corresponding to α in
Equation (2). Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each ob-
servation from village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village
v. The sample used varies by column. Column (1) includes all observations from villages for which
the month of water activation is known (Sample A in the text). Column (2) uses only observations
from up to 24 months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages
which have at least 6 observations before and after (Sample B in the text). Column (3) only uses ob-
servations in a one-year window around the activation of the water supply (12 months before through
11 months after), and restricts the sample to villages with at least 6 observations within this window
on both sides (Sample C in the text). All regressions include village and month-by-year fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                 A9
        Table A3: Placebo Check: Effect on Tuberculosis by Post-Intervention Period

                                                            Sample A      Sample B
                                                               (1)          (2)
                      Months 0-35                              -0.021        0.025
                                                              (0.057)       (0.075)
                      Months 36+                                0.093        0.130
                                                              (0.087)       (0.118)
                      Num. observations                         2,960        2,315
                      Num. villages                               88          74
                      Mean outcome pre-treatment                0.145        0.096
                      p-value: coeffs. are equal                0.046        0.049
Notes: This table reports estimates of a variant of Equation (2), in which we estimate the effect separately
for months 0-35 and beyond month 36. The dependent variable is the number of cases of tuberculosis in a
month. “Months 0-35” denotes the average effect over months 0-35, and “Months 36+” denotes the average
effect beyond month 36. Each observation is one village-month-year. Estimation is by GLS regression. Each
observation from village v is weighted by 1/Nv , where Nv is the total number of observations of village v.
The sample used varies by column. Column (1) includes all observations from villages for which the month
of water activation is known (Sample A in the text). Column (2) uses only observations from up to 24
months before to up to 59 months after the water supply is activated, and only villages which have at least 6
observations before and after (Sample B in the text). All regressions include village and month-by-year fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                    A10
Figures

                                 Figure A1: Estimated Impact on Cases of Malaria
                                         Comparison Across Specifications
                      .5
              Estimated impact
             −1    −.5−1.5  0
                                                                           e

                                                                           d

                                                                           d

                                                                          p.

                                                                        FE


                                                                           E

                                                                           6

                                                                           6

                                                                         00

                                                                         05


                                                                            r

                                                                          ro

                                                                         ng

                                                                          ta

                                                                         ed


                                                                           e
                                                                         te
                                                                       lin

                                                                      ke

                                                                        te




                                                                      ≥3

                                                                      <3




                                                                        et
                                                                     rF
                                                                     po




                                                                     da
                                                                     ze
                                                                      0

                                                                    20




                                                                      si




                                                                     et
                                                                     la
                                                                   gh




                                                                    pl
                                                                  se




                                                                    h
                                                                  ec




                                                                  .τ




                                                                  −2
                                                                  .τ




                                                                    s
                                                                   a




                                                                  pl
                                                                   t




                                                                 m
                                                                ge




                                                                 3/

                                                                 or

                                                                ith




                                                                  d
                                                                  i
                                                               on

                                                               ye
                                                                ei




                                                                m
                                                              Ba




                                                              ax
                                                              ch




                                                              ax




                                                               m
                                                              ne
                                                              97




                                                             co
                                                             −0
                                                           nw




                                                              w
                                                            lla




                                                              5
                                                            m

                                                           y−




                                                          co
                                                          ith
                                                           m

                                                           m




                                                         ea
                                                         19




                                                         00
                                                         es




                                                        01




                                                        ng
                                                         vi




                                                          s
                                                        U




                                                      −b
                                                        n




                                                        w
                                                     ith




                                                     ne
                                                       th




                                                     nk
                                                      cl
                                                    as




                                                     /2
                                                    io




                                                  om

                                                   20
                                                     y




                                                    si
                                                     i




                                                  ro
                                                   ct




                                                 un
                                                tb




                                                  w




                                                04
                                                  w
                                                 ct




                                                 ta

                                                 tri
                        C




                                                 is
                                               tri




                                              ze
                                                r

                                              m
                                             lle




                                              la
                                              m
                                               s

                                               s
                                            gh




                                             .f




                                             er
                                            se
                                            m
                                            is

                                           ge

                                           ge




                                           ro
                                          co




                                          of
                                         bs




                                         ce

                                         ce




                                          at
                                          D
                                         ei




                                         ro




                                         U
                                        .f
                                       lla

                                       lla
                                     a−




                                     :w
                                     W




                                      O




                                     %
                                      la

                                      la
                                     .f
                                    bs
                                   Vi

                                   Vi




                                  ep

                                  ep
                                  bs




                                  90
                                  at




                                   t
                                  O




                                en
                                D




                                R

                                R
                               O




                               t:
                             tm

                            en
                          ea

                         tm
                       Tr

                      ea
                   Tr




Notes: this figure reports estimated treatment effects, with 95% confidence intervals, for each of a series
of variants on Equation (2) in the main text. The variant for each specification is described briefly by the
label on the x axis, and in greater detail in the text of the Supporting Information. In all cases, the sample
corresponds to Sample B in the main text, consisting of observations from two years before to five years after
the initiation of services (−24 ≤ τ ≤ 59), and including only villages with at least six observations before
and six observations after the initiation of services. Data on malaria were not systematically collected during
the period 1997-2000, so that specification is excluded. All regressions include village and month-by-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.




                                                      A11
                                               Figure A2: Estimated Impact on Cases of Fever
                                                      Comparison Across Specifications



                     1
             Estimated impact
             −2    −1−3    0
                                 e

                                              d

                                                        d

                                                                p.

                                                                          FE

                                                                                      FE

                                                                                                 36


                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                              00

                                                                                                                                                              05


                                                                                                                                                                 r

                                                                                                                                                               ro

                                                                                                                                                              ng

                                                                                                                                                               ta

                                                                                                                                                              ed


                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                              te
                                lin

                                           ke

                                                    te




                                                                                                         <3




                                                                                                                                                             et
                                                               po




                                                                                                                                                           da
                                                                                                                                                           ze
                                                                                            τ≥




                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                           si




                                                                                                                                                           et
                                                                                                                                                           la
                                                  gh




                                                                                                                                                          pl
                        se




                                                                        th

                                                                                  ar
                                       ec




                                                                                                                                                        −2
                                                                                                      .τ




                                                                                                                                                          s




                                                                                                                                                        pl

                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                         ge




                                                                                                                                                       3/

                                                                                                                                                       or

                                                                                                                                                      ith




                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                             .
                                                                    on

                                                                               ye
                                               ei




                                                                                                                                                      m
                   Ba




                                                                                          ax
                                      ch




                                                                                                    ax




                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                             97




                                                                                                                                                    co
                                                                                                                                                    −0
                                            nw




                                                                                                                                                    w
                                                        lla




                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                   m

                                                                             y−




                                                                                                                                                  co
                                                                                                                                                  ith
                                                                                      m

                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                                                                 ea
                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                00
                                es




                                                                                                                                               01




                                                                                                                                               ng
                                                       vi




                                                                                                                                                 s
                                           U




                                                                          −b
                                                               n




                                                                                                                                               w
                                                                                   ith




                                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                              ith




                                                                                                                                             nk
                                                                                                                                              cl
                          as




                                                                                                                                             /2
                                                              io




                                                                                                       m

                                                                                                                                           20
                                                    y




                                                                                                                                            si

                                                                                                                                          ro
                                                                        ct




                                                                                                                                        un
                                                  tb




                                                                                  w




                                                                                                                                        04
                                                                                           w
                                                            ct




                                                                                                                                        ta

                                                                                                                                         tri
                       C




                                                                                                                                        is
                                                                                                      ro
                                                                    tri




                                                                                                                                      ze
                                                                                                              m
                                                         lle




                                                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                               s

                                                                                          s
                                               gh




                                                                                                    .f




                                                                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                                    se
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                   is

                                                                             ge

                                                                                      ge




                                                                                                             ro
                                                       co




                                                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                 bs




                                                                                                                                  ce

                                                                                                                                  ce




                                                                                                                                  at
                                                                D
                                            ei




                                                                                                                                 ro




                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                           .f
                                                                         lla

                                                                                    lla
                                                    a−




                                                                                                                              :w
                                           W




                                                                                              O




                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                               la

                                                                                                                               la
                                                                                                                              .f
                                                                                                      bs
                                                                        Vi

                                                                                  Vi




                                                                                                                           ep

                                                                                                                           ep
                                                                                                                           bs




                                                                                                                           90
                                                  at




                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                     O




                                                                                                                         en
                                               D




                                                                                                                         R

                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                             O




                                                                                                                        t:
                                                                                                                      tm

                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                                                   ea

                                                                                                                  tm
                                                                                                                Tr

                                                                                                               ea
                                                                                                            Tr
Notes: this figure reports estimated treatment effects, with 95% confidence intervals, for each of a series
of variants on Equation (2) in the main text. The variant for each specification is described briefly by the
label on the x axis, and in greater detail in the text of the Supporting Information. In all cases, the sample
corresponds to Sample B in the main text, consisting of observations from two years before to five years after
the initiation of services (−24 ≤ τ ≤ 59), and including only villages with at least six observations before
and six observations after the initiation of services. Data on fever were not systematically collected during
the period 1997-2000, so that specification is excluded. All regressions include village and month-by-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.




                                                                                                         A12
                                                 Figure A3: The F-diagram




                                                   Fluids




                                                   Fields



           Feces                                                                            Foods                         New Host




                                                   Flies




                                                  Fingers




                 Primary Barriers                                          Secondary Barriers
       (Sanitation; Handwashing at Latrine)   (Water Protection; Water Treatment; Handwashing Before Cooking or Eating)




Notes: From Figure 1 of Curtis, Cairncross, and Yonli, 2000.




                                                                    A13
