NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPORT FOR REDISTRIBUTION IN AN AGE OF RISING INEQUALITY:
NEW STYLIZED FACTS AND SOME TENTATIVE EXPLANATIONS
Vivekinan Ashok
Ilyana Kuziemko
Ebonya Washington
Working Paper 21529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21529

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

We thank Angus Deaton, David Romer, Joanna Lahey, Matt Weinzierl, Justin Wolfers, seminar participants
at Princeton and discussants Peter Enns and Paola Guiliano for incredibly helpful˛feedback. Khurram
Ali and María Bernardita Canals Cavagnaro provided invaluable research assistance. This paper was
prepared for the 2015 spring Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Vivekinan Ashok, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Ebonya Washington. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Support for Redistribution in an Age of Rising Inequality: New Stylized Facts and Some Tentative
Explanations
Vivekinan Ashok, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Ebonya Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 21529
September 2015
JEL No. D63,H23,J14,J15
ABSTRACT
Despite the large increases in economic inequality since 1970, American survey respondents exhibit
no increase in support for redistribution, in contrast to the predictions from standard theories of redistributive
preferences. We replicate these results but further demonstrate substantial heterogeneity by demographic
groups. In particular, the two groups who have most moved against income redistribution are the elderly
and African-Americans. We find little evidence that these subgroup trends are explained by relative
economic gains or growing cultural conservatism, two common explanations. We further show that
the elderly trend is uniquely American, at least relative to other developed countries with comparable
survey data. While we are unable to provide definitive evidence on the cause of these two groups'
declining redistributive support, we offer additional correlations which may offer fruitful directions
for future research on the topic. One story consistent with the data on elderly trends is that older Americans
worry that redistribution will come at their expense, in particular via cuts to Medicare. We find that
the elderly have grown increasingly opposed to government provision of health insurance and that
controlling for this tendency explains about 40% of their declining support for redistribution. For blacks,
controlling for their declining support of race-targeted aid explains nearly 45% of their differential
decline in redistributive preferences (raising the question of why support for race-targeted aid has
fallen during a period when black economic catch-up to whites has stalled).

Vivekinan Ashok
Yale University
Department of Political Science
P.O. Box 208301
New Haven, CT 06520-8301
vivekinan.ashok@yale.edu
Ilyana Kuziemko
Department of Economics
Princeton University
322 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
kuziemko@princeton.edu

Ebonya Washington
Yale University
Box 8264
37 Hillhouse, Room 36
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ebonya.washington@yale.edu

Introduction
Since the 1970s the United States has witnessed two trends whose coexistence calls into
question predictions from standard political economy models (e.g., Meltzer and Richard,
1981). As documented extensively in Piketty and Saez (2003) as well as their annual updates,
the U.S. income distribution has grown substantially more concentrated since the 1970s. As
Figure 1 shows, the share of income accruing to the top one percent more than doubled
between 1978 and 2007.1 The growth of inequality has not been limited to the top “one
percent” but also appears in broader distributional measures (Autor, 2014).
The workhorse political economy model suggests that an individual’s demand for redistribution is a function of mean income minus own income. As inequality increases, a greater
share of the population has income below the mean and thus demand for redistribution rises.
Yet, in reality, demand for income redistribution in the US has remained flat by some measures and decreased for others (see, e.g., Kuziemko et al. (2013), and we further document
this fact later in the paper). Beyond the US, citizens of other OECD countries that have
seen rising income inequality have generally not exhibited greater demand for redistribution
(Kenworthy and McCall, 2008).
Explaining this puzzle has inspired a large literature, ranging from racial politics to belief
in upward mobility.2 Our goal in this paper is not to offer a new explanation. Instead, we offer
new “clues” to the puzzle by delving deeper into the U.S. survey data, as well as comparing
it to trends from other developed countries. Our hope is that future work trying to explain
the evolution of redistributive preferences would try to fit the new stylized facts we establish
in this study.
In the first part of the paper, we replicate past work showing that trends in the demand
for redistribution among Americans has been largely flat or perhaps slightly negative over
this period. We show that this result is robust across different redistributive questions as
well as different datasets.
We then document (for the first time to our knowledge) the great heterogeneity in trends
for support for redistribution during this time period. We focus on “immutable” demographic
characteristics, so as to put aside worries about compositional changes. Two groups—the
elderly and African-Americans—have significantly decreased their support for redistribution,
relative to other respondents. While race and age differences are pronounced and robust in
1 See
2 See,

their online updates at http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2012prel.xls.
e.g., Lee and Roemer (2006), Benabou and Ok (2001), and citations therein.

1

the data, we do not find significant gender differences in trends in redistributive preferences.
The second part of the paper explores potential explanations for our two heterogeneity
results: the relative decline in redistributive support among the elderly and African Americans. We begin with the standard model of economic self-interest: have these groups made
relative gains in income or other measures of economic well-being?
In fact, we make little progress explaining these subgroup trend divergences with economic
and even broader well-being measures. One exception is that educational gains (perhaps
acting as a proxy for permanent income) can explain roughly 30% of the differential elderly
trend (though it remains negative and statistically significant). Otherwise, household income,
perceived place in the income distribution, perceived social class, self-reported health and
subjective well-being and perceived inter- and intra-generational mobility do little to “explain
away” the relative decline in redistributive support among the elderly and blacks.
A more psychological model of redistributive preferences emphasizes the role of cognitive
dissonance—if an individual becomes more conservative on social issues (e.g., abortion),
she might also become more economically conservative so as to remain consistent in an
ideological or partisan sense.3 We thus subject our differential trend results to a variety
of partisan and ideological controls, as well as control for views on particular hot-button
issues: religious attendance, abortion, gay rights and gun rights. We find little evidence that
a general rightward movement ideologically or culturally among the elderly or blacks has
dragged redistributive views to the right.
Having failed to explain our divergent trends with common models of redistributive preferences, we attempt explanations drawn from the particular historical or institutional features specific to each of these groups. The U.S. elderly have enjoyed tremendous gains in
life expectancy and years of retirement, which our self-reported health and other wellbeing
measures may not capture. These gains have generally been enjoyed by the elderly across the
OECD. To the extent that these broad trends can explain the decline in the elderly’s support for redistribution, we should see the same results elsewhere. In fact, in every developed
country where comparable data have been collected, the elderly’s support for redistribution
follows either a parallel trend to the rest of adults, or is differentially increasing. Thus, the
decline we find among the elderly appears exclusively American.
This international evidence leads us to explore whether there exist aspects of U.S redistributive policy that, relative to other countries, are unique in the treatment of the elderly.
3 The

classic citation on cognitive dissonance is Festinger (1957) but we review the more modern
literature and in particular its connection to partisan identity later in the paper.

2

The most obvious candidate is that in the US, the government guarantees health insurance for only one immutable group: the elderly, whereas this coverage is universal in other
developed countries. As Campbell (2003) has noted, the threat of Medicare cuts politically
energizes U.S. seniors. We find evidence that this view may be driving elderly views on redistribution: seniors have grown increasingly opposed to extending the government guarantee
of health coverage and controlling for this changing view explains nearly 40% of the elderly’s
relative decline in redistributive support.
Finally, to explain the declining support for redistribution among blacks, we are motivated
by the large literature showing that those who believe economic outcomes are the result of
a fair process are more opposed to redistribution. In surveys, blacks are far less likely than
whites to agree that economic outcomes are fair, not surprising given the legacy of slavery
and segregation. And perhaps as a result blacks are far more likely to support race-based
government aid. We show, however, that over the past several decades blacks have moved
significantly toward the white view on these questions. In particular, controlling for views
on race-based government aid explains nearly half of the decline in black redistributive
preferences. We are thus able to provide a proximate determinant of the decline in black
redistributive preferences, which only raises the question of why blacks’ support for racebased aid has fallen during a period when their economic catch-up to whites has stalled.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we replicate past findings on
the flat trend in overall redistributive demand in the US over the past several decades, as well
as establish new facts on heterogeneity by demographic subgroup. In Section 2 we explore
how well standard models do in explaining these divergent subgroup results. In Section 3
we explore hypotheses specific to the elderly and in Section 4 we do the same for blacks. In
Section 5 we offer concluding thoughts and suggests areas for future work.

1

Trends in redistributive demand

While aggregate demand for redistribution has not increased over this period of rising inequality, in this section we document substantial heterogeneity in this pattern across subgroups. To ensure that our heterogeneous patterns are not driven by data or coding differences between our paper and previous work, we first demonstrate that we can replicate the
earlier finding of flat aggregate demand using our survey measures.

3

1.1

Aggregate trends in redistributive demand

We have identified four questions on redistribution that have been fielded regularly since the
1970s. Our first and focal question is drawn from our primary dataset the General Social
Survey, a representative survey of American households. The GSS asks, “Some people think
that the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the rich
and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance
to the poor. Others think that the government should not concern itself with reducing this
income difference between the rich and the poor. Here is a card with a scale from 1 to 7.
Think of a score of 1 as meaning that the government ought to reduce the income differences
between rich and poor, and a score of 7 meaning that the government should not concern
itself with reducing income differences. What score between 1 and 7 comes closest to the
way you feel?.” We subtract this variable from eight so that it is increasing in support for
redistribution and refer to it as the “reduce differences” variable. It is our preferred measure
because it specifically mentions differences between the rich and the poor, whereas the other
measures focuses more on the poor.
Figure 2(a) shows a scatterplot, with best-fit lines, of mean response to the “reduce
differences” question over time.4 We present two best fit lines in this graph and those that
follow. The longer is the fit through all years for which we have data. The shorter line, our
preferred estimate, is the best fit through 2006 (the last time the question is asked in the
pre-Great Recession period).
We prefer to restrict attention to this shorter period for at least four reasons. First,
inequality did not actually increase during the Great Recession, as shown in Figure 1, by
2012 (the most recent year available) the top one percent had yet to regain the steep losses
to their income share incurred in 2008 and 2009. Second, this period also witnessed the
greatest downturn since the Great Depression, which likely has its own effect on redistributive
demand. Third, as we are interested in trends by race, including the administration of the
first black president might well conflate racial attitudes with view of government and thus
not reflect views about redistribution per se. Finally, we wish to hold the redistributive policy
4 Throughout

the paper we weight samples using the provided survey weights. In the GSS, to
include those respondents from years in which over-samples were conducted, we use the product
of the wtssall and oversamp variables as our weight. Toward the end of our sample period, the
GSS introduces interviews in Spanish (before that time, respondents who could not complete an
English-language version of the survey were excluded). To keep the sample consistent, we drop
those who the GSS deems would have been unable to have taken the interview if it were not in
Spanish (spanint = 2).

4

landscape fairly constant. Leonhardt (2015) described the Affordable Care Act of 2010 as
“the most aggressive attack that the federal government has launched against inequality
since inequality began rising four decades ago.” To the extent we wish to offer clues to the
puzzle of why demand for redistribution did not increase despite rising inequality, it seems
prudent to exclude these most recent years, in which the economic and policy environment
changed dramatically, inequality did not increase on net and which, coming at the end of
the time-series, will greatly influence trend lines.
Both fitted lines depicts a slight decrease in demand for redistribution, at least as reflected
by this variable. Measured against the left-hand axis, the drop is about 10% of a point on
the seven-point “reduce differences” scale. Because the seven-point scale has no intuitive
interpretation, we also measure the drop in “partisan units.” That is, we normalize the
measure so that zero represents the view of the average respondent over the sample period,
and an increase of one unit for this variable is equal to moving the distance between the
average Republican’s views and the average Democrat’s view on this question.5 Partisan
units are marked on the right-hand axis. Additionally, the -.0042 [.0033] label on the graph
refers to the slope and standard error of the shorter best fit line in “partisan units”; these
numbers indicate that across the 28 year sample period (1978 to 2006) Americans have moved
(0.0042 · 28) nearly 12% of the Democrat-Republican difference on this question, a movement
that is statistically insignificant. Like previous literature, we cannot reject that the trend is
flat despite the standard model’s prediction of rising support given the increasing inequality
of this time period.
This absence of increasing demand for redistribution is robust across all of our alternative
measures of redistributive support. The second question we have identified, also from the
GSS, asks, “Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything
possible to improve the standard of living of all poor Americans....Other people think it
is not the government’s responsibility, and that each person should take care of himself.”
Respondents are asked to place themselves on a five point scale along the described continuum, which we again flip to be increasing in redistributive support. As shown in Figure
2(b), by this measure Americans have seen an even greater decline—more than 0.3 partisan
points—in support for redistribution over both our focal and expanded time periods.
Our third question is on the role of government. The GSS asks, “Some people think
5 The

GSS asks individuals to rank themselves 1-7 on a Republican-Democrat scale, with 4 being
“independent.” We calculate the difference in the outcome variable between those answering 1-3
(Republican) and those answering 5-7 (Democrat). We then divide the variable by this difference.

5

that the government in Washington is trying to do too many things that should be left to
individuals and private businesses. Others disagree and think that the government should
do even more to solve our country’s problems.” Respondents indicate their place along this
continuum on a one to five scale. We recognize that this question is less directly related to
redistribution than are the first two, but show the results for the sake of robustness. As shown
in Figure 2(c), during this period of increased inequality, Americans have not increased in
their desire for government intervention.
Our final measure of redistributive preferences comes from the American National Election Studies (ANES), a representative sample of voting-age Americans. ANES asks “Some
people feel that the government in Washington should see to it that every person has a job
and a good standard of living....Others think the government should just let each person
get ahead on his/their own.” Respondents place themselves on a seven-point scale on this
continuum, which we flip so that it is increasing in redistributive support. We plot the result
in Figure 2(d). While the sign of the ANES results differs from that using the various GSS
measures, like our main GSS outcome, it is essentially flat.6 Across the four measures, we are
able to replicate the finding of previous literature of no increase in support for redistribution
over this period of increased inequality. As we noted from the onset, this lack of increased
support is puzzling. In an effort to provide clues for solving this puzzle, in the next section
we demonstrate, we believe for the first time, that these aggregate trends mask substantial
heterogeneity across demographic groups.

1.2

Trends by subgroup

In this section we examine how the trend in support for redistribution varies by immutable
demographic subgroups: age, race and sex.
1.2.1

Trends by age

In Figure 3(a) we return to our focal GSS “reduce differences” question and demonstrate
remarkable heterogeneity in the trends of younger and older respondents. Over our 28 year
sample period, while those under 65 saw no significant change in mean desire for the reduction
of income inequality, those aged 65 or older grew increasingly negative toward redistribution.
Looking at our standardized party scale on the right-hand axis, we see that across our
6 Our

last ANES datapoint is 2008. The question is fielded again in 2012, but at the time of
analysis only preliminary data were available for that wave.

6

sample period, the elderly decreased their support by more than 50% of the DemocratRepublican difference. This relative decrease among the elderly is robust to using our ANES
redistribution question (Figure 3b). By this measure young Americans have seen a marginally
significant increase of about 20% of a partisan unit over the 36 year sample period, while
the elderly show a significant decline of roughly 40% of the party difference over the time
period. By either measure, the relative position of the elderly has flipped; the group begins
the time period more in favor of redistribution than the rest of the population (significantly
so in the GSS), but end the time series significantly less supportive (both for the GSS and
the ANES).
1.2.2

Trends by race

The second demographic split we investigate is race. Because of sample size limitations, we
are able to examine only two racial groups: blacks and whites.7 Like with age, we demonstrate
in Figure 3 remarkable differences in trends by race in both the GSS (subfigure c) and the
ANES (subfigure d). While there has been no significant movement on the issue by whites,
in both datasets, blacks, who have a much higher desire for redistribution on average, have
significantly decreased their support, by nearly half of a partisan unit in the GSS and about
90% of a unit in the ANES, over their respective sample periods.
1.2.3

Trends by gender

Unlike for race and age, we do not find significant trend differences by gender in either
dataset. In both the GSS and the ANES, we see that women have a higher demand for
redistribution than men and the sexes trend similarly—decreasing (increasing) in support in
the GSS (ANES)—over time (See Figure 4). This non-result is somewhat surprising given
the large income gains women have made relative to men over the same time period.

1.3

Discussion

While Americans overall have exhibited no marked trend in their support for redistribution
over the past four decades, our subgroup analyses have identified two groups with markedly
negative trends over time: the elderly and African-Americans. These groups are in fact among
7 Moreover,

the GSS only asks about Hispanic ethnicity consistently beginning in 2000.

7

the most dependent on transfers, making their redistributive trends a priori surprising.8 In
the next section, we explore whether commonly used models of redistributive preferences
may explain the divergent trends of these two subgroups.

2

Can standard models of redistributive preferences explain subgroup trends

In this section, we explore to what extent we can “explain away” the black and elderly
differential trends that we uncovered in the previous section, using controls suggested by
common models of redistributive preferences.

2.1

Economic self-interest

The workhorse political economy model has voters maximizing after-tax income, with demand for redistribution an increasing function of the difference between their income and
that of the average tax-payer. We thus begin our exploration of why the elderly and AfricanAmericans have differentially moved against redistribution by examining the robustness of
their differential trends to a myriad of income controls. As we tend to prefer the main GSS
redistribution question (i.e., our “reduce differences” question), we focus on that data source
in the analysis that follows, though all results are robust to using the ANES and for some
key results we will report the parallel ANES analysis.
Col. (1) of Table 1 quantifies the relative decline among the elderly in support for redistribution, essentially replicating the first panel (shorter time period, through 2006) of Figure
3 in regression form. With no controls besides the Elderly dummy and year fixed effects,
the elderly (relative to others) decrease their answer to this question by roughly 0.20 points
(on a seven-point scale) per year. Again, as the units of this coefficient have no intuitive
interpretation, below the table we provide two alternative measures of the magnitude of our
findings. First, we divide the coefficient by the variable’s standard deviation and report it
as the “scaled effect (SD)”. Second, we divide the coefficient by the Democrat-Republican
difference on this question, and report it as the “scaled effect (party)” below the coefficient
estimate. As the coefficient is in terms of 100 years whereas our GSS sample period typically
8 Between

1978 and 2006, the average share of total income coming from government transfers for
the elderly was approximately 65%; as opposed to roughly 10% for the non-elderly. Similarly, over
the same period, the average share for African Americans was about 25%; as opposed to around
15% for whites. Authors’ calculations using CPS data.

8

spans 28 years (depending on the outcome question), the “scaled effect” listed in col. (1)
suggests that over this period, the elderly have differentially shifted their views on this question by roughly 29% of a standard deviation (0.28 · 1.023), or by an amount equal to roughly
fifty percent (1.846 · 0.28) of the partisan gap on this question (moving in the “Republican”
direction).
Col. (5) shows the parallel analysis for blacks. The coefficient of interest suggests that
over our 28-year sample period, relative to other groups, black support for redistribution
has moved 22% of a standard deviation or a distance equal to 37% (1.316 · 0.28) of the
Democrat-Republican gap on this question (again, in the Republican direction), consistent
with Figure 3(c).
In columns (2) and (6) we add household income controls. We use the GSS realinc
measure, converted to 2014 dollars, and adjust for household size as in Stevenson and Wolfers
(2013). We also have a separate control for the roughly ten percent of respondents who have
missing information for this variable. Below the coefficient estimates, we report the “share
explained” (merely one minus the coefficient of interest after we include controls divided by
the original coefficient). For both groups, controlling for household income has essentially
no effect on the coefficient of interest. For the elderly, the income controls “explain” roughly
four percent of the original effect. For blacks, including income controls actually increases
the magnitude of the group’s differential trend, though, again, in both cases the effect is
close to zero.
Especially for the elderly (many of whom are retired), actual income may be a noisy
proxy for economic well-being, and thus in cols. (3) and (7) we use education (fixed effects
for highest degree attained) as a proxy for permanent income. For the elderly (col. 3), this
control has some explanatory power, reducing the original coefficient by nearly 30% (though
the elderly differential trend remains negative and highly significant). In col. (7), controlling
for education once again increases (very slightly) the black differential trend.
The controls we have used so far are based on respondents’ assessments of absolute,
objective measures. In the final set of analyses in Table 1 we control for more subjective and
relative measures: where the respondent places her household in the U.S. income distribution
relative to the average household (fixed effects for far below, below, average, above and far
above) and which class she sees herself in (lower, working, middle or upper). For neither
group do these controls go far in explaining different trends. The controls serve to reduce
the elderly coefficient by less than 15% and the black coefficient by less than 10%.

9

We perform a number of robustness checks related to the results in Table 1. First,
we demonstrate that the elderly and black trends (cols 1 and 4) are robust to controlling for each other simultaneously as well as simultaneously controlling for f emale × year,
top income quintile × year, college × year (see Online Appendix Table A.1). As such, the
black and elderly trends appear to be separately identifiable phenomena and separate from
any other groups’ trend.
While we noted earlier that our preferred sample period excludes the Great Recession
years, in Online Appendix Table A.2 extend our sample period through 2012. While heterogeneity by age is greater over the longer time frame, the race gap shrinks substantially and
is no longer statistically significant when we include the period confounded by the Great
Recession, the first black president and the passage of the Affordable Care Act. However,
the limited ability of covariates to explain the basic trends holds true for both groups in this
extended period.
In Online Appendix Table A.3 we show that the results of cols 2-5 and 6-8 in Table 1 are
robust to interacting each of these economic controls with the main effect (elderly or black,
depending on the specification). These specifications allow the controls to have different
effects on redistributive preferences across our key groups. In fact, this flexibility tends to
have less explanatory power in terms of explaining the differential trends among blacks, and
thus the differential trends that remains tend to grow using this specification.
To maximize sample size, we create a separate category for observations with missing
household income values, but Online Appendix Table A.4 shows that our results hold if we
instead drop these observations. Finally, while we will use OLS for ease of interpretation, in
Online Appendix Table A.5 we show that our results are robust to using an ordered probit
model. In fact, the cut-points generated by the ordered probit model are very close to linear
(Online Appendix Figure A.1), suggesting OLS is a reasonable estimating model.
Besides probing the specifications and regression samples used in Table 1, in Table 2 we
also explored whether broader measures of well-being, economic or otherwise, might better
explain the differential trends of the elderly and blacks. For ease of comparison (and because
some questions are only asked in a subset of sample years) each odd numbered column provides the baseline elderly or black specification with no additional controls on the subsample
of observations with non-missing responses to the controls used in the even numbered column
that follows. In Cols. (2) and (8) the control is self-reported happiness, which fails to explain
the elderly trend at all, but does lead to a small (ten percent) reduction in the black dif-

10

ferential trend (though it remains highly significant), consistent with Stevenson and Wolfers
(2013) findings on black-white happiness convergence. Given the large life-expectancy gains
to the elderly (a topic to which we return briefly in Section 3) we control for self-assessed
health in cols. (4) and (10), which reduces the elderly and black coefficients by only eight
and two percent respectively.
Finally, in cols. (6) and (12) we explore the explanatory power of views on intergenerational mobility, which past authors have found reduces support for redistribution.9 Specifically, we control for whether the respondent thinks that her children’s standard of living
will be worse than her own and whether she feels that her standard of living is worse than
her parents (we drop childless respondents). Only the latter control significantly correlates
with redistributive preferences. The inclusion of both mobility variables serves to increase
our key coefficients slightly. While we do not have intragenerational questions in the GSS,
the ANES asks whether the respondent believes that she will be better off next year. That
variable’s inclusion does not change the black and elderly differential trends significantly
(results available upon request).10

2.2

Increased conservatism and cognitive dissonance

A second hypothesis that we explore is that the declines in redistributive support among the
elderly and blacks are part of a larger trend of increased conservatism amongst these groups.
Kelly and Enns (2010), find that increased income inequality is associated with increased
conservatism. To the extent that this effect was differentially large for blacks and the elderly,
these groups may have become relatively more conservative over time.
To explore the possibility of increasing conservatism more generally as a cause of increased conservatism in redistributive views, in Table 3 we examine the extent to which our
differential trends by age (race) are “explained” by controls for conservatism. We recognize,
however, that a significant correlation between redistributive attitudes and other attitudes
could result from redistributive views as either cause or effect. Scholars have demonstrated
the relevance of the theory of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957)—which posits a need
for internal consistency—to political views. (See for example Beasley and Joslyn, 2001, Mul9 See

Checchi et al. (1999) and Corneo and Grüner (2002) on the connection between intergenerational mobility and redistributive preferences.
10 The classic treatment of redistributive demand as a function of personal mobility is Hirschman
and Rothschild (1973). A more recent application with Russian data is Ravallion and Lokshin
(2000).

11

lainathan and Washington (2009) and Gerber et al. (2010).)
But in fact the results of Table 3 demonstrate that for neither blacks nor the elderly is
the decline in redistributive support explained by a general movement toward conservatism.
In column 1 (5) we repeat the basic uncontrolled age (race) specification for comparison.
In cols. (2) and (6) we control for party identification (a one to seven scale running from
strong Democrat through strong Republican). For both blacks and the elderly, controlling for
party identification makes the magnitude of the differential redistributive trend even larger
(15% so in the case of blacks). As these coefficient patterns suggest, despite their movement
away from redistribution, blacks and the elderly have become no more Republican (and in
fact blacks have become, relatively speaking, significantly more Democratic, as whites have
moved away from the party while blacks have remained loyal).
Cols. 3 and 7 show that, unlike party identification, controlling for political ideology (a
seven-point scale from extremely liberal through extremely conservative) does decrease the
coefficients of interest, but by a small amount (11% for the elderly and under 3% for blacks).
Finally, as Layman (1997) and others since have noted, religious attendance has become
increasingly linked with conservatism, so in cols. (4) and (8) we add a nine-point scale of
attendance (from never attend to more than weekly) as a control. As with political ideology,
the effect on the coefficients of interest is very limited, although this time with a larger
decrease for blacks (7%) than for the elderly (under 2%).
In a final test of the general conservatism hypothesis we explore how views on certain
political “hot-button” issues—abortion, homosexuality and gun control—serve to explain our
patterns. We relegate these results to Online Appendix Table A.6 because of loss of sample
size. Nonetheless, like the more global attitudinal measures, these single issues explain less
than 10 percent of our trends in redistributive views by age and race. We find no evidence
that the decline in redistributive support for either blacks or the elderly is part of a wider
trend toward ideological or cultural conservatism.

2.3

Discussion

In general, controls associated with common models of redistributive preferences have limited
power to explain why the elderly and African-Americans have moved against redistribution,
relative to other Americans. In the case of the elderly, we find some evidence that the standard
model of economic self-interest may hold, as controlling for education (potentially a better
proxy of permanent income for this largely retired population than current annual income)
12

reduces the differential elderly trend by 30%. For blacks, these standard controls enjoy even
less success in reducing the magnitude of the coefficient of interest.
In the final two sections of the paper, we move beyond standard redistributive theories
and instead explore whether historical or institutional factors specific to each of these groups
can provide clues to their declining support for redistribution.

3

Explanations specific to the elderly

3.1

Do unobserved changes to elderly wellbeing explain their trend?

While we are able to observe and control for economic and attitudinal shifts among the
elderly in our sample period, our controls perhaps imperfectly capture large, underlying
trends for this group. Life expectancy over our sample period has significantly increased,
and along with it the total years of retirement that individuals can expect to enjoy. Perhaps
as a reaction, there have been increasing calls in policy circles to raise the age of eligibility
for collecting government retirement benefits, which could affect the elderly’s redistributive
preferences.
In the United States, life expectancy for men (women) at age 65 increased from 13.2 (16.9)
years in 1970 to 17.8 (20.4) in 2011.11 And, indeed those 65 and over reporting good or very
good health between 1982 and 2011 grew from 65% to 75%.12 While we tried controlling for
health in our regression analysis, we may not be fully capturing these gains in wellbeing, nor
the effect of the corresponding policy pressure on retirement ages.
The parallel trends of increasing life expectancy at age 65 and the postponement of full
retirement benefits generally hold across OECD countries. In this section we ask, is the
relative decline in redistributive support among the elderly replicated in other developed
countries?

3.2

Comparing the elderly: international evidence

The General Social Survey and the ANES are relatively unusual in providing the ability
to examine several decades-long trends regarding redistributive preferences. Multi-country
surveys such as the World Values Survey or the European Social Survey have only been fielded
11 OECD

(2015), Life expectancy at 65 (indicator). doi: 10.1787/0e9a3f00-en (Accessed on 08
March 2015)
12 OECD Health Statistics (2015). doi: 10.1787/health-data-en (Accessed on 08 March 2015)

13

three or four times (and in the case of the latter, only once before the 2008 economic crisis)
and are thus of limited use for long-run trend analysis. To place our results for the American
elderly in a comparative context we performed a comprehensive search of the survey data
from 17 developed countries and found only three had similar data: the UK, Germany and
Sweden.13 In all three cases the available span of years was more limited. While more data
would have been ideal, these countries give us coverage from another Anglo-Saxon economy,
as well as continental Europe and Scandinavia.
The immutability of age and the fact that all our case countries have state-run pension
programs, allows us to examine elderly support for redistribution cross-nationally. Each
of these countries has exhibited similar gains in life expectancy conditional on reaching
the retirement age, and all but one (Sweden) have planned increases in their “pensionable
ages.”14 As such, if these broad trends were causing the decline in the American elderly’s
redistributive preferences, we should see similar evidence abroad. We discuss the three data
sources briefly before presenting the cross-national evidence.
3.2.1

United Kingdom Data

The British Social Attitudes (BSA) survey has been administered annually since 1983. Sampling aims to be representative of the British population and each year roughly 3,000 respondents are interviewed in their homes. Britain is an especially useful comparison to the
US given its historical connections but also because the country has seen a marked rise in
pre-tax income inequality (though somewhat smaller than the increase in the US) since the
1980s (Atkinson et al., 2011).
In roughly half of the years since 1983, the BSA has asked three questions related to
redistributive preferences. The first asks whether the government should “reduce income
differences.” Respondents indicate their agreement with the idea on a five-point scale. The
second asks about the gaps between high and low incomes (“too small” being coded as one,
while “too large” coded as three). Finally, related to the first question, a third question asks
whether “the government should redistribute income” and again gives respondents a fivepoint scale to indicate their agreement. We take the first as our focal question and relegate
analysis of the remaining questions to the Online Appendix.
13 We

detail our search, including surveys consulted and the wording and years of relevant questions, in Online Appendix B.
14 See “Trends in Pension Eligibility Ages and Life Expectancy, 1950-2050,” OECD publication.

14

3.2.2

German Data

The German General Social Survey has been fielded roughly every other year since 1980.15
Unfortunately, the German GSS redistributive questions are both less comparable to the
American GSS and asked less frequently than those in the BSA. The German GSS asks
individuals to place themselves on a four-point scale based on agreement with: “The state
must ensure that people can live on a decent income, even in illness, hardship, unemployment
and old age.” In another question, again using a four-point scale, individuals are asked to
react to the statement “Income should not be based solely on individual achievement. Instead,
everybody should have what they and their family need for a decent life” as well as “Only
when differences in income and in social standing are large enough, is there an incentive
for individual achievement.” Given that the first statement involves the role of government,
we take it as the one closest to the GSS “reduce income differences” question and therefore
define it as our focal question, again relegating analyses using the remaining questions to
the Online Appendix.
3.2.3

Swedish Data

The Swedish National Election Studies (SNES) Program was established in 1954 to study
public opinion and voting behavior. Since 1988, the SNES has asked respondents to indicate
their agreement (on a five point scale) with the statement: “Here are a number of proposals
that have appeared in the political debate. What is your opinion about...the proposal to:
Reduce income differences in society.”
3.2.4

International Evidence

We replicate our elderly graphs using the international data in Appendix Figures 1, 2 and
3. For each country, it is clear that the elderly are not differentially moving away from
redistribution, relative to the rest of the population. Additionally, we recognize that the
German reunification introduced composition issues, but in Online Appendix Figure A.6 we
find that the same general pattern holds when we restrict the sample to those living in the
territory of old Federal Republic (West Germany).
In Figure 5 we attempt to compare these trends in a more harmonized way across our
five datasets (our three datasets from European countries plus the ANES and GSS). We first
15 According

to the German Social Survey (ALLBUS) Program, prior to German reunification
the sample of respondents was drawn from West Germany and West Berlin.

15

standardize each of the questions by dividing by its standard deviation. We next regress,
separately for each dataset, these standardized variables on an elderly dummy, year fixed
effects and an elderly-specific trend (i.e., the col. 1 specification in Table 1). We then generate
lines defined by the elderly dummy and the elderly trend, so that for each year we give
the predicted difference in support for redistribution among the elderly relative to others,
separately by dataset. We only generate this line over the sample period of each dataset.
Figure 5 highlights how differently the elderly have evolved on redistribution in the US
relative to similar, wealthy countries. Each of the other countries show, if anything, that the
elderly are growing more supportive of redistribution relative to others (significantly so in
Germany and Sweden). For each of the U.S. datasets, the 95% confidence intervals do not
include any of the point-estimates generated by the European data.
Past work has found that relative to other developed countries, American social spending
is more tilted toward the elderly (see, e.g., Lynch, 2001 and Tepe and Vanhuysse, 2010). In
fact, these calculations typically exclude health spending, suggesting elderly-bias is understated in the US, as until very recently the elderly were one of the few groups guaranteed
government-subsidized health care in the US. The disproportionate gains to the American
elderly in terms of social spending over the past several decades may make them wary of extending redistributive programs. The next section explores this idea in the context of health
insurance.

3.3

Do views on government health insurance explain the elderly
trend?

As the previous section noted, the elderly in the US have many important similarities with
their counterparts in other OECD countries. However, the U.S. social insurance system
exhibits a key difference: Those 65 and over are the only immutable group universally guaranteed government provided health insurance (i.e., not means-tested or dependent on documented disability status), whereas in other OECD countries that benefit does not depend
on age.
Extending that protection to the rest of the population has been a key policy goal for
the American left for decades. Indeed, the last two Democratic presidents made passing
universal health insurance their first major policy goal upon taking office, though only the
current president, Barack Obama, can be said to have succeeded in that realm. In fact, views
about whether “it is the government’s responsibility to pay for doctor’s and hospital bills”
16

predict both Democratic party identification and self-identification as “liberal” as strongly
as do views on redistribution.16
In this section we explore the idea that seniors, a group unique in having guaranteed
health insurance, may increasingly feel that expansions of redistributive programs could
come at their expense. This is a view supported somewhat by the academic literature, most
recently McInerney et al. (2015), who find a reduction in spending on Medicare patients
following state Medicaid expansions. However, like prior work on the topic, the authors find
no evidence of reductions in health access or outcomes. Well placed or not, as we mentioned
previously, past work has shown that the fear of Medicare cuts triggers seniors’ political
activism (Campbell (2003)).17
In this section we ask two questions: have seniors become increasingly opposed to government health insurance over our sample period and, if so, can this increased opposition
explain their general decline in redistributive sentiment?
3.3.1

Seniors’ views on government health insurance

Both the GSS and the ANES ask respondents about their views on government health
insurance. We focus on the GSS as this question is asked more often, though demonstrate
robustness with the ANES. Figure 6(a) shows the evolution over our sample period of views
on whether the government has the responsibility to pay for medical bills, separately for
seniors and other adults. Seniors show a significant decline in their support on this question,
moving (in the Republican direction) about one-third the partisan gap. In contrast, other
adults have become significantly more favorable toward the idea that government bears some
responsibility for covering medical costs.
One might ask how, by the end of our sample period, seniors can be less supportive
of the idea that government cover medical bills given that they, uniquely, are categorically
entitled to this coverage. Mettler (2010) analyzes a 2008 survey, finding that 40% of Medicare
recipients answer that “they do not use a government social program,” suggesting a lower
bound of 40% of Medicare recipients who do not consider Medicare a government social
program. Most Medicare recipients pay a premium (that covers 25% of Part B costs), perhaps
leading them to think they cover the actuarial cost of the program. Finally, an increasing
share of Medicare beneficiaries join private Medicare Advantage health plans (fully financed
16 Authors’

calculations using the GSS.
idea was certainly emphasized by media outlets that broadcasted video of irate seniors
with “Get your hands off my Medicare” signs at town hall meetings during the ACA debates.
17 This

17

by capitation payments paid by the federal government), perhaps further weakening the
program’s association with government.
3.3.2

Views on government health insurance and redistribution

In Table 4, we explore whether respondents’ views on government’s role in covering medical
bills explains the divergent trends of the elderly and African-Americans on redistribution.
The first two columns of the table focus on the elderly results, with col. (1) replicating the
baseline results with no additional controls, but including only the subsample that answers
the government health insurance question. Col. (2) adds the control for views on government
covering medical bills. Not surprisingly, views on health insurance strongly predict views on
redistribution: moving one unit on this 1-5 question (so, from support to strongly support
the idea that government should cover medical bills) increases support for redistribution by
0.50 points (or 40% of the partisan gap on redistribution).
More relevant for our analysis, controlling for this variable has a meaningful effect on the
differential elderly trend over redistributive preferences. The coefficient is reduced by 40%,
though remains significant at the ten percent level and given the size of the standard errors,
statistically indistinguishable from the original coefficient. This result is robust to controlling
more flexibly for view on health insurance (allowing it to enter as a fixed effect for each level
of support, instead of continuously, and interacting it with the elderly indicator). Results are
available upon request.
Given how many potential stories we have tested in the GSS and found had little explanatory power, we worry that random chance might suggest that one story might show
statistical significance even if it had no true explanatory power. To somewhat assuage these
concerns, we replicate these patterns of results in the ANES. Most years since the 1970s, the
ANES has fielded the following question: “Some people feel there should be a government
insurance plan which would cover all medical and hospital expenses for everyone...Others feel
that medical expenses should be paid by individuals, and through private insurance plans.
Where do you place yourself on this scale?” We flip the variable so that it is increasing in
support for government health insurance.
Figure 6(b) shows how elderly versus other adult respondents have evolved on this question. As with the GSS, the elderly started the sample period more supportive than other
adults, but have substantially moved against the idea, so that by the end of the sample period
they are well below the rest of adults in their support. As in the GSS, non-elderly adults have

18

become more supportive of the idea of government insurance. When we replicate the Table
4 analysis using ANES data, we find that attitudes toward government insurance explain
a larger share —nearly 60%—of the differential elderly trend on redistributive preferences,
rendering the coefficient of interest insignificant. Results are available upon request.
A final point to discuss about both the GSS and ANES regression results is that the effect
of controlling for views on health insurance is more muted for the regressions comparing
black and non-black redistributive trends. Blacks have slightly reduced their support for
government insurance relative to others, but the differential trend is small and insignificant,
supporting the idea that growing reservations about government health insurance is a trend
unique to the elderly during this period.

4

Blacks and fairness

There is a large literature linking redistributive preferences to perceptions of fairness (see
for example Alesina and Angeletos, 2005 and Durante et al., 2013). Those who believe the
distribution of income is fair are less likely to support government redistribution. Blacks fit
this model. Although we have shown their support is declining, the level of black support
for income redistribution remains higher than that of whites. Blacks are also on average
less likely than whites to say that economic rewards are fairly earned, a belief that is not
surprising given a legacy of slavery and segregation.
There are reasons to believe, however, that black views about fairness may be changing.
Although the black-white earnings gap is remarkably persistent,18 Stevenson and Wolfers
(2013) document in the GSS a decline in the black-white happiness gap, a finding the authors
attribute to social gains in the arena of civil rights. In this section we ask two questions.
First, do blacks believe that economic rewards are becoming more fairly distributed And
if so, does this changing view “explain,” in a regression sense, their decreased support for
redistribution?
We measure respondents’ sense of fairness using three questions across two surveys. Our
first question, drawn from the GSS, asks “Some people say that people get ahead by their
own hard work; others say that lucky breaks or help from other people are more important.
Which do you think is most important?” Valid answers are 1) hard work 2) equally important
18 See

Altonji and Blank (1999) on the stalling of the black-white wage convergence. In the most
recent decade, the black-white gap has in fact grown (see www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p60245.pdf).

19

and 3) luck. We refer to this as our “luck” question. In Figure 7 we graph responses by race.
Two things are notable. First, as expected blacks are on average more likely than whites
to say luck is more important than hard work. But second, the back-white gap has closed
significantly—by a full partisan unit—over our sample period.
We next complement the fairness measure by examining views on aid targeted specifically to blacks. Is an increasing sense of fairness coupled with a view that race specific
aid is less desirable? Both the GSS and the ANES have questions on this issue. The GSS
asks, “Some people think that (Blacks/Negroes/African-Americans) have been discriminated
against for so long that the government has a special obligation to help improve their living standards. Others believe that the government should not be giving special treatment
to (Blacks/Negroes/African-Americans). Where would you place yourself on this scale, or
haven’t you made up your mind on this?” Respondents are offered a scale from government
should help blacks (1) through no special treatment (5). ANES asks, “Some people feel that
the government in Washington should make every possible effort to improve the social and
economic position of blacks and other minority groups. (Suppose these people are at one end
of a scale, at point 1. Others feel that the government should not make any special effort to
help blacks because they should help themselves. Suppose these people are at the other end,
at point 7. And, of course, some other people have opinions somewhere in between, at points
2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. Where would you place yourself on this scale, or haven’t you thought much
about it?” We reorient both measures so that they are increasing in support for race-based
aid. We refer to these questions as our GSS and ANES “black aid” questions.
As shown in Figure 8 responses to the ANES and GSS questions show similar patterns.
In both cases, blacks are, unsurprisingly, more likely than whites to support government aid
targeted to blacks. But what is remarkable is that the views by race are converging, as over
time blacks have become less supportive of special treatment for blacks by the government.
And like the movement on the luck measure, the trend for blacks on government aid to blacks
is quite steep. The scaled drop in support is over three-quarters of full party distance in the
GSS and more than 1.5 times that distance in the ANES. Blacks view the economic system
as becoming increasingly fair and are decreasingly supportive of government targeted aid
based on race.
Does this changing sense of fairness “explain” blacks’ decreased support for redistribution? We examine this question in Table 5. In columns 1 and 2 (5 and 6 for the patterns by
age) we limit focus to the sample for which we have non-missing responses to the “luck” ques-

20

tion. We find like previous literature that a belief that luck determines outcomes positively
predicts support for redistribution. Nonetheless, controlling for this belief only accounts for
two percent of the black-white redistribution trend gap. (The luck control explains none
of the elderly pattern.) In the remaining columns of the table we restrict attention to the
sample for which we have non-missing responses to the “black aid” question. Support for
“black aid” predicts support for redistribution. And controlling for “black aid” explains 45%
of the decline in black support for redistribution. But this “explanation” is not unique to
blacks. The control explains over 20% of the decline in elderly support.
Thus although we have “explained” in a regression sense nearly half of the black trend
in redistribution, we recognize that this “explanation” creates new puzzles: Why, in the face
of stalled economic catch up, are blacks decreasingly supportive of racially targeted aid?

5

Conclusion

Americans have had a puzzling reaction to rising economic inequality. Across a 30-40 year
period of increasing inequality, survey respondents have failed to increase their support for
redistribution. While we do not claim to have resolved the mystery, we have tried to offer a
number of clues.
First, we demonstrated that the overall flat trend in support for redistribution, masks considerable and surprising heterogeneity. Blacks and the elderly, two groups who are relatively
more reliant on government assistance, have significantly decreased support for redistribution
over the sample period relative to other Americans.
Second, we probed various hypotheses as to why redistributive support has trended downward amongst these populations. We do not find evidence consistent with more common
models of redistribution. Measures of economic and more general well-being fail to explain
(in a regression sense) either trend, with the exception of the education control (perhaps
a proxy for permanent income in a retired population) which explains about a 30% of the
elderly trend. Nor do we find evidence that these trends reflect a wider movement towards
conservatism amongst these groups. In fact, blacks have identified increasingly as Democrats
over the period.
Third, we moved beyond the more basic models to generate and test hypotheses unique
to each group. In the case of the elderly, we can rule out that the trend is driven by something
particular to the modern aging process, as we do not see a similar pattern in OECD countries
with comparable data. Instead, we hypothesize that the trend derives from a uniquely Amer21

ican concern. The elderly in the US are the only immutable group entitled to government
health insurance. Thus we ask in this period in which universal health care has moved in
and out of policy discussions, whether seniors, perhaps concerned about the crowd out of
funding for their own care, have grown increasingly unsupportive of extending guaranteed
government health care. We find not only a trend of decreasing support for universal care,
but that this variable “explains” 40% of the elderly’s decreased support for redistribution.
For blacks, we offer not as much of a hypothesis, but the identification of a concurrent trend. We find that blacks, while more likely than whites to support racially-targeted
government aid, are converging toward the opinion of whites. (Concurrently and perhaps
relatedly, blacks are increasingly likely to say that economic outcomes can be attributed to
hard work over luck.) We find this decrease in support for race-based aid “explains” nearly
45% of blacks’ decreased support for redistribution, a finding that deepens the puzzle: Why
is support for race-targeted aid decreasing during a period in which the black-white wage
gap has stagnated?
Finally, while we have framed the question for the most part as “why have blacks moved
against redistribution” an equally legitimate framing is “why have whites not moved against
redistribution.” A possibility is that whites turned against redistribution during the Civil
Rights movement, when blacks became more able to enjoy the benefits of full citizenship and
government safety-net benefits. To the extent that whites’ reaction to this one-time shock
was either an over-reaction (and thus led to some regression to the mean) or a drop in support
to an extreme negative value (and thus floor effects prevent a further negative trend) then
mechanically whites may be unable to move further against redistribution. Unfortunately, it
is difficult to piece together a consistent time series on redistributive preferences from both
before and after the Civil Rights movement. However Kuziemko and Washington (2015)
show that among whites declines in Democratic party identification (a potential proxy for
redistributive preferences) after 1963 are highly correlated with conservative racial views,
especially in the South.19
We present these ideas not as firm conclusions but as hopefully useful starting points for
researchers who may confirm or challenge these ideas as they seek to explain the trend of
19 We

thank our discussant Peter Enns for this fascinating hypothesis. It picks up on an idea in
Lee and Roemer (2006) that before the Democratic Party’s 1960s Civil Rights initiatives, “it was
possible, in the South, to vote both ‘redistributive’ and ‘racist’ simultaneously. Afterwards it was
not—and the Southern white vote gradually moved from the Democratic to Republican parties.
Thus, ironically, the Civil Rights Movement may have decreased the degree of redistribution in the
United States.”

redistributive views in the United States during this period of rising inequality.

23

REFERENCES
(). GESIS Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, German General Social Survey (ALLBUS) Cumulation 1980-2012 [computer file]. Cologne, Germany: GESIS Data Archive
[distributor]. Accessed: September 2014.
(). Social and community planning research, British Social Attitudes Survey, 1983-2013 [computer file]. Colchester, Essex: UK Data archive [distributor]. Accessed: September 2014.
Alesina, A. and Angeletos, G.-M. (2005). Fairness and redistribution. American Economic Review, pp. 960–980.
Altonji, J. G. and Blank, R. M. (1999). Race and gender in the labor market. Handbook
of labor economics, 3, 3143–3259.
Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2011). Top incomes in the long run of
history. Journal of Economic Literature, 49 (1), 3–71.
Autor, D. H. (2014). Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the other
99 percent. Science, 344 (6186), 843–851.
Beasley, R. K. and Joslyn, M. R. (2001). Cognitive dissonance and post-decision attitude change in six presidential elections. Political Psychology, 22 (3), 521–540.
Benabou, R. and Ok, E. (2001). Social mobility and the demand for redistribution: The
POUM hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2), 447–487.
Campbell, A. L. (2003). Participatory reactions to policy threats: Senior citizens and the
defense of social security and medicare. Political Behavior, 25 (1), 29–49.
Checchi, D., Ichino, A. and Rustichini, A. (1999). More equal but less mobile?: Education financing and intergenerational mobility in italy and in the us. Journal of public
economics, 74 (3), 351–393.
Corneo, G. and Grüner, H. P. (2002). Individual preferences for political redistribution.
Journal of public Economics, 83 (1), 83–107.
Durante, R., Putterman, L. and Van der Weele, J. J. (2013). Preferences for redistribution and perception of fairness: An experimental study. Forthcoming, Journal of the
European Economic Association.
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Row, Peterson & Co.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A. and Washington, E. (2010). Party affiliation, partisanship, and political beliefs: A field experiment. American Political Science Review, 104 (04),
720–744.
Hirschman, A. O. and Rothschild, M. (1973). The changing tolerance for income inequality in the course of economic development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.
544–566.
24

Kelly, N. and Enns, P. (2010). Inequality and the dynamics of public opinion: The selfreinforcing link between economic inequality and mass preferences. American Journal of
Political Science.
Kenworthy, L. and McCall, L. (2008). Inequality, public opinion and redistribution.
Socio-Economic Review, 6 (1), 35.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E. and Stantcheva, S. (2013). How Elastic Are
Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments. Working
Paper 18865, National Bureau of Economic Research.
— and Washington, E. (2015). Why did the Democrats lose the South? Bringing new
data to an old Debate, mimeo, Princeton.
Layman, G. C. (1997). Religion and political behavior in the united states: The impact
of beliefs, affiliations, and commitment from 1980 to 1994. Public Opinion Quarterly, pp.
288–316.
Lee, W. and Roemer, J. E. (2006). Racism and redistribution in the United States: A
solution to the problem of American exceptionalism. Journal of Public Economics, 90 (6),
1027–1052.
Lynch, J. (2001). The age-orientation of social policy regimes in oecd countries. Journal of
Social Policy, 30 (03), 411–436.
McInerney, M., Mellor, J. and Sabik, L. (2015). The effects of state medicaid expansions for working-age adults on senior medicare beneficiaries’ healthcare spending,
unpublished working paper.
Meltzer, A. and Richard, S. (1981). A rational theory of the size of government. The
Journal of Political Economy, 89 (5), 914–927.
Mettler, S. (2010). Reconstituting the submerged state: The challenges of social policy
reform in the obama era. Perspectives on Politics, 8 (03), 803–824.
Mullainathan, S. and Washington, E. (2009). Sticking with your vote: Cognitive dissonance and political attitudes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (1),
86–111.
Oscarsson, H. (). Swedish national election study, 1956-2006 [computer file]. gothenburg,
sweden: Swedish national data service [distributor]. Accessed: December 2014.
Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2003). Income inequality in the united states, 1913–1998. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (1), 1–41.
Ravallion, M. and Lokshin, M. (2000). Who wants to redistribute?: The tunnel effect
in 1990s russia. Journal of public Economics, 76 (1), 87–104.
Stevenson, B. and Wolfers, J. (2013). Subjective and objective indicators of racial
progress. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
25

Tepe, M. and Vanhuysse, P. (2010). Elderly bias, new social risks and social spending:
change and timing in eight programmes across four worlds of welfare, 1980-2003. Journal
of European Social Policy, 20 (3), 217–234.

26

Figure 1: Income share of the top one percent

Notes: Taken from http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2012prel.xls

27

Figure 2: Trends in redistributive support
(a) Gov’t sd. reduce inc. differences (1–7)

(b) Gov’t sd. help poor (1–5)

(c) Gov’t sd. do more (1–5)

(d) Gov’t sd. ensure work, st. living (1–7)

Notes: Figures depict measures of redistributive preferences: a) The eqwlth variable from the GSS
which since 1978 asks whether the government should reduce income difference; b) The helppoor
variable (GSS) which since 1975 asks whether the government should improve the standard of
living of the poor; c) The helpnot variable (GSS) which since 1975 asks whether the government is
trying to do too many things and d) The VCF0809 variable from the ANES, 1972-2008, which
asks whether the government should ensure that each person has a job and a good standard of
living. The shorter lines (graphs a-c) depict trends through 2006 only; the longer line through
2012. Variables are reoriented (if necessary) so that scales are increasing in support for
redistribution. The left-hand axes show “native units” of each variable. The right-hand axes plot
a linear transformation of each variable in which it is demeaned and divided by the partisan gap,
where partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and the average Republican
answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axes represents the view of the average
respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal to moving (in the
Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the average Republican.
Slopes and standard errors of shorter lines indicated in standardized units.

28

Figure 3: Trends in redistributive support, by age and race
(a) Gov’t sd. reduce income diffs. (GSS)

(b) Gov’t sd. ensure work, st. living (ANES)

(c) Gov’t sd. reduce income diffs. (GSS)

(d) Gov’t sd. ensure work, st. living (ANES)

Notes: Figures depict by age and race, measures of redistributive preferences: a) and c) The
eqwlth variable from the GSS which since 1978 asks whether the government should reduce
income difference; and b and d) The VCF0809 variable(1972-2008) from the ANES which asks
whether the government should ensure that each person has a job and a good standard of living.
The shorter lines (graphs a and c) depict trends through 2006 only; the longer lines through 2012.
Variables are reoriented (if necessary) so that scales are increasing in support for redistribution.
The left-hand axes show “native units” of each variable. The right-hand axes plot a linear
transformation each variable in which it is demeaned and divided by the partisan gap, where
partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and the average Republican
answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axes represents the view of the average
respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal to moving (in the
Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the average Republican.
Slopes and standard errors of shorter lines indicated in standardized units

29

Figure 4: Trends in redistributive support, by gender
(a) Gov’t sd. reduce income diffs. (GSS)

(b) Gov’t sd. guarantee work, st. living (ANES)

Notes: Figures depict, by gender, a) responses to the eqwlth variable from the GSS which since
1978 asks whether the government should reduce income difference and b) he VCF0809
variable(1972-2008) from the ANES which asks whether the government should ensure that each
person has a job and a good standard of living. The shorter line (graph a) depicts trend through
2006 only; the longer line through 2012. Variables are reoriented so that scales are increasing in
support for redistribution. The left-hand axes show “native units” of each variable. The
right-hand axes plot a linear transformation each variable in which it is demeaned and divided by
the partisan gap, where partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and the
average Republican answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axes represents the
view of the average respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal
to moving (in the Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the
average Republican. Slopes and standard errors of shorter lines indicated in standardized units.

30

Figure 5: Relative elderly trend on redistributive issues, by country

Notes: Figure depicts the difference in the standardized trends in redistributive support between
the elderly and nonelderly (elderly minus non-elderly) as measured in each national survey: For
the UK, whether the government should reduce income differences (incdiff variable in the British
Social Attitudes Survey, 1985–2004); for Germany, whether the state should ensure people a decent
income (V183 variable in the German General Social Survey, 1984–2004); for Sweden, whether the
government should reduce income differences (v121, v130, v131, v142, v153 and v406 variables
in the Swedish National Election Studies Program, 1988–2006); for the US (GSS), whether the
government should reduce income differences (eqwlth variable, 1978–2006); for the US (ANES),
whether the government should ensure that each person has a job and a good standard of living
(VCF0809 variable, 1972–2008). The dependent variable in each dataset is reoriented so that scales
are increasing in support for redistribution and is divided by its standard deviation. Slopes and
standard errors indicated in standardized units.

31

Figure 6: Trends in support for government health insurance, by age
(a) Gov’t sd. cover medical bills, GSS

(b) Gov’t sd. provide health ins. for all, ANES

Notes: Figures depict responses to the help sick variable from the GSS which asks since 1974
whether the government has the responsibility to pay for medical bills and to the VCF0806
variable from the ANES, 1972-2008, which asks whether there should be government provided
health insurance for all. The shorter line (graph a) depicts trends through 2006; the longer line
through 2012. Variables are reoriented (if necessary) so that scales are increasing in support for
public health care. The left-hand axes show “native units” of each variable. The right-hand axes
plot a linear transformation of each variable in which it is demeaned and divided by the partisan
gap, where partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and the average
Republican answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axes represents the view of
the average respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal to
moving (in the Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the average
Republican.

32

Figure 7: Luck and help key to success, by race (GSS)

Notes: The graph uses the getahead variable from the GSS. The shorter line depicts the trend line
through 2006 only; the longer line through 2012. The left-hand axis uses the “native units” of the
GSS variable. The right-hand side plots a linear transformation of that variable: it is demeaned and
divided by the partisan gap, where partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and
the average Republican answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axis represents the
view of the average respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal to
moving (in the Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the average
Republican.

33

Figure 8: Trends in support for government aid to blacks, by race
(a) Gov’t sd. treat blacks specially, GSS

(b) Gov’t sd. help blacks, ANES

Notes: Figures depict responses to a) helpblk variable from the GSS and the b) the VCF0830
variable (ANES, 1972-2008). The shorter line (graph a) depicts through 2006 only; the longer line
through 2012. Variables are reoriented (if necessary) so that scales are increasing in support for
government aid to blacks. The left-hand axes show “native units” of each variable. The right-hand
axes plot a linear transformation each variable in which it is demeaned and divided by the
partisan gap, where partisan gap is the difference between the average Democrat and the average
Republican answering that question. Therefore, 0 on the right-hand axes represents the view of
the average respondent during the sample period, and a one-unit positive change is equal to
moving (in the Democratic direction) the distance between the average Democrat and the average
Republican.

34

Table 1: Do income measures explain redistribution trends?
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-1.995∗∗∗ -1.924∗∗∗ -1.403∗∗∗ -1.720∗∗∗
[0.401] [0.388] [0.381] [0.394]
-1.423∗∗∗ -1.431∗∗∗ -1.491∗∗∗ -1.307∗∗∗
[0.414] [0.446]
[0.458] [0.423]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100

Mean, dept. var.
4.251
4.252
4.251
4.251
4.252
4.254
4.252
4.252
Scaled effect (SD)
-1.023
-0.987
-0.720
-0.882
-0.730
-0.734
-0.765
-0.670
Scaled effect (party) -1.846
-1.781
-1.298
-1.591
-1.316
-1.323
-1.378
-1.208
Income covar?
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Educ. covars?
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Relative covars?
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Share explained
.0352112 .2965051 .1379481
-.0056065 -.0475128 .0819684
Observations
24388
24260
24388
24388
24463
24331
24463
24463
All regressions run using GSS data and contain year fixed effects, cluster standard errors by year,
and use provided survey weights. Col. (1) and (5) contain no additional controls except an elderly
(black) indicator variable. Col. (2) and (6) contain the income measure (realinc) adjusted for
household size (we follow the OECD and give each additional adult beyond the head a weight of
0.5 and each child a weight of 0.3) and inflation and coding missing values to zero, as well as an
indicator variable for having a missing value for this variable. We lose some observations due to
missing household-size inputs. Cols. (3) and (7) include fixed effects for highest degree attained
(‘missing’ is its own category). Cols. (4) and (8) contain fixed effects for the five possible answers
to where you see yourself in the U.S income distribution and the four possible answers for your
self-assessed social class (‘missing’ is its own category). Section 2.1 provides additional detail.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

35

Table 2: Do broader measures of well-being explain redistribution trends?
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-1.969∗∗∗ -1.990∗∗∗ -2.103∗∗∗ -1.943∗∗∗ -1.090
[0.396]
[0.382]
[0.344] [0.349] [1.239]

(6)

Health (1-4)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.129
[1.246]
-1.410∗∗∗ -1.270∗∗ -2.164∗∗∗ -2.123∗∗∗ -3.124∗
[0.438] [0.454] [0.335] [0.359] [1.489]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Happiness (1-3)

(7)

-0.366∗∗∗
[0.0196]

-3.180∗
[1.460]

-0.320∗∗∗
[0.0205]
-0.295∗∗∗
[0.0211]

-0.253∗∗∗
[0.0191]

36

Kids will do worse

-0.0476
[0.0247]

-0.0207
[0.0238]

Doing worse than
parents

0.0851∗∗∗
[0.0153]

0.0918∗∗∗
[0.0151]

Mean, dept. var.
4.252
4.252
4.212
4.212 4.159
4.159
4.254
4.254
4.214
4.214
Scaled effect (SD)
-1.011
-1.022
-1.078
-0.996 -0.562 -0.582
-0.724
-0.652
-1.109
-1.088
Scaled effect (party) -1.822
-1.841
-1.922
-1.776 -0.901 -0.933
-1.304
-1.174
-1.976
-1.938
Share explained
-.0102991
.0763383
-.0357122
.0995062
.0190701
Observations
24159
24159
14458
14458
9077
9077
24227
24227
14499
14499
All regressions run using GSS and contain year fixed effects, cluster standard errors by year, and use provided survey
columns contain no additional controls except an elderly (black) indicator variable. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

4.160
-1.609
-2.584

4.160
-1.638
-2.631
-.0179786
9096
9096
weights. Odd

Table 3: Does general conservatism explain redistribution trends?
Reduce income differences (1-7)
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

Lib to cons (1-7)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-2.071∗∗∗ -2.181∗∗∗ -1.851∗∗∗ -2.034∗∗∗
[0.393] [0.427] [0.354] [0.398]
-1.500∗∗∗ -1.720∗∗∗ -1.462∗∗∗ -1.391∗∗∗
[0.453] [0.434] [0.498] [0.451]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Identify Republ. (1-7)

(5)

-0.265∗∗∗
[0.00904]

-0.241∗∗∗
[0.00995]
-0.306∗∗∗
[0.0114]

-0.290∗∗∗
[0.0127]
-0.0264∗∗∗
[0.00512]

Relig. attendence
(1-9)

-0.0372∗∗∗
[0.00593]

Mean, dept. var.
4.231
4.231
4.231
4.231
4.232
4.232
4.232
4.232
Scaled effect (SD)
-1.069
-1.126
-0.956
-1.050
-0.774
-0.888
-0.754
-0.718
Scaled effect (party) -1.936
-2.039
-1.731
-1.902
-1.402
-1.608
-1.366
-1.301
Share explained
-.0534258 .1058472 .0176777
-.1466506 .0254986 .0724976
Observations
22119
22119
22119
22119
22172
22172
22172
22172
All regressions run using GSS and contain year fixed effects, cluster standard errors by year, and
use provided survey weights. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

37

Table 4: Do views on public health insurance explain redistributive trends?
Reduce inc. diffs

Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(1)

(2)

-1.599∗∗∗
[0.534]

-0.971∗
[0.465]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100

(3)

(4)

-1.279∗∗
[0.444]

-1.090∗
[0.555]

0.504∗∗∗
[0.0223]

Gov’t medical care

0.479∗∗∗
[0.0221]

Mean, dept. var.
4.261
4.261
4.263
4.263
Scaled effect (SD)
-0.821
-0.499
-0.657
-0.559
Scaled effect (party)
-1.436
-0.872
-1.148
-0.978
Share explained
–
.3924316
–
.1482657
Observations
21710
21710
21773
21773
All regressions run using GSS and contain year fixed effects, cluster standard errors by year, and
use provided survey weights. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 5: Do views on income merit and aid to blacks explain redistributive trends?
Reduce inc. diffs
(1)
Black x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-1.626∗∗ -1.587∗∗ -1.228∗∗ -0.677
[0.561] [0.563] [0.477] [0.547]
-2.186∗∗∗ -2.207∗∗∗ -1.492∗∗ -1.148∗
[0.322] [0.328] [0.511] [0.558]

Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100
Success mostly luck

(5)

0.0933∗∗
[0.0323]

0.104∗∗∗
[0.0325]
0.315∗∗∗
[0.0260]

Gov’t should help
blacks v. no spec. treat.

0.360∗∗∗
[0.0228]

Mean, dept. var.
4.233
4.233
4.253
4.253
4.231
4.231
4.252
4.252
Scaled effect (SD)
-0.833 -0.813 -0.630 -0.347
-1.120
-1.132
-0.765 -0.589
Scaled effect (party)
-1.482 -1.446 -1.104 -0.609
-1.995
-2.015
-1.343 -1.034
Share explained
–
.0243181
–
.4489072
–
-.0099724
–
.2304056
Observations
12559 12559 21637 21637
12522
12522
21574 21574
All regressions run using GSS and contain year fixed effects, cluster standard errors by year, and
use provided survey weights. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

38

Appendix
Appendix Figure 1: Agreement that government should reduce income differences, elderly
versus others, British Social Attitudes survey

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1985 in the British Social Attitudes (BSA) on whether
the government should reduce income differences. The graph uses the incdiff variable from the
BSA (though subtracts it from six so that it is increasing in support for government activism). The
shorter line depicts the trend line from 1985 to 2004 only.

39

Appendix Figure 2: Agreement that state should ensure decent income, elderly versus others,
German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1984 in the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)
on whether the state should ensure people a decent income. The graph uses the V183 variable
from the ALLBUS (though subtracts it from five so that it is increasing in support for government
activism). The shorter line depicts the trend line from 1984 to 2004 only.

40

Appendix Figure 3: Agreement with proposal to reduce income differences in society, elderly
versus others, Swedish National Election Studies (SNES) Program

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1988 in the Swedish National Election Studies (SNES)
Program on whether the government should reduce income differences. The graph uses the v121,
v130, v131, v142, v153 and v406 variables from the SNES in the years presented above, respectively
(though subtracts it from six so that it is increasing in support for government activism).

41

Online Appendix A.

Supplementary figures and tables noted in
the text

Online Appendix Figure A.1: The six “cut points” generated from ordered probit estimate
in Online Appendix Table A.5 col. (1)

Notes: There are seven categories for the main “redistribution” outcome variable, generating six
ordered probit “cut-points” (with −∞ and +∞ serving as endpoints). The generated cut-points
are graphed on the y-axis.

42

Redistributive views by age in other countries (additional outcomes
not shown in main draft)
Online Appendix Figure A.2: View regarding gap between high and low incomes, elderly
versus others, British Social Attitudes survey

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1983 in the British Social Attitudes (BSA) on the gap
between high and low incomes. The graph uses the incomgap variable from the BSA (though
subtracts it from four so that it is increasing in the size of the perceived gap). The shorter line
depicts the trend line from 1985 to 2004 only.

43

Online Appendix Figure A.3: Agreement that government should redistribute income, elderly
versus others, British Social Attitudes survey

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1985 in the British Social Attitudes (BSA) on the support
for government redistribution of income. The graph uses the redistrb variable from the BSA (though
subtracts it from six so that it is increasing in support for government activism). The shorter line
depicts the trend line from 1985 to 2004 only.

44

Online Appendix Figure A.4: Agreement that income should not be based solely on individual
achievement, everybody should have what they need for a decent life, elderly versus others,
German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1984 in the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS) on
the link between income and individual achievement. The graph uses the V205 variable from the
ALLBUS (though subtracts it from five so that it is increasing in support for government activism).
The shorter line depicts the trend line from 1984 to 2004 only.

45

Online Appendix Figure A.5: Disagreement that differences in income are needed as incentive
for individual achievement, elderly versus others, German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1984 in the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)
on whether income differences are needed as an incentive for individual achievement. The graph
uses the V206 variable from the ALLBUS (though subtracts it from five so that it is increasing in
disagreement with the statement). The shorter line depicts the trend line from 1984 to 2004 only.

46

Online Appendix Figure A.6: Agreement that state should ensure decent income, German
General Social Survey (ALLBUS), excluding East German residents

Notes: This figure depicts responses since 1984 in the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)
on whether income differences are needed as an incentive for individual achievement. Respondents
included in the figure reside in the territory of the old Federal Republic (including West Berlin) at
the time of the interview (V5 = 1). The graph uses the V206 variable from the ALLBUS (though
subtracts it from five so that it is increasing in disagreement with the statement). The shorter line
depicts the trend line from 1984 to 2004 only.

47

Robustness of results in Table 1 (GSS)
Online Appendix Table A.1: Main black and elderly results, allowing effects of control variables to vary linearly with time
Reduce inc. diffs
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100
Black x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

-1.995∗∗∗
[0.401]
-1.423∗∗∗
[0.414]

(3)

(4)

-1.910∗∗∗
[0.386]

-1.571∗∗∗
[0.507]

-1.439∗∗∗
[0.428]

-1.827∗∗∗
[0.590]

College x
(Year-1975)/100

1.044∗
[0.499]

Top inc. quintile x
(Year-1975)/100

0.581
[0.455]

Female x
(Year-1975)/100

-0.0234
[0.362]

Mean, dept. var.
4.251
4.252
4.251
4.256
Observations
24388
24463
24388
21875
Notes: Year fixed effects are included in all regressions. The main effects of any interaction
variable are included in the regression but are not reported. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

48

Online Appendix Table A.2: Do income measures explain redistribution trends? (Extending
sample through 2012)
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.668
[0.589]

-0.800
[0.525]

-0.682
[0.590]

-0.530
[0.605]

-2.138∗∗∗ -1.971∗∗∗ -1.490∗∗∗ -1.829∗∗∗
[0.318] [0.329] [0.315] [0.355]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Mean, dept. var.
Scaled effect (SD)
Scaled effect (party)
Income covar?
Educ. covars?
Relative covars?
Share explained
Observations
See notes for Table 1.

4.253
-1.090
-1.845
No
No
No

4.254
4.253
4.253
-1.005
-0.760
-0.933
-1.705
-1.286
-1.578
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
.0779946 .3029018 .1445914
28310
28144
28310
28310
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

49

4.254
-0.340
-0.576
No
No
No

4.256
4.254
4.254
-0.408
-0.348
-0.270
-0.691
-0.588
-0.458
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-.1981527 -.0215247 .2053602
28395 28223
28395
28395

Online Appendix Table A.3: Do income measures explain redistribution trends? (Additional
interactions)
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Elderly x
-1.995∗∗∗ -2.034∗∗∗ -1.452∗∗∗ -1.791∗∗∗
(Year-1975)/100 [0.401]
[0.392]
[0.405] [0.388]
-1.423∗∗∗ -1.737∗∗∗ -1.821∗∗∗ -1.495∗∗∗
[0.414]
[0.480]
[0.450]
[0.374]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Mean, dept. var.
Scaled effect
Income covar?
Educ. covars?
Relative covars?
Share explained
Observations

4.251
-1.846
No
No
No
24388

4.252
4.251
4.251
-1.882
-1.343
-1.658
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-.0197095 .2722932 .1018803
24260
24388
24388

4.252
-1.316
No
No
No
24463

4.254
4.252
4.252
-1.605
-1.683
-1.382
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-.2199206 -.2789428 -.0500543
24331
24463
24463

See notes for Table 1. In cols. (2) through (4) and (6) through (8), each of the additional controls
is interacted with the group of interest. For example, in col. (3), each of the education fixed effects
enters the equation both in levels and interacted with the elderly variable.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

50

Online Appendix Table A.4: Do income measures explain redistribution trends? (Dropping
obs. with missing income values)
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-1.852∗∗∗ -1.759∗∗∗ -1.175∗∗ -1.601∗∗∗
[0.489] [0.499] [0.523] [0.518]
-1.950∗∗∗ -2.016∗∗∗ -1.915∗∗∗ -1.776∗∗∗
[0.526]
[0.584]
[0.577] [0.518]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Mean, dept. var.
Scaled effect (SD)
Scaled effect (party)
Income covar?
Educ. covars?
Relative covars?
Share explained
Observations
See notes for Table 1.

4.254
-0.953
-1.698
No
No
No

4.256
4.254
4.254
-0.905
-0.605
-0.824
-1.613
-1.077
-1.468
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
.0502844 .3657529 .135805
22030
21902
22030
22030
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

4.256
-1.004
-1.788
No
No
No
22061

4.257
4.256
4.256
-1.037
-0.986
-0.914
-1.847
-1.755
-1.627
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-.0334621 .0180649 .0896414
21929
22061
22061

Online Appendix Table A.5: Do income measures explain redistribution trends? (Ordered
probit)
Reduce inc. diffs (1-7)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Elderly x
-1.038∗∗∗ -1.021∗∗∗ -0.712∗∗∗ -0.921∗∗∗
(Year-1975)/100 [0.214]
[0.212]
[0.208]
[0.216]
-0.844∗∗∗ -0.862∗∗∗ -0.905∗∗∗ -0.781∗∗∗
[0.232]
[0.254]
[0.261]
[0.236]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Mean, dept. var. 4.251
4.252
4.251
4.251
Income covar?
No
Yes
No
No
Educ. covars?
No
No
Yes
No
Relative covars?
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
24388
24260
24388
24388
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
See notes for Table 1. p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01

51

4.252
No
No
No
24463

4.254
Yes
No
No
24331

4.252
No
Yes
No
24463

4.252
No
No
Yes
24463

Online Appendix Table A.6: Do other policy preference explain black/elderly effect?
Dept. Var: Reduce inc. diffs
(1)
Elderly x
(Year-1975)/100

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-2.528∗∗∗ -2.505∗∗∗ -2.461∗∗∗ -2.347∗∗∗
[0.425] [0.434] [0.365] [0.382]
-1.700∗∗ -1.593∗∗ -1.912∗∗∗ -1.731∗∗∗
[0.618] [0.611] [0.562] [0.564]

Black x
(Year-1975)/100
Support abortion
rights

-0.151∗∗∗
[0.0503]

-0.146∗∗
[0.0496]

Homo. sex wrong

-0.0287
[0.0173]

-0.0512∗∗
[0.0174]
-0.515∗∗∗
[0.0894]

Support gun ownership
rights

-0.470∗∗∗
[0.0898]

Mean, dept. var.
4.236
4.236
4.230
4.230
4.237
4.237
4.232
4.232
Scaled effect
-2.318 -2.296 -2.240 -2.136 -1.555 -1.457
-1.736 -1.572
Share explained
–
.0093518
–
.0465159
–
.0627715
–
.0943607
Observations
11588
11588
12378
12378 11618 11618
12415
12415
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
See notes for Table 3. p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01

52

Online Appendix B.

Summary of Surveys Considered for International Evidence

To compare our results for the US to other countries, we conducted a comprehensive search
for comparable datasets from similar, developed countries. Our universe was the 17 OECD
nations with the highest per capita income in 2012 according to The World Bank. These
nations are in order: Norway, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Australia, Denmark, Sweden, (the
United States), Canada, Austria, the Netherlands, Finland, Japan, Germany, Belgium, Iceland, France and the United Kingdom. Additionally, we considered a number of cross-national
surveys, which sample across multiple countries in each wave.
If a survey asked a consistently phrased and measured question regarding redistributive
preferences over at least a ten year period prior to 2006, we included the country in our
international analyses. We found that 3 national surveys and none of the cross-national
surveys met our criteria for inclusion. The tables on the next several pages summarize the
results of this search.

53

Online Appendix Table B.1: Summary of international surveys

Country
Norway

Switzerland

54
Luxembourg

Name/s
Years	  Available
Labour	  Force	  Survey
2010,	  4th	  quarter
Social	  Inequality	  ISSP	  
1992,	  1999,	  2009
LOGG	  easy-­‐to-­‐use
2007/08
Quality	  of	  Life	  and	  Gender	  Equality
2007
Leadership	  Survey
2000
Survey	  on	  "Benefits	  and	  Problems	  of	  the	  
Welfare	  State"
1996
Level	  of	  Living	  Study	  for	  Social	  Benefits	  
Recipients
1995
Level	  of	  Living	  under	  Debt	  Settlements	  -­‐	  
Contrasts	  Between	  Acceptable	  Levels	  of	  Living	  
1992
and	  Views	  of	  Justice
Equal	  Status	  Project	  in	  the	  First	  to	  Third	  Grade	  
of	  the	  Compulsory	  School
1990
Attitudes	  Towards	  the	  Development	  of	  Society
1988
Survey	  of	  Work	  Welfare	  and	  Equal	  
Opportunities
1980
Foreigners	  in	  Switzerland?	  The	  process	  of	  
integration	  from	  one	  generation	  to	  the	  next
1997,	  1998
European	  Social	  Survey
2002,	  2004,	  2006,	  2008,	  2010
Social	  Inequality	  ISSP	  
1987,	  1999
L'émigration	  militaire	  neuchâteloise	  au	  XVllle	  
siècle
1998
Living	  conditions	  and	  social	  inequality:	  
Switzerland	  in	  comparative	  perspective
2000
Les	  Suisses	  et	  leur	  société	  au	  début	  des	  années	  
1960	  et	  1990
1962
Les	  Suisses	  et	  leur	  société:	  positionnements	  et	  
images
1991
MOSAiCH	  2009.	  Measurement	  and	  Observation	  
of	  Social	  Attitudes	  in	  Switzerland
2009
Pauvreté	  des	  femmes	  à	  Genève
1990
Hidden	  Poverty?	  Living	  Conditions	  and	  Coping	  
in	  Households	  Facing	  Poverty	  
2003
Concepts	  of	  risk	  and	  solidarity
1991,	  1992
Wahrnehmung	  sozialer	  Ungleichheit	  –	  Eine	  
repräsentative	  Befragung	  der	  Schweizer	  
Bevölkerung
1987
Multiple

Question/s
NA
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

NA

Summary

Website

The	  Norwegian	  Social	  Science	  Data	  Services	  (NSD)	  identifies	  
variables	  across	  all	  national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  
"Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  identifies	  potentially	  
relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  across	  different	   http://www.nsd.uib.no/nsd/english/
surveys/years.	  The	  possibility	  for	  constructing	  a	  time	  series	   individualdata.html
of	  a	  similar	  question	  for	  more	  than	  a	  few	  years	  is	  unlikely.	  
Additionally,	  most	  questions	  have	  not	  been	  translated	  into	  
English.	  	  

NA
NA
NA
NA
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

The	  FORS	  Data	  Service	  identifies	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  
The	  "Social	  structure,	  migration,	  and	  poverty"	  theme	  
identifies	  potentially	  relevant	  surveys.	  However,	  none	  of	  the	  
http://forscenter.ch/en/
surveys	  yield	  anything	  greater	  than	  a	  2	  year	  time	  series.	  
Additionally,	  most	  of	  the	  documentation	  has	  not	  been	  
translated	  into	  English.

NA
NA

NA
None	  of	  the	  national	  surveys	  seem	  relevant	  to	  the	  project.

http://www.ceps.lu/?type=module
&id=125

Online Appendix Table B.1: Summary of international surveys (cont’d)

Country

Name/s

Years	  Available

Question/s

Summary

Website

Government	  should	  reduce	  income	  differences	  (4,	  5,	  7	  
pt	  scales	  vary	  by	  year)

Australia

National	  Social	  Science	  Survey	  (NSSS)

Australian	  Survey	  of	  Social	  Attitudes	  (AuSSA)

There	  is	  too	  much	  of	  a	  difference	  between	  rich	  and	  
poor	  in	  this	  country	  (5pt	  scale),
	  
1984/85,	  1986/87,	  1986/87,	   Income	  and	  wealth	  should	  be	  redistributed	  toward	  
1989/90,	  1993,	  1994,	  1995/96 ordinary	  working	  people	  (5pt	  scale)
Government	  should	  redistribute
income	  from	  the	  better-­‐off	  to	  those
who	  are	  less	  well-­‐off	  (5pt	  scale),

2003,	  2005

Ordinary	  working	  people	  do	  not
get	  their	  fair	  share	  of	  the	  nation’s
wealth	  (5pt	  scale)
Reduce	  income	  differences	  between	  the	  rich	  and	  the	  
2007 poor	  (4pt	  scale)
Thinking	  of	  income	  levels	  generally	  in	  Australia	  today,	  
would	  you	  say	  that	  the	  gap	  between	  those	  with	  high	  
incomes	  and	  those	  with	  low	  incomes	  is...	  ?	  (5pt	  scale),

55

Differences	  in	  income	  in	  Australia	  are	  too	  large	  (5pt	  
scale)
It	  is	  the	  responsibility	  of	  government	  to	  reduce	  the
differences	  in	  income	  between	  people	  with	  high
2009 incomes	  and	  those	  with	  low	  incomes	  (5pt	  scale)
It	  is	  the	  responsibility	  of	  government	  to	  reduce	  the
differences	  in	  income	  between	  people	  with	  high
2011 incomes	  and	  those	  with	  low	  incomes	  (5pt	  scale)

The	  Norwegian	  Social	  Science	  Data	  Services	  (NSD)	  identifies	  
variables	  across	  all	  national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  
"Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  identifies	  potentially	  
http://ada.edu.au/social-­‐
relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  across	  different	   http://www.nsd.uib.no/nsd/english/
science/nsss
surveys/years.	  
he	  pconducted	  
ossibility	  fb
or	  
constructing	  
	  time	  
series	   individualdata.html
The	  
NSSS	  has	  bTeen	  
etween	  
1984	  aand	  
2001.	  
of	  
a	  similar	  mqeasuring	  
uestion	  for	  
more	  ftor	  
han	  
a	  few	  years	  ias	  nd	  
unlikely.	  
Questions	  
support	  
redistribution	  
attitudes	  
Additionally,	  
most	  hqave	  
uestions	  
een	  wtranslated	  
toward	  inequality	  
been	  haave	  
sked	  niot	  
n	  ebach	  
ave.	  Data	  into	  
English.	  	   1997-­‐2001	  is	  unavailable	  from	  the	  Australian	  Data	  
between	  
Archive.
The	  AuSSA	  is	  the	  current	  survey	  of	  social	  and	  political	  
attitudes.	  Every	  wave	  through	  2011	  has	  asked	  questions	  
measuring	  support	  for	  redistribution.
The	  unavailable	  data	  between	  1997	  and	  2006,	  and	  varying	  
http://ada.edu.au/social-­‐
response	  scales	  used	  to	  measure	  key	  redistributive	  
science/aussa
preferences	  make	  time	  series	  analyses	  inappropriate	  for	  this	  
project.

Online Appendix Table B.1: Summary of international surveys (cont’d)

Country

Denmark

Name/s

Years	  Available

56

Attitudes	  to	  development	  aid	  and	  environment	  
aid
Attitudes	  to	  the	  welfare	  state
Contemporary	  Patterns	  of	  Social	  Differentiation	  
-­‐	  The	  Case	  of	  Aalborg
Danish	  attitudes	  towards	  immigrants	  and	  
refugees
Danish	  Electorate	  Studies
1987,	  1988
Danish	  Gallup	  Omnibus	  Data
1965,	  1984,	  1986-­‐89
Danish	  Longitudinal	  Survey	  of	  Youth	  -­‐	  Children	  
(DLSY-­‐C),	  Children	  and	  Parents
Danish	  Omnibus	  Survey
1987,	  1997
Employments	  in	  Scientific	  Positions	  at	  
Universities
1995/96
Eurobarometer
1976,	  1987,	  1981
European	  Social	  Survey
2006,	  2008,	  2010,	  2012
Female	  Clergymen:	  Working	  Conditions	  and	  Co-­‐
Operation
Social	  Inequality	  ISSP	  
1987,	  1992,	  1999,	  2009
Language	  Proficiency
Language	  Understanding	  as	  Source	  of	  Error	  in	  
Surveys,	  1996:	  The	  Danes'	  Living	  Conditions	  and	  
Attitudes,	  II
Materially	  and	  Socially	  Badly	  Situated	  Families
Municipality	  size	  and	  local	  democracy	  
(Denmark)
Observa	  Political	  Index	  Polls
1980,	  1984
Political	  Values	  in	  Funen
Refugees	  in	  Denmark
Scandinavian	  Welfare	  Survey
Shared	  responsibility
2007-­‐11
Socialization	  and	  Political	  Participation	  of	  Young	  
People
Socially	  Afflicted	  Children,	  Young	  People	  and	  
Families
Sport,	  exercise	  and	  everyday	  life
The	  development	  of	  a	  sustainable	  consumption	  
pattern	  in	  Denmark
1998-­‐2000
The	  populations	  living	  conditions
The	  Scientific	  Staff	  at	  the	  Danish	  Universities
1993-­‐96
They	  have	  made	  their	  bed,	  now	  they	  must	  lie	  
on	  it?	  Feelings	  and	  attitudes	  towards	  financially	  
needy	  and	  the	  welfare	  state
2007-­‐10

Question/s

2002 NA
2005 NA
2004 NA
2002 NA
NA
NA

Summary

Website

The	  Norwegian	  Social	  Science	  Data	  Services	  (NSD)	  identifies	  
variables	  across	  all	  national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  
"Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  identifies	  potentially	  
relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  across	  different	   http://www.nsd.uib.no/nsd/english/
surveys/years.	  The	  possibility	  for	  constructing	  a	  time	  series	   individualdata.html
of	  a	  similar	  question	  for	  more	  than	  a	  few	  years	  is	  unlikely.	  
Additionally,	  most	  questions	  have	  not	  been	  translated	  into	  
English.	  	  

2010 NA
NA
NA
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
1989 NA
See	  below	  (Cross-­‐national	  survey	  summary).
1996 NA

1996 NA
1988 NA
2001 NA
NA
1977 NA
1986 NA
1972 NA
NA
1979 NA
1996 NA
1999 NA
NA
2000 NA
NA
NA

The	  Danish	  Data	  Archive	  identifies	  variables	  across	  all	  
national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  "Social	  Stratification	  
and	  Groupings	  -­‐	  Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  identifies	  
http://samfund.dda.dk/dda/default-­‐
potentially	  relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  
en.asp
across	  different	  surveys/years.	  The	  possibility	  for	  
constructing	  a	  time	  series	  of	  a	  similar	  question	  for	  more	  than	  
a	  few	  years	  is	  unlikely.

Online Appendix Table B.1: Summary of international surveys (cont’d)

Country

Name/s

Years	  Available

Question/s

Swedish	  National	  Election	  Studies	  Program	  
(SNES)
Class	  Structure	  in	  Sweden
Citizen	  Survey
Attitudes	  to	  Inequality
Canadian	  Income	  Survey
Canadian	  Survey	  on	  Economic	  Well-­‐being
Ontario	  Material	  Deprivation	  Survey
Survey	  of	  Consumer	  Finances
Survey	  of	  Labour	  and	  Income	  Dynamics

1988,	  1991,	  1994,	  1998,	  2002,	  
2006,	  2010
Reduce	  income	  differences	  in	  society?	  (5pt	  scale)
1980 NA
1987 NA
1991 NA
2012 NA
2013
2008
1974-­‐2006
NA
NA
1993-­‐2011

Austria

NA

NA

Netherlands

Longitudinal	  Internet	  Studies	  for	  the	  Social	  
Sciences	  (LISS)

Sweden

Canada

NA

57

2012 NA
Efforts	  should	  not	  be	  made	  to	  further	  increase	  the	  
material	  standard	  of	  living.	  (5pt	  scale)

Finland

EVA	  Survey	  on	  Finnish	  Values	  and	  Attitudes

High	  income	  tax	  reduces	  my	  willingness	  to	  work.	  (5pt	  
1984,	  1986,	  1988,	  1990,	  1992,	   scale)
1994,	  1996,	  1998,	  2000,	  2002,	  
2004,	  2006,	  2009,	  2010,	  2011,	   Finland	  suffers	  from	  a	  worrying	  trend	  of	  ownership	  
2014
concentration.	  (5pt	  scale)

Japan

Japanese	  General	  Social	  Survey	  (JGSS)

2000,	  2001,	  2002,	  2003,	  2005,	  
2006,	  2008,	  2010
NA

Summary

Website

The	  Swedish	  National	  Data	  Service	  (SND)	  	  identifies	  variables	  
across	  all	  national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  "Social	  
Stratification	  and	  Groupings	  -­‐	  Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  
http://www.valforskning.pol.gu.se/e
The	  Norwegian	  
Social	  relevant	  
Science	  qDuestions/modules	  
ata	  Services	  (NSD)	  tihat	  
dentifies	  
identifies	  
potentially	  
are	  
nglish/Data___Documentation/
variables	  
across	  
all	  national	  
surveys	  by	  Athematic	  
area.	  
The	   is	  
spread	  
across	  
different	  
surveys/years.	  
	  7	  year	  time	  
series	  
"Equality	  uasing	  
nd	  Inequality"	  
theme	  identifies	  potentially	  
possible	  
the	  SNES	  data.
http://snd.gu.se/en/catalogue
relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  across	  different	   http://www.nsd.uib.no/nsd/english/
surveys/years.	  The	  possibility	  for	  constructing	  a	  time	  series	   individualdata.html
Statistics	  
Canada	  
identifies	  
surveys	  
thematic	  
The	  
of	  a	  similar	  
question	  
for	  more	  
than	  ba	  y	  few	  
years	  ias	  rea.	  
unlikely.	  
http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/subject-­‐
"Income,	  pensions,	  
pending	  haave	  
nd	  wnealth	  
-­‐	  Low	  
income	  ianto	  
nd	  
Additionally,	  
most	  qsuestions	  
ot	  been	  
translated	  
sujet/subtheme-­‐
inequality"	  
English.	  	   theme	  identifies	  potentially	  relevant	  surveys.	  
soustheme.action?pid=3868&id=38
Those	  surveys	  that	  collect	  data	  over	  multiple	  periods	  do	  not	  
74&lang=eng&more=1
measure	  attitudes.
Statistics	  Austria	  classifies	  national	  surveys	  by	  theme.	  Both	  
the	  "Social	  Statistics"	  and	  "How's	  Austria?"	  themes	  do	  not	   http://www.statistik.at/web_en/sta
tistics/index.html
yield	  any	  useable	  data.	  
The	  LISS	  panel	  was	  started	  in	  2007	  and	  is	  a	  yearly	  survey	  
with	  a	  core	  module	  as	  well	  as	  year-­‐specific	  topics.	  In	  2012,	  
researchers	  included	  questions	  pertaining	  to	  income	  
http://www.lissdata.nl/lissdata/Abo
inequality.	  
ut_the_Panel/General

The	  Finnish	  Social	  Science	  Data	  Archive	  allows	  searches	  by	  
keyword.	  Inequality/income	  related	  search	  identified	  the	  
EVA	  semi-­‐annual	  survey.	  Depending	  on	  the	  appropriateness	  
of	  the	  questions,	  a	  time	  series	  analysis	  of	  attitudes	  is	  
http://www.fsd.uta.fi/en/data/inde
possible.
x.html
The	  JGSS	  is	  modeled	  after	  the	  GSS	  and	  was	  established	  in	  
2000.	  The	  documentation	  and	  data	  are	  available	  in	  English.	  
Searches	  for	  older	  data	  did	  not	  yield	  obviously	  useful	  surveys	   http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrw
eb/ICPSR/series/209
in	  English.

Online Appendix Table B.1: Summary of international surveys (cont’d)

Country

Name/s

Germany

German	  General	  Social	  Survey	  (ALLBUS)

Years	  Available

Question/s
The	  state	  must	  ensure	  that	  people	  can	  live	  on	  a	  decent	  
1984,	  1991,	  1994,	  2000,	  2004,	   income,	  even	  in	  illness,	  hardship,	  unemployment	  and	  
old	  age	  (4pt	  scale)
2010
Income	  should	  not	  be	  based	  solely	  on	  individual	  
1984,	  1991,	  1994,	  2000,	  2004,	   achievement.	  Instead,	  everybody	  should	  have	  what	  
2010
they	  and	  their	  family	  need	  for	  a	  decent	  life	  (4pt	  scale)
Only	  when	  differences	  in	  income	  and	  in	  social	  standing	  
1984,	  1988,	  1991,	  1994,	  1998,	   are	  large	  enough,	  is	  there	  an	  incentive	  for	  individual	  
2000,	  2004,	  2008,	  2010
achievement	  (4pt	  scale)

Belgium
Iceland

NA
NA

NA
NA

NA
NA

France

NA

NA

NA

58

United	  Kingdom British	  Social	  Attitudes	  (BSA)	  Survey

1985,	  1986,	  1987,	  1990,	  1991,	  
1993,	  1996,	  1999,	  2000,	  2004,	   Government	  should	  reduce	  income	  differences	  (5pt	  
scale)
2006,	  2009,	  2010,	  2012
1983-­‐87,	  1989-­‐91,	  1993-­‐95,	  
1997-­‐2004,	  2006-­‐10,	  2012,	  
2013
Gap	  between	  high	  and	  low	  incomes	  (3pt	  scale)
1985-­‐87,	  1989-­‐91,	  1993-­‐96,	  
1998-­‐2013
Government	  should	  redistribute	  income	  (5pt	  scale)

Summary

Website

The	  German	  GSS	  allows	  for	  several	  time	  series	  analyses	  of	  
http://www.gesis.org/en/allbus
The	  
Norwegian	  Social	  Science	  Data	  Services	  (NSD)	  identifies	  
attitudes.
variables	  across	  all	  national	  surveys	  by	  thematic	  area.	  The	  
"Equality	  and	  Inequality"	  theme	  identifies	  potentially	  
relevant	  questions/modules	  that	  are	  spread	  across	  different	   http://www.nsd.uib.no/nsd/english/
surveys/years.	  The	  possibility	  for	  constructing	  a	  time	  series	   individualdata.html
Statistics	  Belgium	  provides	  access	  to	  national	  surveys.	  None	  
of	  a	  similar	  question	  for	  more	  than	  a	  few	  years	  is	  unlikely.	  
of	  the	  surveys	  listed	  appear	  relevant.
http://statbel.fgov.be/en/statistics/
Additionally,	  most	  questions	  have	  not	  been	  translated	  into	  
surveys-­‐methodology/surveys/
English.	  	  
The	  Interuniversity	  Pole	  Public	  Policy	  and	  Opinion	  (PIOP)	  
conducts	  the	  General	  Election	  Study	  Belgium.	  The	  survey	  was	   http://bdq.reseau-­‐
conducted	  in	  1991,	  1995,	  1999,	  and	  2003.	  It	  is	  unclear	  
quetelet.cnrs.fr/en/Study_details/2
whether	  any	  questions	  asked	  are	  relevant.
78
NA
NA
The	  French	  Data	  Service	  (Reseau	  Quetelet)	  states	  that	  
http://www.reseau-­‐
French	  studies	  are	  not	  translated.
quetelet.cnrs.fr/spip/?lang=en

The	  BSA	  Survey	  allows	  for	  several	  time	  series	  analyses	  of	  
attitudes.

http://ukdataservice.ac.uk/get-­‐
data/key-­‐data.aspx

Online Appendix Table B.2: Summary of international surveys (Cross-national surveys)

Cross-­‐national	  Survey

Years	  Available

Question/s
Summary
1.	  Now	  I'd	  like	  you	  to	  tell	  me	  your	  views	  on	  various	  
issues.	  How	  would	  you	  place	  your	  views	  on	  this	  scale?	  1	  
means	  you	  agree	  completely	  with	  the	  statement	  on	  the	  
left;	  10	  means	  you	  agree	  completely	  with	  the	  statement	  
on	  the	  right;	  and	  if	  your	  views	  fall	  somewhere	  in	  
Both	  questions	  were	  fielded	  in	  3	  waves	  between	  1995	  and	  
between,	  you	  can	  choose	  any	  number	  in	  between.	  
2007	  for	  OECD	  countries	  of	  interest	  (those	  comparable	  to	  
(Code	  one	  number	  for	  each	  issue):	  
the	  US).
Incomes	  should	  be	  made	  more	  equal

Website

Question	  1	  was	  asked	  3	  times	  to	  respondents	  from	  the	  US;	  	  2	  
times	  to	  respondents	  from	  the	  UK,	  Sweden,	  and	  Germany.

2.	  [Same	  instruction	  as	  above]

World	  Values	  Survey

Waves	  between	  1990	  and	  2013

The	  government	  should	  take	  more	  responsibility	  to	  
ensure	  that	  everyone	  is	  provided	  for

Question	  2	  was	  asked	  3	  times	  to	  respondents	  from	  the	  US	  
and	  Sweden;	  	  2	  times	  to	  respondents	  from	  the	  UK	  and	  
http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/
Germany.
wvs.jsp
The	  ISSP	  collaborates	  with	  national	  survey	  programs	  to	  cover	  
certain	  topics.	  Social	  Inequality	  was	  the	  focus	  of	  4	  waves	  (3	  
waves,	  pre-­‐recession).
For	  OECD	  countries	  of	  interest,	  the	  coverage	  is	  as	  follows:
4	  Years:	  Australia,	  Austria,	  Germany,	  UK,	  USA

59

3	  Years:	  Norway,	  Sweden

ISSP

1987,	  1992,	  1999,	  2009

Pew	  Global	  Attitudes	  Survey

Specific	  to	  question	  (see	  right)

Eurobarometer

1989-­‐2014

European	  Social	  Survey

2002,	  2004,	  2006,	  2008,	  2010,	  2012

It	  is	  the	  responsibility	  of	  the	  government	  to	  reduce	  the	   2	  Years:	  Canada,	  France,	  Japan,	  Switzerland
differences	  in	  income	  between	  people	  with	  high	  
incomes	  and	  those	  with	  low	  incomes	  [5	  pt.	  scale]
1	  Year:	  Belgium,	  Denmark,	  Finland,	  Iceland,	  Netherlands
1.	  People	  have	  different	  views	  of	  democracy.	  As	  I	  read	  
you	  a	  list,	  please	  tell	  me	  how	  important	  each	  of	  the	  
following	  is	  in	  a	  democracy	  to	  you.	  A	  small	  income	  gap	  
between	  rich	  and	  poor...do	  you	  think	  this	  is	  very	  
important,	  somewhat	  important,	  not	  too	  important	  or	  
not	  important	  at	  all	  in	  a	  democracy?	  (Spring	  2012)

http://www.issp.org/index.php

2.	  Now	  I	  am	  going	  to	  read	  you	  a	  list	  of	  things	  that	  may	  
be	  problems	  in	  our	  country.	  As	  I	  read	  each	  one,	  please	  
tell	  me	  if	  you	  think	  it	  is	  a	  very	  big	  problem,	  a	  
moderately	  big	  problem,	  a	  small	  problem	  or	  not	  a	  
The	  2	  questions	  pertaining	  to	  redistribution	  are	  only	  asked	  in	  
problem	  at	  all...Social	  inequality	  (Spring	  2010)
single	  years,	  post-­‐recession.
http://www.pewglobal.org/
The	  Eurobarometer	  consistently	  fields	  a	  standard	  battery	  of	  
questions	  measuring	  public	  opinion	  towards	  the	  European	  
Union/Community.	  Questions	  relating	  to	  redistribution	  are	  
few,	  inconsistent	  over	  time,	  and	  are	  only	  asked	  in	  special	  
http://www.gesis.org/en/eurobaro
See	  summary
meter/home/
waves.
The	  ESS	  is	  a	  relatively	  recent	  survey	  that	  covers	  4	  pre-­‐
recession	  years	  starting	  in	  2002.

Using	  this	  card,	  please	  say	  to	  what	  extent	  you	  agree	  or	  
disagree	  with	  each	  of	  the	  following	  statements	  The	  
government	  should	  take	  measures	  to	  reduce	  
differences	  in	  income	  levels	  [5	  pt.	  scale]

In	  addition,	  the	  2008	  Wave	  focused	  on	  Welfare	  Attitudes,	  
asking	  a	  number	  of	  questions	  pertaining	  to	  inequality	  and	  
redistribution	  (	  see:	  
http://www.europeansocialsurvey.org/data/themes.html?t= http://www.europeansocialsurvey.o
rg/
welfare)

