                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A COASIAN MODEL OF INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTION CHAINS

                                         Thibault Fally
                                        Russell Hillberry

                                       Working Paper 21520
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21520


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2015, Revised November 2017




We would like to thank Pol Antràs, Arnaud Costinot, Ben Faber, Rob Feenstra, Tomoo Kikuchi,
Aart Kraay, Phil Luck, Ezra Oberfield, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Ina Simonovska and seminar
participants at UC Davis, UC Berkeley, Dartmouth College, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Drexel University, Columbia University, John
Hopkins University, UC Santa Cruz, Barcelona GSE, Penn State University, Temple University,
University of Arkansas, ITAM, Purdue University, CEPR/CAGE/ECARES Conference on
Global Fragmentation of Production, West Coast Trade Workshop at SIEPR/Stanford, NBER ITI
Spring meeting, and the SED meetings for helpful comments and discussions. Erik Johnson
provided excellent research assistance. Research for this paper has been supported in part by the
governments of Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom through the Multidonor Trust Fund
for Trade and Development. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Thibault Fally and Russell Hillberry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Coasian Model of International Production Chains
Thibault Fally and Russell Hillberry
NBER Working Paper No. 21520
September 2015, Revised November 2017
JEL No. F10,L23

                                         ABSTRACT

International supply chains require coordination of numerous activities across multiple countries
and firms. We adapt a model of supply chains and apply it to an international trade setting. In
each chain, the measure of tasks completed within a firm is determined by transaction costs and
the cost of coordinating more activities within the firm. The structural parameters that govern
these costs explain variation in supply-chain length and gross-output-to-value-added ratios, and
determine countries' comparative advantage along and across supply chains. We calibrate the
model to match key observables in East Asia, and evaluate implications of changes in model
parameters for trade, welfare, the length of supply chains and countries' relative position within
them.


Thibault Fally
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California at Berkeley
301 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
fally@berkeley.edu

Russell Hillberry
Development Research Group
The World Bank
1818 H St NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
rhillberry@worldbank.org
1       Introduction
The nature of international trade changed dramatically in recent decades, as vertically inte-
grated production processes spread across international borders, increasing trade in parts and
components along the way.1 This phenomenon raises a number of important questions for
economic policy: How large are the gains from international fragmentation, and how are they
distributed across countries? How do changes in trade costs affect trade flows and the distri-
bution of value added across countries? How has China’s entry into the world trading system
affected the international fragmentation of production? Answers to these questions require
quantitative models that can represent the complexities of international production chains in
a tractable form.
    Recent evidence has documented substantial variation in the length of supply chains.2 Even
within chains, firms vary in their contribution to value added.3 The length of supply chains
and the degree to which they are internationalized are difficult to separate from decisions that
determine firm scope. The Ford Model T, for example, was produced in a single plant, while
the production of modern day automobiles can involve a myriad of heterogeneous suppliers
scattered across multiple countries. International fragmentation is limited, ultimately, by the
extent of fragmentation at the firm level. Yet the literature lacks a unified treatment that can
explain endogenous firm boundaries within chains, formalize endogenous chain lengths, and
determine comparative advantage within and across chains.
    We offer a framework that accomplishes these goals. In the model, an optimal allocation of
tasks determines jointly the scope of sequentially-arranged firms of varying size, the length of
chains and the sequence of countries in production. We calibrate the model using key moments
from input-output tables on East Asia and the United States.4 Our focus on East Asia reflects
the importance of international fragmentation in that region. Based on our calibration, we are
able to quantify the impact on intermediate and final goods trade, fragmentation and welfare,
of changes in: 1) international trade costs, 2) productivity in China, 3) transaction costs in
China, and 4) a reduction in bilateral trade costs between the US and China.
    1
     Baldwin (2012) surveys these developments and provides insights into how they should affect our thinking
about the economics of international trade and trade policy.
   2
     See Antràs et al. (2012) and Fally (2012), who calculate a (dollar value-weighted average) number of plants
through which an industry’s output travels before reaching consumers. We model an endogenous measure of
firms involved in a sequential production chain and link our theory to the indices derived in Antràs et al. (2012)
and Fally (2012).
   3
     See Kraemer et al. (2011), who illustrate the distribution of value added for Apple iPhones and iPads.
   4
     Such tables have been used to quantify the extent of fragmentation and the allocation of value across
countries. Johnson (2014) surveys a series of papers that use such tables to calculate value added trade.
Koopman et al. (2010) use Chinese tables to calculate the domestic content of China’s exports. Antras et al.
(2012) derive indices of supply chain length from input-output tables.



                                                        1
    A central theoretical contribution is the development of a tractable framework in which
supply chain length is endogenous. Supply chains vary in the number of participating firms
because of endogenous differences in firm scope.5 We modify the supply chain model of Kikuchi
et al. (forthcoming), in which firm scope is determined by a Coasian tradeoff between the
cost of coordinating tasks inside the firm and the costs of conducting market transactions.6
Within countries, outcomes are driven by two key parameters: one that governs coordination
costs within the firm and one that summarizes domestic transaction costs. Our continuous
representation of a firm allows us to derive strong and transparent links between structural
parameters and observables in the data. Specifically, the gross-output-to-value-added ratio at
any point in the chain is equal to the ratio of the Coasian parameters that govern coordination
costs and transaction costs, respectively.
    We allow these Coasian parameters to vary across countries and develop implications for
international trade. Vertical specialization in our model is tightly related to firm scope. Be-
cause inter-firm transactions are more costly downstream, equilibrium firm scope is larger
downstream. In turn, this pattern affects the sorting of countries along the chain. Within a
given chain, the most downstream countries are those in which firms are most able to displace
transaction costs by expanding firm scope. Transaction costs affect absolute, not comparative,
advantage within a given chain, but transaction costs have an indirect effect on countries’ av-
erage position in chains. Countries with high transaction costs are more likely to participate
in chains for which the country has low coordination costs, which means that such countries
tend to be positioned downstream.7
    We examine the effect of trade costs on trade and fragmentation in this setting. Trade
tends to increase the extent of fragmentation along several dimensions. A reduction in trade
costs between two countries affects fragmentation at all stages along chains and decreases firm
scope even for firms that do not directly offshore production but are related to firms that
do. The reduction in firm scope along the chain is associated with the decrease in average
costs, especially downstream, and contributes to the reduction in final goods prices. We derive
analytical results that reveal transparent links between the impact of fragmentation on firm
   5
     In the model atomistic firms make optimal scope decisions given the prices of factors, inputs and outputs,
and their location in the production chain. The equilibrium can also be interpreted as the optimum plan solved
by a single social planner, i.e. a multinational firm allocating tasks and quantities per unit of final output across
plants to produce the final good at minimum cost.
   6
     Kikuchi et al. (forthcoming) establish the existence of a discrete firm partial equilibrium within a single
country. We develop a continuous firm treatment that facilitates tractable analytical solutions and calibration,
and extend it to a multi-country general equilibrium setting. We also introduce a shadow market for tasks that
formalizes the Coasian tradeoffs facing a chain of sequential firms.
   7
     Countries with a high value of both γ and θ for a given variety may find it unprofitable to participate in
the chain at all.




                                                         2
scope, final goods prices and a shadow cost of tasks that governs firm scope along the chain.
    As trade costs decrease, countries tend to move downstream along chains and to enter new
chains. We illustrate our finding in a partial-equilibrium setting (holding the set of participating
countries and their labor cost constant) and in a two-country general equilibrium setting. In
the latter, we also use our framework to examine the response of trade flows to trade costs,
both in gross flows and value added content, and the welfare gains from trade. We compare our
results to a single-stage Eaton and Kortum (2002) model: the gains from trade are relatively
larger in countries that tend to specialize downstream and smaller in countries that tend to
specialize upstream.
    In order to explore the quantitative implications of our framework, we calibrate a numerical
version of our model to match key features of input-output relationships in East Asia. This
exercise relies on international input-output tables produced by IDE-JETRO. These data cover
the US and nine East Asian countries. This region is interesting because production fragmen-
tation there has grown quickly and is highly prevalent. The IDE-JETRO data are unique in
that they track flows in four dimensions: from the making industry in the origin country to
the using industry in the destination country.8 To illustrate our findings, we adapt recently
developed quantitative measures of firm position (i.e. upstreamness) to a multi-country setting
and track border crossings. Our calculations indicate increasing international fragmentation
over time, especially in key industries like electronics.
    While the model has rich implications for trade and the fragmentation of production, its
relative parsimony is useful for the purpose of calibration. We calibrate our model by targeting
key moments such as GDP per capita, value added, countries’ average position in international
supply chains and gross-output-to-value-added ratios. All these moments imply large cross-
country differences in productivity, transaction costs and coordination costs.
    We use the calibrated model to conduct counterfactual exercises regarding changes in key
structural parameters. We first examine what happens when cross-border trade costs decrease
by 10%. In this counter-factual simulation, we tend to find larger gains from trade than
predicted by Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrigues-Clare (2012)’s formula based on imported
final goods, but smaller gains than in Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) with input-output
loops. We also examine the response in terms of the VAX ratio (the value-added content
of exports) as defined by Johnson and Noguera (2012). We find that a decrease in trade
costs leads to a decrease in the VAX ratio in all countries, which can be interpreted as an
increase in cross-border fragmentation. In subsequent counterfactual exercises, we simulate a
10% increase in productivity in China and a 10% decrease in Chinese transaction costs. Both
  8
    Other data that report such figures, like the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), impute these values
assuming proportional treatments.


                                                   3
the productivity and transaction cost shocks produce similar changes in Chinese welfare, but
the shocks have different implications for the organization of international production and other
countries’ welfare. The productivity shock causes China to move downstream while the rest of
the world moves upstream. Instead, the reduction in Chinese transaction costs causes a relative
move upstream by China. Reducing transaction costs in China also lengthens global supply
chains. This is entirely consistent with the model’s qualitative predictions, but the calibration
teaches us that the shock to Chinese transaction costs has relatively larger effects outside of
China. Finally, we simulate a 10% reduction in trade costs between China and the US. In this
counterfactual, we find that fragmentation leads to larger trade responses.

Relationship to the literature: The paper contributes to the literature in two broad ways:
1) we develop a model of international production sharing that formalizes a role for firms
(as distinct from tasks) in a sequential, multi-country general equilibrium with endogenous
chain length, 2) we calibrate our model and provide quantitative implications using input-
output tables for East-Asian production. We discuss the literature surrounding each of these
contributions in turn.

1. Models of production chains. An important question in the literature on international
production chains is the spatial organization of production across countries. We contribute to
this literature in two ways: by endogenizing the extent of fragmentation across firms and by
endogenizing the relative position of countries along the chain.
    In recent work, Costinot et al. (2012) derive an explicitly sequential multi-country model
in which mistakes can occur with given probability and these mistakes destroy all accumulated
value. They show that countries with relatively high probabilities of mistakes are situated
upstream. The intuition for this result broadly follows Kremer (1993), that higher rates of
mistakes do less damage if they occur upstream. Since tasks are indistinguishable from firms
in their model, Costinot et al. (2012) cannot inform questions related to the scope of firm
activities or the number of firms participating in a chain.
    We maintain the continuum of sequential tasks, but we also formalize the firm’s internal-
ization decision and endogenize the range of firms involved in the chain. The motivation for
this follows Coase (1937), and our mathematical framework is inspired by Kikuchi et al (forth-
coming), who show how Coase’s insights can be applied to production chains. Kikuchi et al
(forthcoming) solve their model in a closed-economy partial equilibrium setting, and employ
discrete firms. We adapt their framework to a continuum of firms in a multi-country setting
where countries differ in key parameters governing transaction costs and diseconomies of scope.
    As in Costinot et al. (2012), we examine how countries specialize along the chain, but the
patterns of specialization are now driven by interactions between firm scope, transaction costs

                                               4
and ad-valorem trade costs affecting cross-border transactions. In addition, we offer explicit
links between the Coasian structural parameters in our model and empirical objects that can be
observed or constructed from input-output tables. These links make calibration of the model
relatively straightforward compared to other models in the literature.
    Several models fix the number of production stages by assumption (Krugman and Venables
1996, Hillberry and Hummels 2002, Yi 2003, 2010, Johnson and Moxnes 2013). The focus of
this literature is often the geographic location of each production stage, relative to the other(s),
and so a finite and countable number of stages is useful for analytical purposes.9 Relative to
our work, these models avoid the question of the allocation of activities or tasks across stages,
and focus on the extensive margin of completing a specific stage in a certain location.
    These models are also silent about why some countries specialize upstream while others are
downstream. In Yi (2010) and in Johnson and Moxnes (2013), for example, the specialization
of countries along the chain is driven by exogenous productivity shocks and trade costs. This
literature makes important insights about non-linear responses of trade to trade costs and
differences between gross and VA trade. Our model also contains these forces, but we introduce
intra-firm coordination costs and inter-firm transaction costs as additional sources of cross-
country heterogeneity. One goal of our paper is to understand the robustness of these insights to
the richer theoretical structure we offer, where the extent of fragmentation and the specialization
of countries along the chain are endogenous.10

2. Quantitative implications. We contribute to a recent quantitative literature on value
chains by using new indexes to calibrate our model of cross-border fragmentation and examine
the effect of trade costs on the organization of production chains, trade and welfare.
    Our quantification exercise relies on input-output matrices that we exploit in a new way.
Input-output matrices and direct requirement coefficients are traditionally taken as an exoge-
nous recipe that is essentially determined by technology. Instead, we argue that input-output
matrices reflect transactions in intermediate goods between firms that are themselves endoge-
nous economic outcomes. We show that these tables can be informative about the position of
firms within supply chains that link firms both within national borders and across them. Un-
like previous papers, our theory determines the allocation of tasks across firms and the length
of production chains endogenously, and can thus shed some light on equilibrium input-output
relationships when fragmentation is endogenous, both across and within countries.
   9
     Antràs and Chor (2013) offer a different perspective by taking the location and length of production chains
as exogenous but examining the optimal allocation of ownership along the chain.
  10
     In an earlier version of the paper we showed that the model can be adapted to include a capstone assembly
sector that uses the output of several optimized chains as inputs. Assembly adds realism, but it also requires
additional parameters that complicate calibration of the model.



                                                       5
    Under the assumption that IO tables effectively summarize plant-to-plant movements for a
representative firm in each industry, matrix algebra can be used to calculate, for each industry
in the table, two numerical values: i) a measure of the industry’s “distance” from final demand
(where distance is a count of the number of plant boundaries that will be crossed prior to final
consumption) and ii) the average number of stages embodied in an industry’s production.11 We
also examine more traditional indexes of fragmentation such as gross-output-to-value-added
ratios and the share of intermediate goods in trade. We show that, within our framework,
we can map each of these indexes to structural parameters and key summary statistics of
our model. These mappings are useful when we calibrate the model to data on interregional
input-output relationships in East Asia.
    A key purpose of this exercise is to offer a model comparison vis-a-vis other papers in the
literature. A prominent literature has emphasized that intermediate goods trade magnifies the
effect of trade costs on trade. Yi (2010) and Johnson and Moxnes (2013) focus on the response
of trade to trade cost shocks, whereas Krugman and Venables (1996), Hillberry and Hummels
(2002), Yi (2010) and Johnson and Noguera (2014) link the spatial clustering of activities to
trade costs and intermediate goods trade.12 Clustering also occurs in our model, with sequential
activities locating so as to avoid trade costs. Our calibrated model can be used to investigate
the response of trade to trade cost shocks, as in Johnson and Moxnes (2013) or Yi (2010).
    We also contribute to the recent literature on the welfare implications of trade cost change.
Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) show that a broad class of models imply the
same response of welfare to trade costs, provided that the models are calibrated to generate
the same trade response to trade cost change. Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) and Melitz
and Redding (2014) show that welfare effects are magnified when intermediate goods trade is
involved. Like other papers in the literature, these presume an explicit input-output relationship
that governs supply chain length, in contrast to the endogenous length in our model. The
Armington framework used in these papers also precludes movement along the extensive margin
(in terms of countries involved in supply chains), while our theory allows this. Our calibrated
model implies larger gains than in standard trade models like those described by Arkolakis et
al (2012), especially for countries that tend to be downstream, but smaller gains than Costinot
and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) or Melitz and Redding (2014).
  11
      The first is described as “distance to final demand” in Fally (2012) and “upstreamness” in Antras et al
(2012). The second is developed in Fally (2012). Both indexes are computed using the BEA input-output tables
for the US. Here we extend these indicators to multi-rational input-output tables.
   12
      More recently, Kee and Tang (2013), Bernard et al. (2014) and Antràs et al. (2014) have used firm-level
data to examine both intensive and extensive margins in import decisions. Firm-level data, however, do not
allow a full consideration of supply chains over several countries. Multi-country input-output tables are more
suitable for exercises like ours.




                                                      6
2     Model setup
We develop a model where the production of each variety of final good requires a continuum
of tasks and firms organized across countries. We describe, in turn, consumers’ preferences in
final goods, tasks and firms involved in the production of each good, the forces shaping firm
scope and firm entry along the chain, differences between varieties and the labor market.

Preferences: Consumers have identical Cobb-Douglas preferences over varieties of final goods
indexed by ω:                      Z
                                  Ui =           αi (ω) log yi (ω) dω                           (1)
                                          ω∈Ωi

where Ωi denotes the set of varieties available to consumers in i (fixed), yi (ω) denotes quantities
                                                           R
of final goods and αi (ω) is a constant term such that ω∈Ωi αi (ω)dω = 1. We obtain that
expenditures in each variety ω equals:

                                     pYi (ω)yi (ω) = αi (ω)Li wi                                (2)

where Li wi refers to income and pYi to final good prices.

Tasks and firms along the chain: In order to produce the final good of variety ω, a range
[0, 1] of tasks must be performed sequentially. These tasks may be performed across different
firms and different countries.
     Firms are arranged sequentially along the chain to produce each good ω. A chain is specific
to each variety ω of the final good and the location of final producers. On each chain, we assume
that there is a continuum of firms indexed by f . Firms may be located in different countries.
For each chain, we rank countries along the chain and index by i(n, ω) the nth country, with
i(1, ω) indicating the most downstream country and i(N, ω) the most upstream country along
the chain.
     We denote by Fn (ω) the range of firms involved in the chain in the nth country i(n). An
elementary firm df performs a range snf (ω) of tasks. Both the range of firms Fn (ω) and firm
scope snf (ω) are endogenous, but the range of tasks performed across all firms must sum up to
one to obtain a final good:
                                     X Z Fn (ω)
                                                 snf (ω)df = 1                                 (3)
                                      n   f =0

                    R Fn (ω)
Denoting Sn (ω) = f =0       snf (ω)df the total range of tasks to be performed in country n, the
last constraint can be rewritten:
                                            X
                                                Sn (ω) = 1
                                            n


                                                   7
for all chains ω.

Coordination costs: There are costs and benefits to fragmenting production across firms and
countries. Fragmentation across firms reduces total costs because of diseconomies of scope. As
firms must manage employees across different tasks and perform tasks that are away from their
core competencies, unit costs increase with the scope of the firm. We will refer to these costs
as “coordination costs” that occur within the firm.
    Formally, we assume that an elementary firm df in country i requires one unit of intermediate
goods and ci (s, ω)df units of labor which is a function of firm scope s. The cost of labor is wi
in country i and labor is the only production input besides intermediate goods. We assume
that ci is convex in firm scope s, thus generating gains from fragmentation across firms.
    In particular, we specify the following labor requirements:

                                                             sθi (ω)+1
                                       ci (s, ω) = ai (ω)              .                                 (4)
                                                            θi (ω) + 1

where ai (ω) and θi (ω) are specific parameters for each country i for variety ω.13 The marginal
cost of performing additional tasks within the firm increases with s. This follows recent work
on the division of labor (the specification is similar to Chaney and Ossa, 2013), and in this
context can represent the productivity loss associated with movement away from the firm’s core
competencies. θi (ω) parameterizes “coordination costs” and governs the convexity of the cost
function. The higher is θi (ω), the greater the increase in costs when firms need to manage a
larger range of tasks.14 Accounting for the unit cost of labor wi in country i, the cost function
for value added by an elementary firm df is wi ci (s, ω)df .

Transaction costs: Fragmenting production across firms incurs transaction costs. We model
transaction costs like iceberg transport costs in standard trade models. Let qi,f (ω) be the
quantity of an input for variety ω produced by firm f in country i. A transaction in country
i with an elementary firm df involves losing a fraction γi df of the good when upstream firm
f + df sells to firm f .
                                qi,f +df (ω) = qi,f (ω) (1 + γi df )                      (5)

Within each country, quantities thus follow a simple evolution depending on transaction costs
γi and the position on the chain f . As we go upstream, quantities increase exponentially with
  13
     ai (ω) and θi (ω) are constant along the chain (for a given country).
  14
     Note that we assume diseconomies of scope but constant returns to scale in production. This differs from
Chaney and Ossa (2013) and more closely follows Kikuchi et al (forthcoming). In keeping with Kikuchi et
al (forthcoming), this framework allows us to examine patterns of fragmentation across firms while keeping a
perfectly-competitive framework where the competitive allocation of tasks across firms is optimal.



                                                     8
the number of firms f participating in the chain:

                                              qi,f (ω) = eγi f qi,0 (ω)                                          (6)

Since part of the production is lost when transactions occur, upstream firms must produce
larger quantities. The necessary increase in quantities is starker when transaction costs are
high and when the chain is more fragmented.
    In a similar fashion, a cross-border transaction between two consecutive countries i = i(n)
and j = i(n+1) along the chain involves an iceberg trade cost τ > 1 such that:

                                              qj,0 (ω) = τ qi,Fi (ω)                                             (7)

where qj,0 (ω) denotes the quantities produced by the most downstream plant in the upstream
country j and qi,F (ω) denotes quantities produced by the next plant, i.e. the most upstream
plant f = Fi in the next country i along the chain, going downstream. For simplicity, we
assume away geographical elements other than borders and impose a common border cost.15
Cross-border trade costs τ also apply to trade in the final good, between the most downstream
firm and final consumers if those are located in different countries.

Market structure: We assume perfect competition. Since we have constant returns to scale
in quantities,16 the price of each variety in each location equals its unit cost of production.
Consistent with the perfect competition assumption, we impose free entry and zero profits.
Imposing the zero profit condition everywhere along the chain, and for the chain as a whole,
implies that the least cost solution to the problem is consistent with perfect competition as we
will show in Lemma 1. The zero profit constraint will hold at optimized values of sif , which
will also be incentive compatible in equilibrium for every firm in the chain.17

Prices along the chain: The price of intermediate goods at each step along the chain is equal
to their unit cost of production. Here, this cost accounts for all transaction costs and labor
  15
     In our setting, there is a continuum of firms but only a discrete number of countries involved sequentially.
When crossing a border, the unitary transaction cost is τ + γj df but γj df is infinitesimally small relative to τ
with a continuum of firms.
  16
     There are decreasing returns to scope in tasks, sif , but constant returns in terms of quantities, qi,f .
  17
     In the competitive equilibrium, tasks can be allocated across firms through a series of contracts. For
instance, one can have a recursive contracting process: each firm f takes as given the measure of tasks S̄if
that must be completed before selling the good to the next firm, but choses the measure of tasks to complete
in-house sif df and the measure of completed tasks to be required of the subsequent upstream firm, S̄i,f +df ,
such that S̄if = S̄i,f +df + sif df . Conversely, one can think of a forward contracting process: firms take as given
the range of tasks S̄i,f +df performed by upstream firms and chooses the range of tasks S̄if = S̄i,f +df + sif df
to be completed before selling to the next downstream firm. Both approaches lead to the same outcome. We
develop this point in more length in the Appendix (proof of Lemma 1).


                                                         9
costs incurred by all upstream firms. Within country borders, the price of intermediate goods
satisfies the following differential equation which describes its evolution along the chain:

                           pif (ω) = wi ci (sif )df + (1 + γi df ) pi,f +df (ω)                 (8)

where ci (sif ) denotes the cost of performing a range sif of tasks at stage f in country i as
specified above. This equation is similar to its counterpart in Costinot, et al. (2013) and also
features increasing intermediate goods prices as we go downstream. A key difference, however,
is that the labor share is endogenous since snf is endogenous and thus not simply driven by
differences in input prices along the chain. In particular, the cost of inputs per unit of labor is
no longer necessarily larger for downstream firms. Many of the results in Costinot et al (2012)
are driven by this feature and thus no longer hold in our framework.
    Across borders, the price is simply multiplied by the international trade cost τ :

                                          pj,F (ω) = τ pi,0 (ω)                                 (9)

for cross-border transactions from the most downstream plant in j to the most upstream plant
in i. This arbitrage condition also applies to final goods.

Industry heterogeneity: While the previous assumptions are sufficient to generate interest-
ing patterns of specialization along a particular chain, we still need to specify how chains vary
across varieties. Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), we assume that labor efficiency is a ran-
dom variable drawn independently across varieties and countries. Specifically, we assume that
the labor cost parameter ai (ω) is drawn from a Weibull distribution as in Eaton and Kortum
(2002). For each country i, the cumulative distribution function for ai is:

                                                                    ξ
                                    P roba(ai < a) = 1 − e−Ti a                                (10)

where Ti parameterizes the country average productivity and where ξ is inversely related to
productivity dispersion. Note that ai (ω) is thus constant along the chain for a specific country
and variety ω. Unlike Yi (2003, 2010), Rodriguez-Clare (2010) and Johnson and Moxnes (2013),
our framework does not require ai (ω) to differ across tasks along the chain to generate trade in
intermediate goods. Another component of the cost function is θi (ω). We will explore different
settings. In section 4.1, we do not impose any restriction on θi (ω). In section 4.2 we only
consider two countries U and D: one where θU (ω) = θU across all varieties, and another country
with θD (ω) = θD < θU across all varieties. In section 5 (the calibration exercise), we allow θi (ω)
to vary across countries and varieties, assuming that θi (ω) is log-normally distributed with a


                                                   10
country-level shifter θ¯i and a common standard deviation.

Labor supply: Finally, to close the model, we assume that workers are homogeneous and
perfectly mobile within each country, with an inelastic supply of labor Li in country i.
    Labor demand corresponds to unit labor requirement at each stage, multiplied by output qi,f ,
summing across all varieties and all stages performed in the country. Factor market clearance
sets labor demand equal to the value of fixed labor supply.
                                      Z Z
                                                qi,f (ω)ci,f (sif , ω) = Li                             (11)
                                        ω   f


By Walras’ law, trade is balanced.

Equilibrium can then be characterized as:

Definition 1 For each variety of good ω, a partial equilibrium is a competitive equilibrium
taking wages wi and final consumption yi given, defined as an allocation of tasks sif to firms
f ∈ [0, Fi ] and countries i to rank positions n = 1, ....N , a set of quantities qif and intermediate
prices pif , such that: only the lowest-price chain produces (with free entry of chains and firms);
prices equal marginal costs all along the chain; all tasks are performed (3); prices and costs
satisfy (4), (8) and (9), and quantities satisfy (6) and (7).


Definition 2 General equilibrium is defined as a set of wages wi to satisfy the labor mar-
ket clearing condition (11), a set of final demands yi (ω) as in (2) and production chains in
competitive equilibrium as described in Definition 1.



3      Partial equilibrium: optimal organization of chains
In this subsection, we take wages wi as given and focus on the optimal fragmentation and loca-
tion of production for a specific chain corresponding to a final good variety ω. For the sake of
presentation, we drop the index ω. The reader should keep in mind, however, that the optimal
fragmentation and allocation of value across firms, as well as costs parameters ai and θi , are all
specific to each variety of final good ω. For a given chain, we can reformulate the equilibrium as
the solution to a social planner’s problem.18 Given our assumption of perfect competition and
  18
     One could also view the partial equilibrium as the solution to a cost minimization problem for a large
integrated multinational corporation allocating tasks across plants. The firm’s price and quantity choices in
final goods markets would not affect the organization of the optimal chain.


                                                        11
constant returns to scale, prices equal unit costs and the competitive equilibrium corresponds
to the social optimum. This result is standard with a discrete number of firms and it holds here
with a continuum of tasks and firms along each chain. In particular, we show in the appendix
that the first-order conditions associated with the social planner’s problem correspond to the
free entry conditions and firm scope choices in the competitive equilibrium.

Lemma 1 Taking wages as given (Definition 1), a competitive equilibrium is unique and cor-
responds to the social planner’s solution, i.e. it minimizes the cost of producing final goods
subject to the full range of tasks to be performed sequentially along the chain.


   Let us denote by i(n) the ranking of countries along the chain, with i(1) being the most
downstream country and i(N ) the most upstream country, assuming that N countries are
involved in the chain. One should keep in mind that the ranking of countries is an equilibrium
outcome that we will characterize subsequently.
   As expressed in Lemma 1, equilibrium can be summarized by the following optimization
problem:
                                       min P1                                              (12)
                                 over:     i(n) , snf , Fn , Sn , Pn
                                                 Z Fn                                              
                                                          γi(n) f                   γi(n) Fn
             under the constraints:        Pn =         e         ci(n) (snf )df + e         τ Pn+1
                                                      f =0
                                                  Z   Fn
                                           Sn =           snf df
                                                   f =0
                                           N
                                           X
                                                 Sn = 1
                                           i=1


where N is the optimal number of countries involved in the chain and Pn ≡ p0,n denotes the
price at the most downstream stage in country i(n) at the nth position. Recall that exponential
terms eγi(n) f reflect the evolution of quantity requirements along the chain as described in
equation (6). The transaction cost parameter γi(n) and the cost function ci(n) (s) are indexed by
i(n) because they depend on which country i(n) is at the nth position upstream. As an abuse of
notation, PN +1 refers to the price of the most upstream good and is set to zero.19 The solution
to the model in autarky occurs when each country i produces all tasks Si = 1 purchases inputs
at price Pi+1 = 0.
  19
    Alternatively, we could set an exogenous price PN +1 = p̄ of the most upstream good reflecting the price of
primary commodity such as oil and minerals available from an outside economy that trades for final goods.



                                                       12
    The optimization problem described in (12) can be formulated as a nested optimization
problem. In the inner nest, firms in a specific country i(n) are organized to minimize the
price Pn of goods exported by this country, conditional on a given measure of tasks Sn to be
performed and the price Pn+1 of the imported intermediate good. The outer nest allocates
measures of tasks to be completed to each country, and determines the import and export
prices of participating countries, conditional on a sequential ranking of the countries. The
solution must also provide a mapping of countries i to their rank order position n = 1, ...., N
and determine the number of countries N that participate in each chain. Our solution method is
to first solve the within-country problem; then solve the global problem for any given ranking
of countries. The optimal rank order and the choice of N are be determined by comparing
minimized prices of each chain.20


3.1     Fragmentation of production within countries
Before turning to the cross-border organization of chains, we focus on the within-country prob-
lem. In this problem we allocate tasks sif across firms f ∈ [0, Fi ] to minimize country i’s
last-stage (export) price Pi , given a measure of tasks to be completed and an import price.21
Pi can be expressed as the solution of the following optimization:
                                                    Z    Fi                                          
                         Pei (Si , PiM ) = min                 eγi f                    γi Fi
                                                                       wi ci (sif )df + e       PiM           (13)
                                          sif ,Fi       f =0


under the constraint:                               Z    Fi
                                                              sif df = Si                                     (14)
                                                     f =0

To examine the optimal allocation of tasks across firms and the optimal range of firms, it is
                                                                             RF
useful to introduce the Lagrange multiplier λi associated with the constraint 0 i sf df = Si .
   The first-order conditions of this planning program are:

                           For sif :      eγi f wi c0i (sif ) = λi                                            (15)
                            For Fi :      eγi Fi wi ci (siFi ) + eγi Fi PiM γi = siFi λi                      (16)

These conditions help us solve for firm scope (sif ) and the number of firms involved in the
chain (Fi ). Both sif and Fi depend on λi , the shadow cost of a task.
   Equation (15) defines a shadow market for tasks. All firms in the chain provide a measure
  20
     Proposition 1 identifies parametric restrictions on rank orderings of countries that allow us to rule out most
of the possible rank orders as optimal solutions. This substantially eases our computation of the optimum.
  21
     The autarky solution of the model is the solution to the following problem for Si = 1 and PiM = 0.


                                                               13
of tasks sif such that their marginal cost of tasks equals the shadow price of a task, λi . In this
way, the conditions that determine the scope of individual firms also define the allocation of
tasks across firms that minimizes the cost of producing a measure of tasks Si in country i.22
    Condition (15) offers an additional insight about the relationship between firm heterogeneity
and relative position along the chain. A move upstream (i.e. towards higher index f ) increases
required quantities eγi f , which must be balanced by a reduction in the marginal cost c0i (sif ).
Hence, with convex costs, condition (15) implies that more upstream firms have smaller firm
scope sif and provide less value added. We can be more explicit about this using our parame-
terization: c0i = ai sθifi , which implies that firm scope is log-linear in upstreamness f :

                                            ∂ log sif   γi
                                                      =− < 0                                                (17)
                                               ∂f       θi

From a broader perspective, λi also links firm scope decisions across countries, a relationship
we develop further in the following section of the paper. For those relationships it is helpful to
recognize that λi = ∂∂SPii .
                       e


   In an appendix we solve for sif and Fi as a function of λi . We apply these in turn to the
           RF
constraint 0 i sif df = Si and derive an explicit solution for the shadow cost of fragmentation.
                                            "                                      θ 1+1 #θi
                                                               (θi +1)γi PiM
                                                           
                                                γi S i                               i
                               λi = wi ai              +                                                    (18)
                                                 θi                θi    ai w i

λi increases with all cost parameters ai , θi and γi , with the price of intermediate goods PiM and
with the range of tasks to be performed Si . Having solved for the shadow cost of fragmentation,
we can now solve for the price of the last-stage goods Pi , the extent of fragmentation Fi in
country i and firm scope sif across all firms f within the country. We also examine the
(endogenous) intermediate goods intensity at each stage.

Firm scope: The model is tractable enough to solve for firm scope sif all along the chain.
Firm scope si,Fi for the most upstream firm is:

                                                                          θ 1+1
                                                  (θi +1)γi PiM
                                                   
                                                                            i
                                        siFi    =                                                           (19)
                                                      θi    ai w i
  22
    Our Lagrangian formulation in (15) generalizes the condition δc0 (sf +1 ) = c0 (sf ) in Kikuchi et al (forth-
coming) that links the marginal costs of tasks between (discrete) firms f that neighbor one another in the
chain.




                                                           14
while the most downstream firm has scope :

                                                 γi Si
                                        si,0 =         + si,Fi                                   (20)
                                                  θi

Using expression (17), scope at intermediate positions corresponds to: log sif = − γθii f + log si,0 .
Note again that firms are ex ante homogeneous but end up with different firm scope due to
their position on the chain. The difference γθii Si between the scope of the most downstream and
upstream firms in country i is illustrative of this within-country heterogeneity in firm scope.
Heterogeneity is rising in Si because more tasks produced in country i implies more firms, and
thus more room for heterogeneity, conditional on θi and γi . Larger values of transaction costs
γi imply more heterogeneity in firm scope because upstream firms must reduce sif relatively
more to satisfy equation (15). Larger values of θi imply that scope remains more uniform across
firms.
    Of further interest is the relationship between firm scope and the price of intermediate
                                 PM
goods relative to labor costs aiiwi . The scope of both the most upstream and downstream
firms are rising in this ratio. The intuition is that when the price of intermediates is relatively
high, the cost of outsourcing is relatively higher and firms will choose to add more value in-
house. Conversely, when labor costs are high, firms will produce relatively few stages before
outsourcing to upstream firms.

Length of the chain: The number (mass) of firms involved sequentially in production is a key
measure of fragmentation of the chain. Here, since the range of tasks performed by each firm is
endogenous, the length of the chain also becomes endogenous and is no longer proportional to
Si . For a given price PiM of imported intermediate goods and range Si of tasks to be performed,
the mass of sequential suppliers is:
                                       "                1 #
                                   θi         Si   Ai wi θi +1
                               Fi = log 1 +                                                      (21)
                                   γi       θi +1 PiM

The mass of suppliers depends negatively on the price of intermediate goods because more
expensive components make transactions more costly, which leads to less fragmentation. The
number of suppliers also depends negatively on transaction costs and positively on θi , the
parameter for diseconomies of scope.

Aggregate price: After solving for firm scope sif and the number of firms Fi , we find that
the price of the most downstream good in country i, i.e. the solution of the minimization




                                                  15
program (13), is:
                                                                                     θi +1
                                                     Si             1         1
                      Pi = Pei (Si , PiM ) =             (Ai wi ) θi +1 + PiM θi +1              (22)
                                                   θi +1

expressed as a function of the synthetic parameter Ai :
                                                           θi
                                          Ai = ai γi θiθ+1
                                                        i
                                                                                                 (23)

This Ai depends on exogenous country-specific parameters θi , ai and γi , and reflects the ef-
fective labor productivity in country i. Note that, conditional on Ai , prices no longer depend
on transaction costs γi . The price mimics a CES cost function with two inputs: imported
intermediate goods and labor, where the weight for labor depends on the range of tasks, pro-
ductivity, transaction costs and coordination costs. The apparent elasticity of substitution is
θi +1. When coordination costs θi are larger, production has to be more fragmented and there
is a larger amount of production lost in transaction costs. These costs are larger when the price
of intermediate goods PiM is high.

Labor vs. imported intermediate goods demand: Each unit of the final-stage good
produced in country i also generates a demand eγi Fi for the most upstream intermediate goods,
i.e. intermediate goods imported from the next country in the chain. In terms of value rather
than quantities, we obtain that the share of imported inputs in the total cost of production in
country i is:
                                                                 1
                      PiM qi,Fi    ∂ log Pei              PiM θi +1
                                =            =                1              1             (24)
                       Pi qi,0    ∂ log PiM    Si
                                                   (Ai wi ) θi +1 + (P M ) θi +1
                                                         θi+1                  i

Using this expression, we can retrieve the demand for local labor in country i. The share of
local demand in the production of country i has a simple interpretation: it corresponds to the
value-added content of exports for country i in that chain. As with the price of the produced
good, this expression mimics a CES cost function. The share of labor (one minus the above
expression) depends positively on the range of tasks to be performed as well as the price of
intermediate goods. The elasticity of substitution between imported inputs and local labor is
in turn endogenously determined by diseconomies of scope at the firm level.
                                                                                      RF
Gross-output-to-value-added ratio: We define gross output as: GOi = 0 i pif eγi f df by
integrating the value of all transactions along the chain, while total value added by country i
                         RF
corresponds to: V Ai = 0 i ci (sif )eγi f df . The ratio of these two variables has a useful empirical
counterpart since it is readily available in input-output tables provided by statistical agencies.


                                                        16
Here, we find that the GO-VA ratio equals:

                                                 GOi    θi
                                                      =                                           (25)
                                                 V Ai   γi

Strikingly, this result also holds at the firm level. To be more precise, the ratio of price to cost
at each stage is constant and equal to:

                                                   pif        θi
                                                            =                                     (26)
                                               wi ci (sif )   γi

We can interpret this ratio as an index of fragmentation at the firm level. In particular,
this ratio reflects the two key forces present in our model: stronger diseconomies of scope
(coordination costs) θi lead to more fragmentation while larger transaction costs γi lead to less
fragmentation. As seen in equations (17) and (20), this ratio also dictates the difference in
scope between upstream and downstream firms.
    The relationship between the structural parameters and summary measures of fragmentation
are summarized in the following lemma:



Lemma 2 Production fragmentation within countries – captured either by the GO/VA ratio
or by the range Fi of firms involved in the chain – increases with coordination costs θi and
decreases with transaction costs γi . In particular, the GO/VA ratio equals γθii .



Free entry and cost decomposition: We can also use (26) to better understand the link
between our model, perfect competition and the shadow market for tasks. Perfect competition
implies that firms’ average and marginal costs of performing tasks will be equalized along the
chain. If average costs exceed marginal costs, firms can reduce costs by expanding their scope.
If marginal costs exceed average costs, there will be entry and firms will reduce their scope.
Applying (26) and (15), we can equate average and marginal cost of performing tasks for firm
f , and link these to the shadow cost λi :

                   wi ci (sif ) + γi pif   (1 + θi ) wi ci (sif )
                                         =                        = wi c0i (sif ) = λi e−γi f .   (27)
                            sif                    sif
    It is also useful to decompose the sources of costs in the left-hand-side term of (27). Av-
erage cost has two components: labor costs associated with producing tasks inside the firm,
wi ci (sif ), and transaction costs linked to shipments between firms, γi pif . A decomposition
exercise highlights the central role of the coordination cost parameter θi , and will be useful in

                                                       17
a later discussion of comparative advantage. Using (26), we solve for changes in average cost
as we move along the implicit price function.

                                                 γi pif             θi
                                                               =                                         (28)
                                         wi ci (sif ) + γi pif   θi + 1

The contribution of input prices to total cost growth is solely a function of θ. The share of labor
costs is, by implication: θi1+1 . A notable outcome in this calculation is the absence of a role
for γi in this decomposition, which arises because firms react to higher values of γi by bringing
more stages inside the firm. We revisit this issue when we describe comparative advantage
within the supply chain.



3.2       Cross-border fragmentation
Now that we have described the allocation of tasks along the chain within borders, we turn to
the optimal allocation of tasks and firms across borders. In particular, we need to characterize
the ordering of countries i(n) on the chain, with i(1) being the most downstream and i(N ) the
most upstream country.23
   Given the optimal fragmentation of production across firms in each country i = i(n), sum-
marized by the price function from equation (22), Pei (S, P M ), the optimal global value chain
corresponds to the following minimization program:

                                                     min P1                                              (29)
                                                   {Sn ,Pn }


under the constraints:
                                            Pn = Pei(n) (Sn , τ Pn+1 )                                   (30)

and
                                                  N
                                                  X
                                                         Sn = 1                                          (31)
                                                   i=n

where the function Pei (S, P M ) is the solution of the optimization described in equation (22) in
the previous section.
    For a given sequence of countries i(n), we can go quite far in characterizing prices, ranges
of tasks completed and labor demand along the chain. First, it is useful to explicitly express
 23
      Recall that we drop for now the variety subscript ω while most parameters vary across varieties.




                                                         18
the Lagrangian:

                              N
                              X       h                          i      N
                                                                       hX       i
                   L = P1 −         qn Pn − Pei(n) (Sn , τ Pn+1 ) − λG    Sn − 1                 (32)
                              n=1                                           n=1


The Lagrange multipliers associated with price equations correspond to quantities required for
each unit of final good. To be more precise, qn correspond to quantities qi(n),0 /qi(1),0 required
at the most downstream task performed in the nth country i(n) per unit of final good qi(1),0 .
The first-order condition ∂P∂L
                             n+1
                                 = 0 is equivalent to imposing qn+1 = τ qn eγi(n) Fn (using the price
derivative described in equation 24).
                               ∂L
    The first-order condition ∂S n
                                   = 0 reflects the optimal allocation of tasks across countries.
At the optimum, the marginal cost of completing another task should be equalized across all
                                                                                 ∂ Pe
countries on the chain, up to quantities qn produced by country n: λG = qn ∂Si(n)     n
                                                                                        = qn λn . This
implies:
                                            qi λi = qj λj                                         (33)

for any pair of countries i and j along the chain, where λi is the shadow cost of fragmentation
within country i (per unit of goods exported by the country). The tight links between the
Lagrange multipliers in successive countries serves to link the shadow cost of stages across
markets.
    Since a move upstream along the chain increases quantities (because of transaction costs
and cross-border trade costs), the shadow cost λi(n) > λi(n+1) must decrease. Concretely, a first
implication is that firm scope tends to decrease as we go upstream, not just within countries
but also across countries. The F.O.C. in Si implies the following expression which generalizes
equation (15) across countries along the chain:

                                     qn eγi(n) f wi(n) c0i(n) (snf ) = λG                        (34)

where qn eγi(n) f corresponds to the quantities of intermediate goods required for each unit of final
good. Since the latter increases with upstreamness, we obtain that firm scope snf would be
smaller if a country i = i(n) specializes upstream than if it specializes downstream. Therefore, a
country with large within-firm coordination costs would have a relatively larger cost downstream
than upstream compared to a country with low coordination costs.
    This feature has important implications for the sorting of countries along the chain. Be-
cause firm scope is smaller upstream, diseconomies of scope have a smaller impact on upstream
stages than downstream stages. Hence, we should then expect countries with high-θ to special-
ize upstream while low-θ countries tend to specialize downstream. Formally, we can confirm


                                                     19
this insight by examining second-order conditions of the optimization problem described in
Equation (29), which yields the following Proposition:


Proposition 1 Let us denote by i(n) the ranking of countries involved in the same production
chain, i(1) being the most downstream and i(N ) the most upstream country. In equilibrium,
the relative position of countries along the chain is fully determined by coordination costs θi ;
countries with smaller coordination costs specialize downstream:

                                                 θi(1) < θi(2) < ... < θi(N )

    Proposition 1 describes comparative advantage within a supply chain, conditional on a
country’s participation in the chain.24 Two implications are of primary interest here: the
central role of θi in determining within-chain comparative advantage, but also the absence of a
role for the transaction cost parameter γi . The lack of a role for γi would seem to run counter
to Costinot et al. (2013), where cross-country differences in the rates of mistakes in production
drive comparative advantage within the chain. The closest counterpart in our model to the
mistakes in Costinot et al. (2013) is the γi parameter.25
    In both models cross-country sorting of sequential activities mitigates the effects of firm-to-
firm transaction costs on the price of the completed good. In Costinot et al. (2013) countries
with low transaction costs produce downstream in equilibrium because they impose the least
“melt” on goods that are nearing completion. In our model firms offset transaction costs by
expanding firm scope. Because offsetting such costs is more valuable downstream, the countries
in which firms can most easily expand firm scope, the low-θ countries, locate downstream.
    Another way to see this is to exploit the insights in Costinot (2009), who links comparative
advantage to the mathematics of log super-modularity. The accumulation of value added along
the chain insures that the cost of intermediate goods is rising along the chain. This means
that if production costs are log-supermodular in a parameter and input prices, then countries
that have low values of that parameter will locate downstream. Using previous results on cost
decomposition (equation 28), we find for any country i and stage f :
                                 n                         o
                                     wi ci (sif )+γi pif
                         ∂ log               sif                           γi pif            θi
                                                               =                         =        .           (35)
                                 d log pif                         wi ci (sif ) + γi pif   1 + θi
  24
      Countries with large values γi , wi , ai and/or θi may not participate at all in an equilibrium chain. Propo-
sition 1 describes the sorting of countries that do participate in an equilibrium chain.
   25
      Costinot et al. (2013) offer cross-country differences in contract enforcement as a rationale for differences
in the rates of mistakes. Here, the parameter most closely related to contract enforcement is clearly γi .



                                                                   20
In Costinot et al. (2013), sif is fixed, so average cost is log supermodular in pif and γi . The
                   γ pif
middle term wi ci (sifi )+γi pif
                                 would be increasing in γi if firm scope were fixed. This implies that
transaction costs γi have the least impact on average cost when pif is low (i.e. early in the
chain), so that lower transaction costs create a comparative advantage in downstream tasks.
    In contrast, γi does not appear in (35), and thus does not affect comparative advantage
within the chain. The simple explanation is that in our model, firm scope is endogenous to
changes in γi ; in countries with larger transaction costs, firms will endogenously increase firm
scope to mitigate the role of higher transaction costs. These endogenous responses nullify the
role that transaction cost would otherwise play if firm scope were exogenous. Instead, θi plays
a singular role in determining countries’ positions within the chain. As shown in equation (35),
countries with higher coordination costs θi should specialize upstream to mitigate the effect
of input prices on value added.26 A related implication is that there will be no international
fragmentation without cross-country variation in θi . Proposition 1 also implies that there is no
back-and-forth trade along a specific chain in equilibrium, except when a final good is shipped
back to be consumed in an upstream country.

Equilibrium allocation of tasks across countries: Given the ranking of countries described
in Proposition 1, we now describe the range of tasks performed by each one. Using marginal
conditions imposed by the optimization problem, we can also determine prices and firm scope
along the chain depending on wages and relative productivity. Specifically, the first-order
conditions determine the c.i.f. price between consecutive countries i(n) and i(n + 1). First-
order conditions between three consecutive countries i(n − 1), i(n) and i(n + 1) then yield the
range of tasks performed in i(n). Denoting An , wn and θn the productivity, wages and the
coordination cost parameter in the nth country i(n) along the chain, we obtain:
                                           θn+1 +1                   θn +1
                       τ Pn+1 = (An wn ) θn+1 −θn (τ An+1 wn+1 )− θn+1 −θn
                                              1                         θ 1−θ                             (36)
                           Sn       An−1 wn−1 θn −θn−1          An wn        n+1 n
                      
                          θn +1
                                =    τ An wn
                                                        −    τ An+1 wn+1


where τ is the trade cost between any two countries.
  Given the range of tasks performed in country i(n), it is interesting to derive the share of
   26
      Our specific choice of functional form removes γi altogether from the determination of within-chain com-
parative advantage. It is difficult to derive analytical solutions for other functional forms, and the effects of γi
on within-chain comparative advantage may not be completely offset or may be more-than-offset by endogenous
responses to θ for other functional forms of c(s, θ). The intuition nonetheless goes through for cost functions
where the convexity is governed by parameter θ. Countries with low values of θ are better able to reduce inter-
firm transaction costs through expansion and thus   tend to locate downstream. Computational experiments
with alternative functional forms (e.g. a eθs − 1 as in Kikuchi et al. forthcoming) confirm that θ is the main
determinant of comparative advantage within the chain.



                                                        21
local labor in exports to the next country in the chain. Because ours is a single-factor model,
this corresponds to the value added locally in the exports of country i(n), a key statistic for
economic policy.27 Here, we find that the demand for labor (in value) in country i(n) per dollar
of good exported to the next country i(n − 1) in the chain is:
                                                         θ     1                      θ      1
                       wn ln                   wn An           n+1 −θn        τ wn An         n −θn−1
                             =1 −                                                                           (37)
                        Pn                  τ wn+1 An+1                      wn−1 An−1

Intuitively, the share of local value added in exports is higher when the relative labor cost is
lower, as lower labor costs allows the country to serve as the low cost location for a larger
measure of stages. This operates through margins that are both up- and down-stream. A lower
labor cost makes country i(n) more competitive at the margin than the previous upstream
country i(n + 1) as well as the next country i(n − 1) downstream.
    The effect of trade costs on this statistic also operates through two channels: higher trade
costs reduce the contribution of country i(n) in the downstream country i(n − 1) operations,
but they also reduce the upstream country’s contribution. For a country in the middle of
the chain, trade costs have a positive effect on local labor content only if there are stronger
complementarities with downstream rather than upstream countries, i.e. when the differences
in θn are larger with the downstream country than with the upstream country: θn − θn−1 >
θn+1 − θn .
    Conditional on the set of countries participating (with θn increasing with n along the chain),
we can go further and obtain a simple expression for the price of final goods (i.e. price of
downstream goods in country 1) as a function of costs parameters A, θ and wages w. Conditional
on the set of countries, we can also derive simple expressions for the share of labor costs from
a specific country.


Lemma 3 Conditional on the set of countries n = 1, 2, etc. participating (with θn increasing
with n along the chain), the price of the final good is:

                                                       A1 w1             
                                        P1 =               θ  +1
                                                                 Θ wA, τ                                    (38)
                                                    (θ1 +1) 1
             
where Θ wA, τ < 1 captures the gains from fragmentation for the chain:
                                    "        N −1                                  θ     1
                                                                                                   #θ1 +1
                                            X                           wn An           n+1 −θn
                     Θ wA, τ = 1 −                  (θn+1 −θn )
                                             n=1
                                                                      τ wn+1 An+1
 27
      For example Koopman et al. (2010) investigate the share of domestic value added in China’s exports.


                                                          22
Moreover, country i(n)’s contribution to each dollar of final good being produced is equal to:
                                                           θ      1                       θ 1−θ
                                                wn−1 An−1        n −θn−1            wn An      n+1 n
           ln wn   d log P1   d log Θ            τ w n An
                                                                           − τ wn+1    An+1
                 =          =          =                                     θ 1+1                    (39)
            P1     d log wn   d log wn                              
                                                                       P1      1
                                                                      A1 w1




    In the expression for the final good price above, the first term (θ1A    1 w1
                                                                            +1)θ1 +1
                                                                                     is the cost of
production in country 1 if there is no possibility to fragment production across countries, while
                            
the second term Θ wA, τ is the price reduction obtained from fragmenting production across
countries. We can verify that this term increases with trade costs. It also increases with labor
requirements A in each upstream country.
    Reductions in trade costs allow chains to reorganize some of the tasks abroad, which in turn
has an effect on all other firms along the chain. Equation (34) shows that the marginal cost of
increasing firm scope has to be equalized across all stages. A decrease in trade costs leading to
a decrease in the final good’s price also lead to a decrease in firm scope at other stages. The
price of the final good is itself tightly linked to the shadow cost of fragmentation:

                                           A1 w 1            θ θ+1
                                                                 1
                                 λG =             θ
                                                    Θ wA, τ    1                                       (40)
                                         (θ1 +1) 1

As expressed with the Θ term, there is a tight connection between the gains from fragmentation
(which reduces the final good’s price) and the shadow cost of fragmentation. Any increase in
fragmentation and decrease in the final good price follows: d log λG = θ1θ+1 1
                                                                               d log Θ.
    A change in trade costs and wages along the chain has implications for firm scope everywhere
on the chain. Each firm equalizes the cost of the marginal task and the shadow cost λG of
performing the task somewhere else. Hence, a change in the shadow cost of fragmentation
λG has implications for firm scope everywhere along the chain. In particular, the marginal
cost of increasing firm scope in the most downstream firm in the most downstream country,
w1 c0 (s1,f =0 ) is equal to λG , which implies:

                                               γ1         1
                                   s1,f =0 =      Θ wA, τ θ1 +1                                        (41)
                                               θ1

Hence: d log s1,f =0 = θ11+1 d log Θ, which formalizes how a change in fragmentation and trade
costs (changes in Θ) affects firm scope for the last firm in the chain, the one that produces the
finished good.
    Note, however, that the scope of the average firm in an upstream country i(n) (with n > 1)
does not decrease with trade costs. As trade costs decrease, a country moves downstream where


                                                  23
firms tend to be larger. Upstream firms, which tend to be smaller in scope, exit or relocate.
More specifically, we find that both the size of the most downstream and the most upstream
firm within a country increase as trade costs decrease:
                                     θ  1                                                      θ     1
          (θn +1)γn       An−1 wn−1    n −θn−1                      (θn +1)γn          An w n          n+1 −θn
 sn,0   =                                        and:     sn,Fn   =
              θn           τ An wn                                      θn          τ An+1 wn+1
                                                                                          (42)
   Proposition 2 below summarizes the effect of trade costs on a chain in partial equilibrium
(exogenous wages) for a given set of countries involved in the chain:


Proposition 2 Holding wages constant, a decrease in cross-border trade costs leads to:
  i) a decrease in the price of the final good;
  ii) an increase in the value share of imported inputs at any stage of the chain;
  iii) an increase in the range of tasks being offshored;
  iv) a decrease in the shadow cost of fragmentation λG ;
  v) a decrease in firm scope sn,f at a given stage f ;
  vi) an increase in average firm scope in upstream countries n > 1.


    While the ranking of countries along the chain (from downstream to upstream stages) is
dictated by the ranking in θi (Proposition 1), it is more difficult to characterize the participation
of a specific country in the chain. Expression (36) for Si can be used to obtain a necessary
condition for Si > 0, but cannot be used to derive a sufficient condition for country i to
participate in the chain. Moreover, the reader should keep in mind that we have dropped the
variety subscript ω to simplify the notation, but the costs parameters Ai and θi are assumed to
be specific to a particular variety of final good ω. Hence, the organization of the chains across
firms and countries is specific to each variety and country of final destination.
    In the next section, we address this problem in a two-country case with trade costs and
heterogeneous chains.28 In Section 5, we examine numerically a ten-country case calibrated
using input-output data. Using expressions (38) and (39) from Lemma 2, we can dramatically
reduce the complexity of the numerical problem and reformulate the problem into a simpler
linear programming problem that allows us to solve for large economies with a large number
of final goods.
  28
   In the working paper version (NBER working paper 21520), we also examine a fully tractable case as in
Costinot et al (2012) with more than two countries, symmetric chains and frictionless trade.




                                                  24
4    General equilibrium
The discussion so far has described the production structure of the equilibrium chain. As
described in Definition 2, general equilibrium requires labor markets and the final goods market
to clear.
    Using Lemma 3 (equation 39) for each individual chain and our expression for labor demand
per unit of final output, it is now easier to compute aggregate labor market demand. As in
equation (11), factor market clearance sets labor demand equal to the value of fixed labor
supply:
                              XZ                   li(n) (ω)
                                       αj (ω)Lj wj           dω = Li                        (43)
                              j,n ω∈Ωj
                                                   Pi(n) (ω)

where li(n) and Pi(n) are the values of unit labor demands and export prices that apply to region
i when it takes the nth position in an equilibrium supply chain for variety ω that is completed
in country j. αj (ω)Lj wj corresponds to expenditures on the final good (equation 2).

Two-country case: trade elasticity and welfare

A central question in the trade literature is the link between trade and welfare. Arkolakis et
al. (2012) show that several theoretical models summarize the trade welfare link with a simple
formula requiring only the home trade share and a trade elasticity parameter. Our model of
sequential production does not provide such a simple summary of trade and welfare links, but
we are able to make a direct analytical comparison of our model’s framework, relative to the
Arkolakis et al. (2012) benchmark, in a two-country setting.
    We consider country D and country U . In country D, we assume that all θD (ω) equal θD .
In country U , all θU (ω) equal θU . To justify these country names, we assume that θU > θD .
This implies that country U is always upstream and country D downstream when there is
production sharing.
    The first relationship we study is the response of trade to trade costs. While the previous
sections examine the fraction of value-added by a country along a given chain (intensive margin),
here we examine how trade costs affect the fraction of varieties that a country sources from
another country depending on trade costs.
    Country D, in particular, relies on imports from U to produce some goods that it exports
back to U . As in Yi (2010), this back-and-forth trade generates a higher trade elasticity. There
are two reasons for that. When trade costs increase by 1%, the price of goods imported by
U from D increases by more than 1% since the production of final goods in D relies itself on
goods imported from U (a double penalty). The second reason is that, even if there were no
double penalty of trade costs, labor costs in country D would need to be strictly more than

                                               25
1% lower to offset a 1% increase in the price of its exports when its labor only contributes a
fraction of the value of the good. Considering the extensive margin, this implies a larger decline
in the fraction of goods sold by D when trade costs increase. Combining these two effects, we
find that the trade elasticity, on the extensive margin, is larger than without fragmentation of
production across countries. For any two countries i 6= j, we have:
                                                            
                                                       πij
                                           d log       πii
                                                                  ≤ −ξ
                                              d log τ

where πij is the share of products from country j among final goods purchased by consumers in
country i.29 Moreover, as we describe in Appendix, lower trade costs generate more fragmen-
tation of production and therefore increase the trade elasticity. Because lower trade costs lead
to more fragmentation, the foreign labor content embodied in the marginal variety increases.
When trade becomes frictionless, the foreign labor content for this marginal variety converges
to unity and the trade elasticity can, in theory, go to infinity.
    We also examine Johnson and Noguera (2012a)’s “Value-added-to-export” (VAX) ratio,
which compares a country’s value added embodied in its exports to its gross export value.30
A decrease in the VAX ratio reflects an increase in fragmentation across borders, because
embodied import value accounts for a larger share of gross export value (Johnson 2014). In our
two country model, the VAX ratio is below unity in both countries. The upstream country sells
a combination of intermediate and final goods, while the downstream country adds value to the
upstream country’s intermediates. In the Appendix, we show that this back-and-forth trade
grows faster than other trade flows as trade costs decrease, which implies that the VAX ratio for
country U decreases as trade costs decrease. These results are both intuitive and supported by
recent empirical evidence. In particular, Johnson and Noguera (2012b, 2013) use multi-country
input-output tables to show that the VAX ratio has decreased over the past decades and that
the bilateral VAX ratio depends positively on bilateral trade costs.
    We now turn to the distributional question of how trade affects welfare in upstream and
downstream countries. A key policy question is whether a country is affected differently de-
pending on its position in international production chains. To examine this question, we derive
an exact expression for the price index and the gains from trade relative to autarky and compare
it to standard models without cross-border fragmentation of production. In particular, we use
the formula developed by Arkolakis et al.  (2012)
                                                  as a benchmark. Arkolakis et al. (2012) show
                                              wi
that welfare gains from trade equal ∆ log Pi = − 1ξ log πii in a wide set of models, including
  29
   Recall that ξ is the parameter that defines the dispersion of productivity draws in each country.
  30
   As noted in Fally (2012), the inverse of the VAX ratio for the world can also be interpreted as the embodied
number of border crossings.


                                                             26
Eaton and Kortum (2002, henceforth EK), when there is no fragmentation of production.
    These calculations show that welfare changes from international integration are larger than
the simple EK model for D, and smaller than the EK model for U (explicit formulas are
provided in Appendix). The brief intuition on this point is as follows. In a simple EK model,
or in an EK model with fully-domestic production chains, each country benefits from trade in
final goods because trade allows both countries to purchase rather than produce the varieties
for which they have comparative disadvantage. When we allow international integration of
production chains, D benefits in this way, but additional gains from trade arise from D’s ability
to offshore those tasks for which it is has comparative disadvantage (within the set of varieties
in which it has comparative advantage in the final good). By contrast, country U’s gains from
integration are smaller than they would be in an EK model because in the fully integrated
equilibrium country U produces (the early, low-productivity stages of) varieties for which it
has comparative disadvantage in final goods.
    We summarize the results on the trade cost elasticity, VAX ratio and welfare in the following
Proposition:


Proposition 3 With two countries, the effect of trade costs on trade is such that:
i) The elasticity of trade in final goods to trade costs is higher than without fragmentation;
ii) This elasticity is larger when trade costs are smaller;
iii) The value-added content of trade  decreases
                                                 as trade costs decrease.
                                       wi
iv) Welfare gains from trade ∆ log Pi are larger than − 1ξ log πii for country D and smaller
than that for country U .


    While these results are shown here only for a two-country case, our counterfactual simula-
tions in Section 5 suggest that these insights hold more generally. In what follows, we calibrate
our model and compute gains from trade, trade elasticities and VAX ratios by using input-
output tables and information on domestic and foreign labor content which, as shown above,
are crucial to obtain a more adequate measure of the gains from trade when production is
fragmented across borders.


5     Quantitative analysis
5.1    Data
Our main sources of data are the Asian input-output tables developed by IDE-JETRO. These
tables provide information on gross output, value-added, and (most importantly) input pur-

                                               27
chases by product, parent industry (downstream industry), source country and destination
country. For instance, the data report the amount of metals purchased from China by the
auto industry in Japan. These 4-dimensional input-output tables, are, as far as we know,
the only tables that track international transactions directly, rather than imputing them from
trade flows. This is an exceptional data set for investigating the organization and evolution
of international production fragmentation in a region of the world where fragmentation is an
important feature of international trading relationships.31
    The dataset covers 9 Asian countries and the US.32 Our analysis mostly focuses on the
year 2000 (with most disaggregated product classification), but we also compare our results to
IDE-JETRO data from 1975 and 1990. This period marks a time in which the region began to
emerge as an important location for internationally fragmented production (see Baldwin and
Lopez-Gonzalez (2015) for example).
    Information on input purchases and production is disaggregated at the 76-sector level in
2000. For the sake of comparison to previous input-output tables (1975 and 1990), we also
construct a more aggregated 46-sector classification to obtain harmonized product categories
across years. The sector classification is far more detailed for manufacturing goods and com-
modities than services (among the 46 sectors, only 5 of them are service industries). We thus
mostly restrict our attention to tradable goods: commodities and manufacturing goods.
    The information provided in the IDE-JETRO tables goes beyond a simple aggregation
of country-level input-output tables. Besides the harmonization of product categories, input
flows by parent and source countries are estimated using supplementary surveys about firms’
input choices. This supplementary information informs deviations from the proportionality
assumption, which, according to Puzzello (2012), is rejected in these data.33 This constitutes
an important advantage of using the IDE-JETRO input-output compared to previous attempts
at constructing input-output tables based on the proportionality assumption (as in Johnson
and Noguera 2012, for example).34
  31
      Like other international IO tables such as the World Input-Output Database or Global Trade Analysis
Project database, the Asian IO tables are constructed by merging harmonized national IO tables with interna-
tional trade statistics. The Asian tables supplement these sources of information with a survey of input users,
who report the specific country-of-origin of their inputs. See Meng et al. (2013) for details.
   32
      The countries in the data base are the US, Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand,
Indonesia and the Philippines.
   33
      The proportionality assumption is made to construct input purchase by source country and parent industry
when only partial information is provided. For instance, traditional country-level input-output tables describe
how much steel is used by the auto industry in each country. Using trade flow data (which describe how much
steel is imported from a particular country), previous international input-output tables have been constructed
by allocating the use of input across source countries on a proportional basis.
   34
      Ideally, one would want to use firm-level data tracking chains across multiple countries in order to study
why countries specialize at different positions along chains. While recent research has examined the structure of
chains by matching suppliers and buyers within a country (e.g. Bernard et al. (2016)) or between two countries


                                                       28
5.2     Measuring the position along the chain: indexes N , D and DX
To better understand the degree of fragmentation in vertical production chains we adopt four
indexes that generalize the two indexes proposed in Fally (2012) and applied there to US
data. The indexes are designed to describe industries’ position in vertical production chains by
exploiting information about relationships in the input-output table. The ‘D’ index measures
an industry’s weighted average distance to final demand, where distance is a measured by
the apparent number of plants visited by the industry’s output before reaching consumers.35
The ‘N’ index calculates, for each industry, the number of stages that are embodied in each
industry’s production. These two calculations are distinct for each industry, and in the US
data there is only a weak correlation between them.

Distance to final demand or “upstreamness”: We turn to a formal representation of the
two indices. Consider a variable Dik , which is intended to measure the distance of a product
k from final demand. Some part of product k’s sales will be intermediate trade purchased
by downstream industries, so the industry in question’s distance measure will depend upon
which industries buy its output, and in turn how far those downstream industries are from
final demand. Because an industry’s sales go to several industries, which will vary in their
respective measures of D, the industry measure must be weighted, and it must also be defined
recursively. Let Dik indicate the distance measure in region i for product k. We define Dik as:
                                                                X
                               Dik = 1 + ϕikik Dik +                        ϕikjl Djl
                                                             (j,l)6=(i,k)


where ϕikjl denotes the share of output from sector k in country i that is used in sector l in
country j. The entire system of equations that includes a Dik for each industry and country
can be solved to produce a measure for each sector-country pair.
    As shown in Antras, et al. (2012), this index can be interpreted as the average number
of stages of production an industry’s output passes through before reaching final consumers.
Using the input-output matrix, we can decompose the different trajectories taken by the good
across and within industries. Each trajectory is associated with a specific number of transac-
tions across or within industries. Index D would then correspond to the average number of
transactions weighted by the fraction of output corresponding to each trajectory. Notice that
Dik does not only rely on inter-industry linkages but also depends on the extent of fragmenta-
(e.g. Bernard, Moxnes and Ulltveit-Moe, 2016), firm-level data of these kinds do not provide information that
allow us to track chains on their entire length across multiple countries. These input-output tables allow us to
do so at a more aggregate level.
   35
      The measure is equivalent to the ‘upstreamness’ measure in Antras, et al. (2012).



                                                      29
tion within each industry. If an industry’s production is partly used an input by other firms
in the industry (e.g. electronic parts are used as inputs into other electronic parts within the
same country), the coefficient ϕikik would be strictly positive and would contribute to a higher
index Dik (since it would also correspond to a higher number of transactions).36
    How to interpret ‘D’ in the model? First, suppose that products k correspond to stages f .
When f is strictly positive, i.e. when it does not refer to the most downstream stage in the nth
country i(n), then all sales are made to the next plant f − df in the chain:

                                       Di(n),f +df = df + Di(n),f

If f = 0 and i(n) is not the most downstream country i(1), then all sales go towards the most
upstream firm in the next country in the chain. After integrating, we obtain that the model
counterpart of Dif corresponds to the total range of firms located downstream:
                                                        X
                                       Di(n),f = f +            Fi(n0 )
                                                        n0 <n


summing across all downstream countries i(n0 ) with n0 < n.
   In terms of the model, we can also interpret Di,k , for any country i, as a semi-elasticity of
required quantities w.r.t. to transaction costs. Formally, Dif corresponds to:

                                                  X ∂ log qi,f
                                         Di,f =                     ,                               (44)
                                                   j
                                                         ∂γj

which follows from (6). Because γj governs proportional iceberg “melt” that arises in firm-
to-firm transactions, it summarizes the degree to which the additional quantities required of
upstream firms rise with the upstreamness of their position.

Embodied stages: The Nik index captures a weighted average of the number of plants involved
sequentially in the production of good k in country i. It is defined recursively by:
                                                                X
                              Nik = 1 + µikik Nik +                       µikjl Njl
                                                          (j,l)6=(i,k)


where µikjl denotes the amount of input l from country j used to produce one dollar of product
k in country i. This is a single equation, but, as with the D index, the system of equations can
  36
    One may argue that the industry classifications are too aggregated and create biases in computing Dik
and Nik compared to what would be obtained with more precise data. Fally (2012) examines the aggregation
properties of indexes D and N and shows that aggregating industries does not much affect the average of D
and N across industries.


                                                   30
be solved to produce a measure of N for each sector-country pair. As shown in Fally (2012),37
this index can also be expressed as a weighted average of the number of stages required to
produce good k in country i, weighted by how much each stage of production contributes to
the final value of that good.
    We can also interpret N in light of our theoretical framework. In the model, the amount
of input purchased by other firms corresponds to the price of the good minus the labor cost
                              w c (s )df
incurred at each stage, i.e.: i ipifif , where pif denotes the price of the good in country i at
stage f . The model counterpart of index N would thus correspond to the following recursive
definition:                                                 
                                                 ci (sif )df
                               Ni,f = df + 1 −                 Ni,f +df
                                                     pif
with a similar equation when the chain crosses a border. The solution to this differential
equation equals the average of the number of production stages required to produce a good at
stage f in country i.
   There is a strong connection between the N and D index. Since the number of stages
between firm f 0 in the mth country i(m) and firm f in the nth country i(n) corresponds to
Di(m),f 0 − Di(n),f , we obtain formally:
                                            Z                                                                       
                                 1
              Ni(n),f   =                                      (Di(m),f 0 − Di(n),f ) qi(m),f 0 ci(m) (si(m),f 0 )
                          qi(n),f pi(n),f    (m,f 0 )>(n,f )


where the integral is taken across all upstream firms either in i(n) at a more upstream stage
f 0 > f or in more upstream countries i(m) with m > n, and where the price pif can be
itself re-expressed as the sum of all costs incurred in upstream stages, adjusting for quantities:
                 R
qi(n),f pi(n),f = (m,f 0 )>(n,f ) qi(m),f 0 ci(m) (si(m),f 0 ).
    The connection between the two indexes N and D is clearest if we look at the most down-
stream stage. For the most downstream country i = 1 and the most downstream firm f = 0 in
the country, index N corresponds to a weighted average of D:
                                                         "                                                  #
                                                             XZ       Fj
                                                 1
                             Ni(1),f =0 =                                   Dj,f 0 qif 0 cj (sjf 0 ) df 0
                                             q1,0 p1,0       j     f 0 =0


                          P R Fj
with the price pi=1,f =0 = j f 0 =0 qif 0 cj (sjf 0 )df 0 being the sum of all upstream costs.
   As for D, we can also use the model to interpret Nik as a semi-elasticity of w.r.t. to
 37
      See Proposition 1 in Fally (2012).




                                                                 31
transaction costs, looking at prices instead of quantities. Formally, Nif corresponds to:38

                                                     X ∂ log pif
                                             Nif =
                                                       j
                                                             ∂γj


Aggregation: Using the IDE-JETRO data, the D and N statistics are calculated at the
level of country-industry (i, k) pairs. For the calibration exercise that follows a country-level
statistic will be useful so as to better describe countries’ average position in global supply
chains. A weighted average across statistics is most suitable, although there are several options
for defining weights, including value added- or export-weighting for D and output-weighting for
N. As argued in Fally (2012), a natural weight for the upstreamness index D is value added,
and final production by sector-country for index N .
    In order to best capture the relative position of countries on international production chains,
the aggregate we use in calibration is an export-weighted average of index Dik . This export-
weighted average is the statistic calculated in Antràs et al. (2012) to document countries’
comparative advantage along production chains. Formally, we define DXi by country with the
following:                                       P
                                                   k Xik Dik
                                        DXi = P                                               (45)
                                                     k Xik

where Xik represents country i’s exports of product k.

Descriptive statistics: We calculate these indices using the IDE-JETRO data from 1975,
1990 and 2000. First, we examine at upstreamness, weighted by value-added, across countries
and years. Figure 1(a) exhibits the results for all tradable goods. There is some variation in
the levels and trends of upstreamness index D across countries. This index increases over time
for most countries (with Japan and the US as notable exceptions), which suggests that chains
have become longer or that the countries in question have moved into upstream positions along
production chains.
    In this graph, countries are sorted by their per capita GDP’s. One can see that there is no
monotonic relationship between per capita GDP and average upstreamness. Countries at both
end of the spectrum tend to be downstream while middle-income countries are relatively more
upstream. This is not in line with the model developed by Costinot et al (2012) where more
productive countries tend to be located downstream.
  38
    Based on the results in Fally (2012), we should also note that Nif equals the aggregate gross-output-to-
value-added ratio across upstream activities. It can therefore be interpreted as a weighted average of γθii across
upstream activities.




                                                       32
              Figure 1: Average upstreamness index D by country for 1975, 1990 and 2000
  4




                                                                            4
  3.5




                                                                            3
  3
  2.5




                                                                            2
  2




                                                                            1
        USA    SGP   JPN    TWN   KOR   MYS    THA   IDN   CHN   PHL            USA   SGP   JPN    TWN   KOR   MYS    THA   IDN   CHN   PHL

                           1975         1990           2000                                       1975         1990           2000



                       (a) Manufacturing                                                          (b) Electronics




    In Figure 1(b), we report results of our calculations for the electronics sector only, by coun-
try and by year. The electronics sector is particularly interesting over this period. Complex
international production chains are, anecdotally, an important phenomenon in East Asian man-
ufacturing. This is even more notably so within the electronics sector. Moreover, there has
been important growth in the region’s trade in electronics, which constituted only 8% of Asian
exports in 1975, and 34% in 2000. For electronics, there has been a sharp upward movement
in index D for most countries, which is consistent with increasing fragmentation of production
chains in Asia in the electronic industry. Some countries such as China and the US remain
downstream while other countries such as the Philippines have moved upstream. But again,
there is no clear monotonic relationship between upstreamness and GDP per capita as predicted
by Costinot et al (2012).
    For other indexes, we refer to Table 2 and 3 (indexes DX, GOVA and N for 2000). In an
appendix, we describe the variations in D and N across industries, showing that the two indexes
are not strongly correlated. As one could expect, primary commodities such as ores and feeds
are associated with higher upstreamness while finished goods tend to have lower upstreamness
index values.

Correlation between upstreamness, value-added content and transaction costs: The
model predicts that: i) countries with high coordination costs θ should specialize upstream
while countries with low θ should specialize downstream (Proposition 1); ii) the gross-output-
to-value-added (GO/VA) ratio increases with coordination costs θ (Lemma 2); iii) the GO/VA
ratio increases with transaction costs γ (Lemma 2).


                                                                       33
                       4   3.5
                 GO/VA Ratio
                       3
                       2.5




                                 2            4                  6                  8
                                              Upstreamness

                                     95% CI           Fitted values (local poly.)



        Figure 2: Gross-output-to-value-added ratio as a function of upstreamness Dik


    By combining predictions i) and ii), we should observe a positive correlation between up-
streamness and the GO/VA ratio. This correlation should hold after controlling for transaction
costs γi . Moreover, we should observe a negative correlation between the GO/VA ratio and
proxies for transaction costs γi . Here we use the “cost of enforcing contracts” from the Doing
Business database (World Bank), but similar results obtain with measures from the Doing Busi-
ness database on the “time to enforce contracts” or the recovery rate in insolvency proceedings.
    Figure 2 shows a strong positive correlation between upstreamness and the GO/VA ratio.
This finding supports the prediction that firm scope tends to be smaller upstream than down-
stream. If firm scope were fixed and held constant along production chains, the GO/VA ratio
would be negatively correlated with upstreamness because a constant measure of value added
per firm would accrue to increasing levels of gross output as production moved downstream.
Our model with endogenous firm scope generates equilibria with relatively more value added by
downstream firms, thereby allowing it to replicate the positive relationship observed in Figure 2.
    In Table 1, we confirm the result from Figure 2 by regressing the gross-output-to-value-
added ratio on upstreamness. We find a significant and positive correlation between the two,
whether we include country fixed effects (column 2), industry fixed effects (column 3) or both
(column 4). Consistent with the model, the correlation is the strongest when most of the
variation is driven by cross-country variation (column 3), i.e. when we include industry fixed
effects but no country fixed effects. Even assuming our model structure, the correlation might



                                                34
                           Table 1: GO/VA ratio and upstreamness Dik

                                       (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)
         Dependent var.:                                    GO/VA ratio
         Upstreamness                 0.147            0.132            0.244             0.161
                                    [0.034]∗∗        [0.031]∗∗        [0.069]∗∗         [0.060]∗∗
         Industry FE                   No                No              Yes               Yes
         Country FE                    No                Yes             No                Yes
         R2                           0.05               0.16            0.49             0.59
         N                            344                344             344              344
         Notes: OLS regression with robust s.e.; by country and sector in 2000, excluding services
         and trimming outliers with upstreamness above 10; ∗∗ significant at 1%.



not be expected to emerge if the structural parameters γi and θi were strongly correlated across
countries. Nevertheless, we do see the positive relationship.
   As shown in Table 2, our results also corroborate another prediction of the model, that the
GO/VA ratio decreases with transaction costs γi . This result is intuitive: higher transaction
costs lead to fewer transactions and a larger range of activities performed internally, hence
a higher value-added content and a lower GO/VA ratio. Note also that the correlation with
upstreamness is robust to controlling for γi using proxies for transaction costs (columns 3, 4).


                        Table 2: GO/VA ratio and contract enforcement

                                       (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)
         Dependent var.:                                    GO/VA ratio
         Cost of enforcing           -0.385           -0.376           -0.329            -0.264
         contracts                  [0.136]∗∗        [0.083]∗∗        [0.082]∗∗         [0.097]∗∗
         Upstreamness                                                   0.226             0.212
                                                                      [0.069]∗∗         [0.066]∗∗

         Industry FE                   No                Yes             Yes              Yes
         R2                           0.02               0.48            0.50             0.52
         N                            344                344             344              344
         Notes: OLS regression with robust s.e.; by country and sector in 2000, excluding services;
         the cost of enforcing contracts is from the Doing Business Database; population and
         (output-based) per capita GDP are from the Penn World Table 9; ∗∗ significant at 1%.




                                                    35
5.3     Calibration
Our calibration exercise focuses on the 10 countries that are covered by the IDE-JETRO input-
output tables. The general equilibrium model described above is calibrated so as to reproduce
key features of the data. The parsimony of the model allows us to consider only a small number
of parameters to calibrate, those listed in the left column of Table 3.
    Thanks to Lemma 2 and the analytical results described in section 3.2, we can reduce the
optimization problem described in equation (12) to a linear programming problem for each
chain. We consider chains of varying length, and identify the low cost chain completed in
each destination country. The supplier of final goods to each market is the country with the
lowest delivery cost, gross of trade costs.39 Numerical simulations are performed in Matlab.
We approximate a continuum of varieties by assuming 1,000,000 different final goods.
    We now describe each calibrated parameter and its targeted moment, as described respec-
tively in the left and right columns of Table 3.

Labor supply: Each country is endowed with an exogenous supply of factors. In the bench-
mark case, we consider only one factor of production: labor. For each country, we choose the
labor force Li to match aggregate value-added in tradeable goods sectors (i.e. excluding ser-
vices) divided by the cost of labor (proxied by income per capita in our benchmark simulation).

Labor productivity: Labor productivity is calibrated such that labor demand equals labor
supply, while wages are set equal to per capita income, obtained from the Penn World Tables
for the year 2000.
    As in Eaton and Kortum (2002), average labor productivity across all varieties is equal to
        −1
Āi ≡ Ti ξ where Ti is the shift parameter for the Weibull distribution of Ai (ω) in country i
(equation 10). The dispersion parameter ξ = 5 is calibrated based on recent estimates such
as Simonovska and Waugh (2014). Conditional on wages and calibrated parameters, we can
compute labor demand for each country. Equality between aggregate labor demand and labor
supply is attained by adjusting labor productivity Āi (or, equivalently, by adjusting Ti ). Note
that there is a tight link between wages and implied labor productivity in country i. As shown
in Table 3, there is a nearly log-linear (downward-sloping) relationship between wages wi and
Āi in our benchmark calibration.

Coordination costs: As shown in Proposition 1, the coordination cost parameter θi is a key
determinant of the position of a country along the chain, downstream or upstream. A country
tends to export final goods when coordination costs are low and export intermediate goods when
  39
    In general, if trade costs are sufficiently high, the final good associated with a single a variety may be
produced for export by one country and for domestic consumption by one or more other countries.


                                                     36
these costs are higher. Since all countries export a mix of final and intermediate goods, we
assume that θi is heterogeneous across varieties ω, as discussed in section 4.3. We assume that
it is log-normally distributed. In calibration countries are allowed a different shift parameter
θ̄i and a different standard deviation σθ . We use DX as the primary moment to calibrate θ̄i ,
and calibrate σθ to fit countries’ intermediate share in total exports. While the correlation of
the θ̄i and DXi in Table 3 is weak (0.22), the prediction of the model is confirmed: countries
that are more upstream have higher average values of θ̄i . Most countries share similar values
of DXi , with China and, to a lesser degree, Thailand positioned relatively downstream, while
Indonesia is relatively upstream.

Transaction costs: Another key parameter of the model is γi , the cost of transactions between
two firms. This cost is assumed to be positive even for transactions that occur within borders.
Transaction costs are difficult to estimate in practice, but our model indicates that the gross-
output-to-value-added ratio equals the ratio of coordination and transaction costs parameters
θi
γi
   and thus can be used to retrieve an estimate of γi once we know θ¯i (on average). Results
are provided in Table 3. As a credibility check we compare our results to plausible real-
world counterparts of the γi parameter using the Doing Business Database (World Bank).
Reassuringly, we find expected correlations of our calibrated γi variables with the costs of
enforcing a contract claim (0.69), the time to enforce contracts (0.29), and the recovery rate
in insolvency proceedings (-0.39). We note that Singapore has unusually low transaction costs
in the calibration, which is consistent with its high gross output to value added ratio. At the
other end of the spectrum, Indonesia has the highest transaction costs, which is consistent with
the Doing Business indicators and recent literature (Olken and Barron, 2009).

Trade costs: In addition to transaction costs that are also incurred within borders, cross-
border transactions face an additional burden. The nature and size of the extra cost affecting
international transactions is the matter of an extensive debate in the trade literature (transport
costs, asymmetric information, marketing cost, technical barriers, or cultural differences are
plausible sources of such costs). There is however a consensus that these costs are large and
have a large effect on cross-border trade. While distance usually plays a key role in explaining
the pattern of international trade (see Disdier and Head, 2008), distance is not as crucial for
trade among IDE-JETRO countries.40 We therefore assume that cross-border trade costs are
  40
     In a standard gravity equation of trade using the IDE-JETRO data, the coefficient for distance is not
significant while the estimated border effect is large and significant, economically and statistically. Of course,
this is a small sample of only 10 countries. Antràs and de Gortari (2017) build a general equilibrium model
of international value chains assuming heterogeneous trade costs linked to geography. They show that more
geographically central regions are more likely to host final production. In our model, geography would affect
participation in the chain but not the vertical ordering of countries.


                                                       37
                       Table 3: Parameter choice and moments to match
Parameters:                                      Moments to match:
                − 1ξ
Average Āi = T                  USA     1.000   GDP per capita            USA    35,080
by country                       SGP     1.284   (PWT)                     SGP    32,808
(relative to the US)             JPN     0.484                             JPN    26,721
                                 TWN     1.463                             TWN    21,891
                                 KOR     1.434                             KOR    17,208
                                 MYS     2.644                             MYS     7,917
                                 THA     2.847                             THA     5,178
                                 IDN     3.182                             IDN     2,549
                                 CHN     3.193                             CHN     2,442
                                 PHL     3.680                             PHL     2,210
Labor supply                     USA    53,551   Total value-added         USA   1,878.6
in tradeable goods               JPN    41,665   in tradeable goods        JPN   1,113.3
(x1000 workers)                  SGP       735   (in $M)                   SGP      24.1
                                 TWN     3,889                             TWN      85.1
                                 KOR    10,491                             KOR     180.5
                                 MYS     5,637                             MYS      44.6
                                 THA    10,410                             THA      53.9
                                 IDN    36,585                             IDN      93.3
                                 CHN   266,707                             CHN     651.3
                                 PHL    13,618                             PHL      30.1
Average coordination costs θ̄i   USA     0.875   DX Index                  USA     2.923
by country                       SGP     0.384   (Export weighted)         SGP     2.879
                                 JPN     0.760                             JPN     2.663
                                 TWN     0.444                             TWN     2.853
                                 KOR     0.560                             KOR     2.892
                                 MYS     0.390                             MYS     2.679
                                 THA     0.455                             THA     2.439
                                 IDN     0.679                             IDN     2.957
                                 CHN     0.530                             CHN     2.009
                                 PHL     0.515                             PHL     2.776
Transaction costs γi             USA     0.378   aggregate GO / VA ratio   USA     2.599
by country                       SGP     0.209                             SGP     3.842
                                 JPN     0.336                             JPN     2.745
                                 TWN     0.216                             TWN     3.865
                                 KOR     0.276                             KOR     3.224
                                 THA     0.210                             THA     3.718
                                 MYS     0.276                             MYS     2.801
                                 IDN     0.460                             IDN     2.161
                                 CHN     0.249                             CHN     3.049
                                 PHL     0.359                             PHL     2.434
Simple average border cost       All      15%    Trade/output ratio        All      26%




                                            38
uniform across all country pairs in our sample.We fit the trade cost parameter by asking the
model to replicate the global ratio of trade to output.
   Note that, as a consequence of trade costs, not all countries participate in a given production
chain. In our fitted model, less than one percent of the chains involve more than three countries.

Simulation results on other moments: Before turning to the counterfactual results we
briefly describe the benchmark equilibrium. By construction, our model is able to reproduce
key indicators of fragmentation such as the gross-output-to-value-added ratio and values of
DX. Alternatively, we can examine how the fitted model fares in terms of other indexes such
as indexes D, N and the share of intermediate goods in exports, M-share.
    Table 4 compares indexes from the model vs. data. In broad terms the magnitudes of D and
N are consistent with the data, even though they are constructed in very different ways. These
indexes from the data are computed at the industry level then averaged across industries. Index
N in the benchmark calibration is computed for the most downstream firm in the chain while
index D is a weighted average across firms weighted by value-added at each stage. The levels
of D and N are approximately the same in model and data, and the cross-country correlations
are high.
    The calculated share of intermediates in exports is generally lower in the calibration than in
the model. Recall that our model has no scope for back and forth trade in intermediates. Nei-
ther does our model have an explicit role for assembly nor multiple sources of inputs (“spiders”).
Any of these features would lead real world data to report higher shares of intermediates in
exports.41 We nonetheless find M-share useful for model analytics in subsequent counterfactual
analysis and so report it here for consistency.


5.4     Counterfactual simulations
East-Asian economies have been the setting for tremendous changes in recent decades. Arguably
the most significant changes are the increased fragmentation of production, China’s opening to
international trade and its subsequent rapid economic growth. In our theory these phenomena
can certainly be related, as China’s opening to trade could have facilitated fragmentation along
chains in which it is now involved. Rapid economic growth may be associated with trade-related
increases in productivity, but multi-factor productivity growth not specifically related to trade
might also have been important. With a calibrated model at hand, we can now examine various
counterfactual simulations to study how structural changes would affect economic outcomes
such as output, trade, welfare and the fragmentation of production.
  41
   An earlier draft of this paper showed that a capstone assembly sector can easily be added to our model, see
NBER working paper version 21520.


                                                     39
                         Table 4: Fragmentation indexes: model vs. data

          Index          D                        N                      M share
                          Data       Model        Data       Model       Data        Model
          USA            2.829       2.666        3.397      2.871       0.649       0.365
          SGP            3.638       3.842        3.833      3.976       0.690       0.240
          JPN            3.137       2.735        3.152      3.053       0.596       0.301
          TWN            3.817       3.805        3.691      3.997       0.711       0.238
          KOR            3.426       3.312        3.565      3.472       0.676       0.280
          MYS            3.666       3.654        3.453      3.897       0.640       0.216
          THA            2.888       2.869        3.432      3.156       0.609       0.216
          IDN            2.955       2.786        2.642      2.579       0.675       0.353
          CHN            3.099       2.771        3.255      3.360       0.439       0.162
          PHL            2.477       2.824        2.725      2.798       0.692       0.280
          Correl. with data          0.882                   0.843                   0.506



    We see at least four experiments that would provide interesting insight into the reorganiza-
tion of supply chains in Asia:

   • Counterfactual 1): Trade costs have fallen significantly over the past decades and their
     reduction is cited as the most likely source of the increased fragmentation of production
     in Asia. Trade costs may decline even further in the near future, as there is still room to
     improve trade agreements, especially on a multi-lateral basis (Baldwin, 2008). We model
     this structural change with a 10% reduction in cross-border trade costs.

   • Counterfactual 2): Arguably the most dramatic economic change in Asia over the past
     two decades has been the very high rates of growth in the Chinese economy, along with its
     opening to trade. With GDP growth rates reaching 10%, the Chinese economy is inducing
     very large changes in how production in Asia is organized. To examine the role of China
     in light of our model, we shock the productivity parameter there. We first simulate a 10%
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        ξ
     productivity increase in China. Formally, this corresponds to a 10% increase in TCHN   .

   • Counterfactual 3): We simulate a reduction in the transaction costs γCHN for China.
     This scenario could be used to understand growing transparency in contractual disputes,
     for example. Reduced transaction costs should encourage relatively more domestic out-
     sourcing in China, and raise the share of domestic value added in production/exports.42

   • Counterfactual 4): Finally, we consider a bilateral trade cost reduction. This allows
     us to offer a local estimate of the trade elasticity. In particular we are interested in a
  42
   Kee and Tang (2013) and Li and Liu (2014) provide evidence that the share of domestic value added in
Chinese exports has been growing over time.


                                                  40
        quantitative evaluation of the claim in Proposition 3, that the elasticity of final goods
        trade to trade cost changes is larger in the presence of fragmentation. In order to do this,
        we reduce trade costs between China and the US.

5.4.1     Reduction in trade costs

Our first scenario is a 10% reduction in international trade costs τ . These results are reported
in Table 4. For comparison purposes, we provide welfare results for two versions of an Eaton
and Kortum model, a one-stage model without intermediate goods and an alternative model
featuring intermediate production (EK-loop). In the EK-loop model, all goods are both final
good and intermediate goods. Production costs are a Cobb-Douglas function of labor costs
and good price indexes in each country. We calibrate the share of labor such that it equals the
value-added-to-gross-output ratio in each country. Hence, all varieties are traded internationally
multiple times and welfare gains from trade are magnified by a factor equal to the gross-output-
to-value-added ratio.43
    In level terms the calculated welfare gains in our model are much more similar to the
standard EK model than to the EK-loop model. As illustrated in Proposition 3, our supply
chain model does not necessarily yield larger welfare gains than one-stage models, especially for
countries that tend to be upstream. On average our simulations yield relatively larger gains for
downstream countries such as Japan and China, and lower gains for some upstream countries
such as Singapore, compared to the one-stage model. In the EK-loop model, all of value added
is exposed to trade costs, repeatedly, so the welfare costs of trade cost changes are significantly
higher. The data have GO/VA ratios between two and three, so welfare gains in the EK-loop
model are multiplied by more than a factor of two. This leads to systematically larger gains
from trade then our sequential production chain model.
    Reductions in VAX indicate a lower value added content of trade, which occurs because
a larger fraction of exported goods now rely on imported intermediate goods. This change is
consistent with Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) and Johnson and Noguera (2012), who document
a decrease in the VAX ratio over the decades. This does not imply, however, that trade
is growing faster for upstream goods. Actually, our simulations indicate that trade grows
faster for downstream stages: both the share of intermediate goods trade (M-share) and trade-
weighted upstreamness (DXi ) decrease for all 10 countries when trade costs fall.44 This finding
illustrates that final goods trade is more sensitive than intermediate goods trade to reduced
trade costs (see Proposition 3): trade flows increase relatively more for goods that embody
  43
   Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) model a similar loop with multiple industries.
  44
   Fally (2012, Figure 4) documents reductions in trade-weighted upstreamness over a period (1962-1996)
when trade costs arguably fell substantially.


                                                  41
small shares of domestic labor and larger shares of traded intermediate goods. In a similar
fashion, value-added-weighted upstreamness (Di ) tends to decrease with trade.


                  Table 5: Counterfactual 1): 10% decrease in border trade costs

  (10 x change)     Fragmentation                               Welfare
  Country            DX      D         N     M share    VAX     Model     EK 1-stage   EK loop
  USA               -0.075 0.007     0.008    -0.002   -0.076    0.060      0.054       0.147
  SGP               -0.441 -0.383   -0.193    -0.067   -0.099    0.209      0.240       0.537
  JPN               -0.197 -0.046    0.019    -0.025   -0.077    0.094      0.069       0.209
  TWN               -0.277 -0.197   -0.089    -0.031   -0.083    0.186      0.186       0.480
  KOR               -0.238 -0.103   -0.023    -0.028   -0.080    0.170      0.156       0.398
  MYS               -0.263 -0.217   -0.052    -0.028   -0.085    0.202      0.222       0.439
  THA               -0.249 -0.199    0.004    -0.033   -0.092    0.196      0.198       0.408
  IDN               -0.224 -0.022    0.061    -0.050   -0.078    0.189      0.180       0.325
  CHN               -0.084 -0.112    0.006    -0.003   -0.084    0.117      0.085       0.288
  PHL               -0.210 -0.112    0.024    -0.034   -0.087    0.197      0.202       0.379




5.4.2   Increasing labor productivity in China
                                                                                   1
                                                                                ξ
Table 5 reports results from a 10% shock to labor productivity in China, TCHN       . This is a
uniform shock that improves labor productivity at all points in the chain. Our interest is in
seeing how such shocks affect China’s relative position in chains, and the degree to which such
shocks spill over into other countries.
    The welfare changes reported in column 2 show that the vast majority of the welfare gains
accrue to China, which sees a 9.33% increase in welfare from a 10% productivity shock. The
gains elsewhere are limited, and reasonably similar across countries. The most notable changes
have to do with changes in relative position in supply chains. Changes in China’s DX, and
D indices indicate that the technology shock moves Chinese production significantly closer to
final demand, while the other countries move upstream. China’s move downstream can also
be seen in the fourth column (M share), which shows a reduction in the intermediate share of
China’s exports. This market size effect is similar to the overshooting effect in Baldwin and
Venables (2012). With a larger fraction of world income spent by consumers in China and a
larger fraction of tasks being performed in China, other vertically-related tasks are also more
likely to be performed there to save on trade costs.




                                                42
           Table 6: Counterfactual 2): 10% increase in labor productivity in China

         (10 x change)       DX         D          N      M share     VAX       Welfare
         CHN               -0.322    -0.281     -0.171     -0.038     0.000      0.933
         USA                0.182     0.075     0.011      0.038      0.008      0.022
         SGP                0.177     0.159      0.109     0.022      0.006      0.031
         JPN               0.200      0.104     0.024      0.039      0.010      0.021
         TWN               0.185      0.172      0.096      0.023     0.007      0.036
         KOR                0.234    0.195      0.063      0.036      0.012      0.026
         MYS               0.198      0.185     0.053       0.027     0.012      0.028
         THA               0.101      0.099     -0.003     0.014      0.007      0.036
         IDN               0.262      0.237      0.051      0.045     0.017      0.029
         PHL                0.224     0.199     0.028      0.035      0.014      0.037



5.4.3   Reduced transaction costs in China

When compared with the productivity shock, the welfare effects of a 10% reduction in transac-
tion costs in China are smaller for China and relatively larger for other countries. In the case of
a shock to internal transaction costs, China’s production moves upstream, as indicated by the
movements in DX, D and the share of exports in intermediate goods. Similarly, the increase
in N reflects greater fragmentation of production within China. Other countries also move up-
stream because falling Chinese transaction costs lead to longer chains. This counterfactual also
leads to a higher value-added export to gross export ratio (VAX) for China, and heterogeneous
effect on other countries’ VAX ratio. In broad terms, a move upstream by China is consistent
with the evidence presented in Kee and Tang (2013), who find that Chinese exporters have
been shifting their purchases of inputs from foreign to domestic sources.

           Table 7: Counterfactual 3): 10% decrease in Chinese transaction costs γi

         (10 x change)      DX         D         N       M share      VAX       Welfare
         CHN               1.418     4.646     3.832       0.095      0.090      0.667
         USA               0.223     0.130     0.195      -0.003      0.015      0.029
         SGP               0.062     0.106     0.155      -0.002     -0.014      0.032
         JPN               0.139     0.114     0.190      -0.004      0.006      0.028
         TWN               0.067     0.089     0.078      -0.005     -0.005      0.040
         KOR               0.166     0.174     0.126       0.007      0.002      0.032
         MYS               0.044     0.071     0.024      -0.008     -0.003      0.036
         THA               0.081     0.096     0.081       0.003     -0.004      0.038
         IDN               0.229     0.250     0.123       0.009      0.001      0.035
         PHL               0.183     0.217     0.079       0.001      0.000      0.039




                                                43
5.4.4    Reduced trade costs between China and the US

As noted above and in Yi (2010), international fragmentation raises the elasticity of trade to
trade costs. In order to explore the quantitative magnitude of this effect we shock trade costs
for a single country pair (US and China) and measure trade responses. We compare results
in our model to those in the calibrated EK model described above (note that one-stage EK
and EK-loop models yield the same elasticities). Recall that our two-country model showed a
higher elasticity for final goods trade than in the standard EK model. We see that final goods
trade is indeed more responsive to trade cost changes in our model, as is the elasticity of total
trade.

          Table 8: Counterfactual 4): 10% bilateral decrease in US-China trade costs

                                Importer-exporter       With cross-border
                                      pair                 fragmentation           EK
                                                     All trade    Final goods   All trade
        ∆ log πni                  USA-CHN            0.063         0.065        0.050
                                   CHN-USA            0.059         0.057        0.043
        Trade cost elasticity      USA-CHN            5.510         5.727        4.589
                                   CHN-USA            6.170         6.201        5.272




6       Concluding remarks
Recent empirical work has documented sizable differences in supply chain length. In this paper
we attempt to explain such variation in an integrated framework that links the internalization
decisions of firms within a supply chain to the organization of the chain across countries. We
develop a continuous firm representation of the optimal organization of a multi-country supply
chain, with an endogenous allocation of tasks across countries and firms. We derive formal and
intuitive representations of the gains from fragmentation within a chain and relate these to the
implicit price of tasks and the price of the final good.
    In this Coasian setting, we show that the same parameters that shape the boundaries of
firms also determine comparative advantage within international supply chains. Conditional on
participation in a supply chain, the lower a country’s coordination costs the more downstream
it will be. Low within-firm coordination costs also imply an ability to host larger firms. By
contrast, countries with high transaction costs will tend to participate downstream because their



                                                44
disadvantages can only be offset in chains for which they have low within-firm-coordination costs
and larger firms.
    In order to link the model to the prominent literature on the welfare gains of trade we
use a conventional Ricardian framework to produce a general equilibrium model with multiple
chains, and with exogenous productivity shocks across chains. We derive implications for trade
elasticities and welfare, relative to standard theoretical benchmarks (Arkolakis et al 2012).
Among a number of theoretical results we show that the elasticity of final goods trade to trade
costs is larger in the presence of fragmentation. Relative to the Arkolakis et al (2012) formula
without fragmentation, we show that welfare effects are smaller for upstream countries and
larger for downstream countries in the presence of fragmentation.
    To illustrate the quantitative implications of the model we conduct a calibration exercise
with counterfactual simulations. In our model, the Coasian structural parameters determine the
gross-output-to-value added ratio, a fact that facilitates calibration. We shock international
trade costs and find numerical evidence that is consistent with our theoretical results. We
find that shocks to Chinese productivity and to the coordination cost parameter in China to
highlight different implications for welfare, spillover to other countries and specialization along
production chains.


References
Antràs, Pol and Alonso de Gortari, “On the Geography of Global Value Chains,” Working
 paper, 2017.

   and Davin Chor, “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (6),
  2127–2204.

  , , Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry, “Measuring the Upstreamness of Production
  and Trade Flows,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2012, 102 (3), 412–
  416.

  , Teresa C Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and
  Evidence from US Firms,” Working paper, 2014.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “New Trade Mod-
 els, Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.

Baldwin, Richard, “Global Supply Chains: Why They Emerged, Why They Matter, and
 Where They Are Going,” C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers, August 2012, 9103.

   and Javier Lopez-Gonzalez, “Supply-chain Trade: A Portrait of Global Patterns and
  Several Testable Hypotheses,” The World Economy, 2015, 38 (11), 1682–1721.



                                                45
Baldwin, Richard E., “Managing the Noodle Bowl: The Fragility of East Asian Regional-
 ism,” The Singapore Economic Review (SER), 2008, 53 (03), 449–478.

Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, “Two-Sided
 Heterogeneity and Trade,” NBER Working Paper no. 20136, 2014.

  , , and Yukiko U. Saito, “Production Networks, Geography and Firm Performance,”
  Dartmouth Tuck manuscript, 2016.

Chaney, Thomas and Ralph Ossa, “Market Size, Division of Labor, and Firm Productiv-
 ity,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90 (1), 177–180.

Costinot, Arnaud, “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage,” Econometrica, 2009,
 77 (4), 1165–1192.

   and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Conse-
  quences of Globalization,” Handbook of International Economics, 2014, 4, 197–261.

  , Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang, “An Elementary Theory of Global Supply Chains,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80, 109–144.

Disdier, Anne-Celia and Keith Head, “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
 Bilateral Trade,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (1), 37–48.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Anthony Samuelson, “Comparative
 Advantage, Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” The
 American Economic Review, 1977, pp. 823–839.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Economet-
 rica, 2002, 70, 1741–1780.

Fally, Thibault, “Production Staging: Measurement and Evidence,” Working paper, 2012.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels, “Explaining Home Bias in Consumption: The
 Role of Intermediate Input Trade,” NBER working paper no. 9020, 2002, pp. 1–33.

Johnson, Robert and Andreas Moxnes, “Technology, Trade Costs, and the Pattern of
  Trade with Multi-Stage Production,” Working Paper, 2013.

   and Guillermo Noguera, “Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade
  in Value Added,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 86 (2), 224–236.

Johnson, Robert C., “Five Facts about Value-Added Exports and Implications for Macroe-
  conomics and Trade Research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (2), 119–42.

Johnson, Robert C and Guillermo Noguera, “Proximity and production fragmentation,”
  The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (3), 407–411.

   and    , “Fragmentation and Trade in Value Added over Four Decades,” Working paper,
  2013.

                                          46
Kee, Hiau Looi and Heiwai Tang, “Domestic Value Added in Chinese Exports: Firm-level
 Evidence,” Working Paper, 2013.

Kikuchi, Tomoo, Kazuo Nishimura, and John Stachurski, “Span of Control, Transac-
 tion Costs and the Structure of Production Chains,” Theoretical Economics, forthcoming.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, “How Much of Chinese Exports is Re-
 ally Made in China? Assessing Domestic Value-added when Processing Trade is Pervasive,”
 Working Paper, 2010.

Kraemer, Kenneth L., Greg Linden, and Jason Dedrick, “Who Captures Value in the
 Apple iPad and iPhone?,” Working paper, 2011.

Kremer, Michael, “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 551–75.

Krugman, Paul and Anthony J Venables, “Integration, Specialization, and Adjustment,”
 European Economic Review, 1996, 40 (3), 959–967.

Li, Ben G. and Yibei Liu, “Moving Up the Value Chain,” Boston College Working Paper,
  2014.

Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding, “Missing Gains from Trade?,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 317–21.

Meng, Bo, Yaxiong Zhang, and Satoshi Inomata, “Applications of IDE-JETRO’s Inter-
 national Input Output Tables,” Economic Systems Research, 2013, 25 (1), 122–142.

Olken, Benjamin and Patrick Barron, “The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence
 from Trucking in Aceh,” Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (3), 417–452.

Puzzello, Laura, “A Proportionality Assumption and Measurement Biases in the Factor
 Content of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 87 (1), 105–111.

Rodriguez-Clare, Andres, “Offshoring in a Ricardian World,” American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2), 227–258.

Simonovska, Ina and Michael E Waugh, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
  dence,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (1), 34–50.

Yi, Kei-Mu, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 2003, 111 (1), 52–102.

  , “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2010, 100 (1), 364–93.




                                          47
A      Mathematical Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1: First best
Sketch of proof. Given that we have constant returns to scale, prices equal unit costs and
marginal costs in the competitive equilibrium. With free entry, firms in production chain have
exactly zero profits all along the chain in equilibrium, and any chain associated with a lower
final good price would have negative profits somewhere along the chain. As we will describe,
the equilibrium chain corresponds to the chain that yields the lowest price of final goods under
the constraints that: i) all firms along the chain choose their scope to maximize their profits;
ii) profits are zero in equilibrium. What is not trivial is that firm scope in the social planner’s
solution maximizes profits of each firm along the chain. We need to show that, defining the
price schedule as the cumulative cost along the chain, profit maximization for each firm along
the chain leads to the same decision in firm scope as with the social planner’s problem.
    For this Lemma, we introduce two pieces of notation:

    • We denote by Sif the amount of tasks embodied at stage f in country i. The planning
                           P RF
      problem’s constraint i f =0 sif df = 1 cannot be used directly in the competitive solution,
      because the requirement that the entire chain is completed cannot enter directly into an
      individual firm’s problem. Instead, each firm takes as given its position on the chain and
      the range of tasks being performed by their suppliers.
    • We denote by pC (Sif ) the sequence of prices associated with the range of tasks Sif in
      the competitive equilibrium. This price is imposed upon each firm f by its downstream
      buyer. Similarly, we denote by pW (Sif ) the sequence of prices associated with the range
      of tasks Sif in the social planner’s solution.

   We focus on a specific chain ω (hence we remove ω from the notation below for the sake of
exposition).


                                                                                               F
Characterization of the competitive equilibrium. Given a sequence of prices pC (Sif )f =0     i


(and wages, wi which we subsume in ci (sif )) and a required bundle of quantities q0 = q̄if and
embodied stages S̄if to be delivered to the next downstream firm, the problem facing each firm
f in country i is to choose qif and sif to maximize profits πif solving:

                    πif = max qif pC (Sif ) − c(sif )df − pC (Si,f +df )qi,f +df
                                                      
                                                                                            (46)
                          qif ,sif


                                     s.t. qif = qi,f −df (1 + γi df )
                                        Si,f +df + sif df = Sif
                                               Sif = S̄if
                                               qif = q̄if
The first constraint represents the goods market clearance condition for the output of firm f .
The second constraint insures that the firm’s choice of sif together with the stages embodied

                                                    1
in its own inputs are sufficient to meet the input requirements of the downstream firm, which
demands Sif embodied stages. The final two constraints define the contractual requirements
for output and tasks to be performed.
    We can simply rewrite (46) as:

                 πif = max q pC (Sif ) − ci (s)df − (1 + γi df )pC (Sif − sdf )
                                                                              
                                                                                         (47)
                          s

Joint solution of the first order conditions (w.r.t. q and s) represent a solution to the competitive
firm’s problem. We link the solution to the firms’ problem to the equilibrium price function in
what follows.
    First, the first-order condition in s yields:

                                                               dpC
                                   c0i (s) df = (1 + γi df )     i
                                                                   df                           (48)
                                                               dS
Taking the limit where df is infinitesimally small (i.e. ignoring second order terms in df 2 ), we
simply obtain that the marginal cost of an additional task performed within the firm should be
equal to the marginal price associated with this task along the chain for the equilibrium firm
scope sif :
                                             0         dpC
                                            ci (sif ) = i                                       (49)
                                                       dS
Note that we would obtain exactly the same result if, instead of choosing their intermediate
goods and how much to outsource, each firm were to choose how much to produce given the
intermediate goods that they receive. The marginal cost would be c0i (sif ) while the marginal
                 dpC
gains would be dS̄i
    In turn, the zero-profit condition (i.e. the first-order condition in q) implies that the output
price for each firm equals its average cost. This leads to:

                        pC (Sif ) − ci (s)df − (1 + γi df ) pC
                                                             i (Sif − sdf ) = 0                 (50)

Rearranging, this can be written:

                     pC (Sif ) − pC (Sif − sdf ) = ci (s)df + γi df pC (Sif − sdf )

Taking the limit where df is infinitesimally small (i.e. ignoring second-order terms in df 2 ), we
obain:
                                  dpC
                                      sif = ci (sif ) + γi pC (Sif )                          (51)
                                   dS
for the competitive price schedule and equilibrium firm size sif . To summarize, the price sched-
ule for the competitive equilibrium is characterized by the optimal firm scope in equation (49)
and the free-entry condition (51).


Comparison with the social planner’s solution. We have yet to show that the social
planner’s solution satisfies these two equations. To do so, we need to characterize the price in


                                                   2
the social planner’s solution associated with one unit of the intermediate good as a function of
the range of tasks that has been completed. The first-best chain is the chain that minimize the
price of the final good:
                                         min P1                                             (52)

                                        over:                i(n) , snf , Fn , Sn , Pn
                                                                   Z Fn                                              
                                                                            γi(n) f                   γi(n) Fn
           under the constraints:                            Pn =         e         ci(n) (snf )df + e         τ Pn+1
                                                                           f =0
                                                                       Z   Fn
                                                             Sn =             snf df
                                                                       f =0
                                                             N
                                                             X
                                                                   Sn = 1
                                                             i=1

    First, our goal is to show that the allocation of tasks across firms within a given country
satisfies the competitive market equilibrium conditions described above. Taking the sequence
of countries i(n) as given (we discuss below why the sequence of countries is identical to the
one in the competitive equilibrium), we define pW (S) as the minimum unit cost to performed
a range S of tasks, for each S ∈ [Sn+1 , Sn ] and country i = i(n) where Sn , Pn+1 and i(n) are
the solution from above:
                                        Z F                          
                            W                  γi f           γi F
                           p (S) = min        e ci (sf )df + e τ Pn+1                      (53)
                                                          sf ,F    f

                                                                            Z     F
                                                      s.t. Sn+1 +                       sf df = S
                                                                                 f =0

   Notice that we can split the minimization problem in two parts. For any S 0 ∈ (Sn+1 , S), we
obtain:
                    Z F                                  Z F
      W                    γi f           γi F
    p (S) = min           e ci (sf )df + e Pn+1       s.t.     sf df = S
                 sf ,F       f                                                                              f =0
                                  Z        F                                        Z     F                                                           
                                                   γi f                     γi F 0                  γi (f −F 0 )                  γi (F −F 0 )
             =      min                         e         ci (sf )df + e                        e                  ci (sf )df + e                Pn+1
                 sf ,F,s0f ,F 0         f                                               F0
                                  Z    F0                                                               Z    F
                                                                       0
                         s.t.                sif df = S − S                          and                            sf df = S 0
                                   f =0                                                                   f =F 0
                         (Z                                                                 )
                                  F0                                                                                Z   F0
                                                                       γi F 0 W         0
             = min0                     e   γi f
                                                   ci (sf )df + e            p (S )                         s.t.             sf df = S − S 0                 (54)
                 sf ,F           f =0                                                                                 f =0


   This implies that the optimal sequence of firm scope sf is common across all price mini-
mization pW (S) within a given country. In other words, the scope of firm after completing a
range S of tasks is independent of what happens downstream (within a country).
   Let us now examine optimal firm scope in the social planner’s minimization problem. After


                                                                             3
completing a range S of tasks, the price minimization associated with pW (S) implies that the
                                                                                  RF
marginal cost c0 (s) equals the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint f =0 sif df = S.
Since the range S of tasks appears only in this constraint, the Lagrange multiplier (shadow
                                                         W
cost of completing a task) also equals the derivative dpdS . Hence, we obtain the same condition
as (49) in the competitive equilibrium:

                                                                  dpW
                                       c0i (s) = λi (S) =
                                                                   dS
   Next, taking equation (54) with S 0 = S − sdf , where s is the optimal scope at this stage f ,
we obtain:
                         pW (S) = ci (sf )df + (1 + γi df )pW (S − sdf )
Taking the limit where df is infinitesimally small (i.e. neglecting second order terms df 2 ) yields:

                                     dpW   ci (sf ) + γi pW (S)
                                         =
                                      dS             sf

for the optimal firm scope s at this stage f . This is the same condition as the free-entry
condition (51) in the competitive equilibrium within each country.
    Finally, we argue that the allocation of tasks and firms across countries is identical. Obvi-
ously, the first-best solution corresponds to the sequence of countries and cross-country alloca-
tion of tasks Sn that yields the minimum final good price. The same applies to the competitive
equilibrium. If a sequence of countries in a chain does not yield the lowest price, a lower-
cost chain can enter (with a better sequence of countries) and capture all its consumers. The
free-entry condition for chains is key to this argument.


Proofs for Section 3.1: Within-country fragmentation
FOCs: The first-order conditions of this planning program correspond to equations (15)
and (16):

                        For sif :   eγi f wi c0i (sif ) = λi
                        For Fi :    eγi Fi wi ci (si,Fi ) + eγi Fi PiM γi = si,Fi λi

   Using our parameterization of the cost function, the first-order condition for sif can be
rewritten:
                                     eγi f ai wi sθifi = λi
which yields:
                                                           θ1
                                                    λi        i       −
                                                                          γi f
                                       sif =                      e        θi
                                                   ai wi




                                                     4
   By combining the first-order condition in Fi and the first-order condition in sif , we obtain:

                                     sθi,F
                                        i +1

                      eγi Fi ai wi         i
                                             + eγi Fi PiM γi = si,Fi . eγi Fi ai wi sθi,F
                                                                                       i

                                     θi + 1                                               i



which can be simplified into:
                                                wi ai θi    θi+1
                                                 θi +1     si,F i
                                                                  = γi PiM
and thus:                                                                     θ 1+1
                                                   (θi +1)γi PiM
                                                    
                                                                                i
                                        si,Fi    =
                                                       θi    ai w i

Lagrangian multiplier: It is the solution of:
                                      Z Fi
                                           sif df = Si
                                                    0

where sif and Fi functions of the Lagrangian multiplier as shown above. The left-hand side
can be rewritten:
                       Z Fi             θ1 Z Fi γi f
                                                   −
                            sif df = wλi ai i i   e θi df
                          0                                        0
                                            θi  λi  θ1i              h      γ F i
                                                                             − iθ i
                                          =                             1−e i
                                            γi wi ai
                                            θi  λi  θ1i                    − θ1
                                                                                           
                                                                              λi    i
                                          =                              1 − wi ai    si,Fi
                                            γi wi ai
                                            θi  λi  θ1i                  θi si,Fi
                                          =                            −
                                            γi wi ai                          γi
We obtain the following solution in λi such that the expression above equals Si :
                                           "                                           θ 1+1 #θi
                                                               (θi +1)γi PiM
                                                           
                                                γi S i                                   i
                           λi = wi ai                  +
                                                 θi                θi    ai w i


Final price: Expression for Pi :




                                                               5
                 Z   Fi
         Pi =             eγi f wi ci (sif )df + eγi Fi PiM
                  f =0
                     Fi      wi ai sθifi+1
                 Z
             =            eγi f            df + eγi Fi PiM
                  f =0          θi +1
                                  θ +1 Z F
                 wi ai λi iθi
                                            i     γ f
                                                  − i
             =            wi ai                 e θi df + eγi Fi PiM
                 θi +1                     f =0
                                        θi +1 h
                 wi ai θi    
                                 λi
                                         θi
                                                         γ F i
                                                        − iθ i
             =                                  1 −   e     i      + eγi Fi PiM
                  γi θi +1 wi ai
                                        θ +1                               θ +1
                                                                                                 wi ai γi PiM
                                                                                                              
                 wi ai θi  λi  iθi              wi ai θi  λi  iθi − γiθFi
             =         θi +1 wi ai             −         θi +1 wi ai            e i +                            eγi Fi
                  γi                                γi                                             γi   w i ai
                                        θi +1
                 wi ai θi    
                                 λi
                                         θi       1 i                       wa θ θi +1 γi Fi
             =                                 − θiθ+1      λi si,Fi +                    s     e
                  γi   θi +1 wi ai
                                                  γi                          γ θ+1 i,Fi
                                        θ +1
                 wi ai θi  λi  iθi               1 θi                               θi +1 γi Fi
                                                                                                   
             =                                 −               λi s i,F   −  w i a i s i,F   e
                  γi θi +1 wi ai                  γi θi +1              i                  i

                                        θ  +1
                 wi ai θi  λi  iθi
             =                                  + 0
                  γi θi +1 wi ai

Using the expression above for λi , we obtain equations (22) and (23) in the text:
                                                                                  θi +1
                                            Si             1         1
                                     Pi =       (Ai wi ) θi +1 + PiM θi +1
                                          θi +1

with                                                                   θi
                                                  Ai = ai γi θiθ+1
                                                                i

It is also useful to note that:                                              θi
                                                                 1
                                               λi = (wi Ai ) θi +1 (Pi ) θi +1                                            (55)


Labor demand: Each unit of last-stage good produced in country i generates the demand for
              ∂ log Pi
labor wi LD
          i = ∂ log wi in country i. This yields:


                                                                                       θ 1+1 θi
                                                                                            
                                      Si             1       S i            1
                     wi LD
                         i        =       (Ai wi ) θi +1         (Ai wi ) θi +1 + PiM    i                                (56)
                                    θi +1                  θi +1



Prices along the chain: To obtain a simple expression for the value-added-to-gross-output




                                                             6
        ci (sif )
ratio     pif
                  ,   the first step is to compute pif is the price along the chain.
                            Z   Fi
                                               0
               pif =                  eγi (f −f ) c(sif 0 )df 0 + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                             f 0 =f
                                      Z   Fi
                          w i ai                           0
                        =                          eγi (f −f ) sθifi+1
                                                                    0 df
                                                                         0
                                                                           + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                          θi +1         f 0 =f
                                                       Z       Fi
                          wi ai γi (Fi −f )                                            0
                        =       e                                       e−γi (Fi −f ) sif
                                                                                       θi+1 0
                                                                                          0 df + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                          θi +1                        f 0 =f
                                                                    Z    Fi                                    
                          wi ai γi (Fi −f ) θi+1                                   −γi (Fi −f 0 ) γi
                                                                                                       θi +1
                                                                                                                   (Fi −f 0 )
                        =       e          si,Fi                               e                e       θi
                                                                                                                                df 0 + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                          θi +1                                     f 0 =f

                            wi ai γi (Fi −f ) θi+1 Fi γi (Fθ−f 0 ) 0
                                                   Z
                        =          e         si,Fi         e i df + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                            θi +1                     0
                                                     f =f
                             wi ai θi γi (Fi −f ) θ+1 h γi (Fi −f )      i
                        =               e         si,Fi e θ         − 1 + eγi (Fi −f ) PiM
                            (θi +1)γi
                                                     eγi (Fi −f ) wi ai θi θi+1
                                                                                        
                             wi ai θi θi+1                                             M
                        =               s      −                          s     − γi Pi
                            (θi +1)γi if                  γi       θi +1 i,Fi
                             wi ai θi θi+1
                        =               s      − 0
                            (θi +1)γi if
                            θi
                        =       wi ci (sif )
                            γi
Hence the gross-output-to-value-added ratio at the firm level is:
                                                                                  pif        θi
                                                                                           =
                                                                              wi ci (sif )   γi

We also obtain the same expression for the aggregate gross-output-to-value-added ratio. If we
define gross output as the total value of all transactions:
                                               Z Fi
                                      GOi =         qif pif df
                                                                                           0

we obtain:                                R Fi                  R Fi θi
                                GOi             q if p if df            q w c (s )df
                                                                 0 γ if i i if             θi
                                     = R Fi 0                  = R Fi i                  =
                                V Ai        qif wi ci (sif )df        qif wi ci (sif )df   γi
                                                   0                                            0




Proof of Proposition 1
To simplify the exposition, we index countries by n, with n = 1 referring to the most down-
stream country and n = N the most upstream country. The goal is to minimize:

                                                                                     min P1                                                               (57)

                                                                                           7
under the constraints:
                                                                                 N
                                                                                 X
                             Pn+1   = Pen (Sn , τ Pn+1 )               and             Sn = 1
                                                                                 n=n

with:                                                                                    θn +1
                                                   S              1         1
                           Pen (S, P M ) =             (An wn ) θn +1 + P M θn +1
                                                 θn +1
   Under which condition can country n be downstream from country n + 1? Let us take as
given the price in country n + 2 and consider the following function:

                             m(x)θn +1 = Pen (Sn − x, τ Pen (Sn+1 + x, τ Pn+2 ))

This function m(x) indicates by how much the price of output in n will increase if we shift a
measure x of tasks from country n to country n + 1.
                                                                                             θn+1 +1
            (Sn − x)            1       (S n+1 + x)                 1                   1       θn +1
     m(x) =          (An wn ) θn +1 +               (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1 + (τ Pn+2 ) θn+1 +1
             θn +1                       θn+1 +1

If we are at equilibrium, the function m(x) must be at its minimum at x = 0. The first-order
condition imply that m0 (x) = 0. We obtain that:
                       1                          1                                                                   θn+1 −θn
           (An wn ) θn +1 (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1                  (Sn+1 + x)                 1                   1          θ +1
                                                                                                                           n
m0 (x) = −               +                                                 (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1 + (τ Pn+2 ) θn+1 +1
             θn +1              θn +1                            θn+1 +1
                                                                                                                          (58)
must equal zero at x = 0.
   More importantly, to prove Proposition 1, one needs to examine the second order condition,
which imposes m00 (x) > 0. If m00 (x) were negative, x = 0 would not be a local minimum and it
would be more efficient to shift some tasks to either country n or n + 1.
   As one can see in equation (58), the right-hand-side term is increasing in x (i.e. m00 (x) > 0)
                          −θn
only if the exponent θn+1
                       θn +1
                              is positive. This proves that we must have θn+1 > θn at equilibrium.
   Finally, it is not difficult to verify that two consecutive countries cannot have the same
θn = θn+1 as long as we have non-zero trade costs τ − 1 > 0.

Other proofs for Section 3.2
Prices along the chain: Using again equation (58), the first-order condition m0 (0) = 0
implies:
               1                             1                                                               θn+1 −θn
    (An wn ) θn +1     (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1                Sn+1                   1                   1          θ +1
                                                                                                                 n
                     =                                            (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1 + (τ Pn+2 ) θn+1 +1
      θn +1                  θn +1                        θn+1 +1
                                             1
                                                               −θn
                       (An+1 wn+1 ) θn+1 +1           1   θ
                                                         . n+1
                     =                      (Pn+1 ) θn +1 θn+1 +1
                             θn +1


                                                                  8
This yields expression (36) for the price of goods sold by country n + 1:
                                                    θn+1 +1                             θn +1
                                                                                 −θ
                              τ Pn+1 = (An wn ) θn+1 −θn (τ An+1 wn+1 )                n+1 −θn



For country i, this gives:
                                                             θn +1                 θn−1 +1
                                                                                −θ
                                Pn = (An−1 wn−1 /τ ) θn −θn−1 (An wn )             n −θn−1




Allocation of tasks across countries: The range of tasks performed by country i can then
be obtained as:
                               1                        
    Sn                − θ 1+1    θn +1
                                                     1
         = (An wn ) n          Pn      − (τ Pn+1 ) θn +1
  θn + 1
                                                               θn−1 +1                        θn+1 +1
                                                                                                                                    
                                           1
            − θ 1+1                                       − (θ +1)(θ                                                       − θ 1−θ
  = (An wn ) n       (An−1 wn−1 /τ )   θn −θn−1 (An wn )      n     n −θn−1 )
                                                                              − (An wn ) (θ n +1)(θn+1 −θn )
                                                                                                             (τ An+1 wn+1 )   n+1 n




which can be simplified into expression (36) given in the text:
                                                   θ      1                            θ       1
                           Sn           An−1 wn−1        n −θn−1              An w n             n+1 −θn
                                =                                  −
                         θn + 1          τ An wn                           τ An+1 wn+1

For the last country N in the chain, we obtain:
                                                                      θ      1
                                          SN            AN −1 wN −1         N −θN −1
                                               =
                                        θN + 1           τ AN wN

Finally, the range of tasks performed by the last country in the chain is:
             N
             X −1
 S1 = 1 −           Sn
             n=2
                                1          N −1
                                                            "              1                        θ 1−θ #
                  AN −1 wN−1 θN −θN−1 X                        An−1 wn−1 θn −θn−1            An wn       n+1 n
 = 1 − (θN +1)                            −       (θn + 1)                            −
                   τ AN wN                   n=2
                                                                τ An wn                   τ An+1 wn+1
        N                           1          N −1                          θ 1−θ
       X               An−1 wn−1 θn −θn−1 X                          An w n       n+1  n
 =1−       (θn + 1)                            +      (θn + 1)
       n=2
                        τ An wn                   n=2
                                                                 τ An+1 wn+1
       N −1                            θ 1−θ        N −1                         θ 1−θ
       X                     A n wn        n+1  n     X                 An w n        n+1  n
 =1−        (θn+1 + 1)                             +      (θn + 1)
       n=1
                          τ An+1 wn+1                 n=2
                                                                     τ An+1 wn+1
                               1
                            θ −θ     N −1                             θ 1−θ
                   A1 w 1     2   1   X                       An w n       n+1  n
 = 1 − (θ1 + 1)                     −     (θn+1 − θn )
                  τ A2 w2             n=1
                                                           τ An+1 wn+1


Final good price: Using the above expressions for S1 and P2 , we obtain the price of the final


                                                            9
good:
                                                                 θ1 +1
                           S1              1               1
              P1 =              (A1 w1 ) θ1 +1 + (τ P2 ) θ1 +1
                          θ1 +1
                                                                                             θ1 +1
                         S1               1                   θ2 +1                        1
                                                                                       − θ −θ
                  =           (A1 w1 )  θ1 +1
                                              + (A1 w1 ) (θ1 +1)(θ2 −θ1 )
                                                                           (τ A2 w2 ) 2 1
                       θ1 +1
                                     "                               θ −θ 1
                                                                                #θ1 +1
                         A 1 w1                            A1 w1          2   1
                  =           θ   +1
                                       S1 + (θ1 + 1)
                      (θ1 +1)   1                         τ A2 w2
                                     "      N −1                                     θ 1−θ #θ1 +1
                         A 1 w1              X                         An w n            n+1  n
                  =                    1 −       (θ n+1 − θ n )
                      (θ1 +1)θ1 +1           n=1
                                                                   τ An+1 wn+1
                         A 1 w1                  
                  =           θ   +1
                                     Θ  wA,    τ
                      (θ1 +1) 1

This corresponds to expression (38) in the text with the term in Θ reflecting gains from frag-
mentation:                   "     N −1                           θ 1−θ #θ1 +1
                                  X                     w n An      n+1 n
                Θ wA, τ = 1 −           (θn+1 −θn )
                                    n=1
                                                      τ wn+1 An+1

Demand for labor: By the envelope theorem, demand for labor in upstream countries can
be obtained by:
                            ln wn   d log P1   d log Θ
                                  =          =
                             P1     d log wn   d log wn
This gives expression (39) in the text:
                                                  θ  1                             θ 1
                                       wn−1 An−1    n −θn−1                wn An       n+1 −θn
                       ln wn            τ wn An
                                                               −        τ wn+1 An+1
                             =                                   θ 1+1
                        P1                               
                                                           P1       1
                                                          A1 w1



Lagrangian multiplier: The Lagrangian multiplier λG is equal to the Lagrangian multiplier
λ1 in the most downstream country (since q1 = 1). Using (55), we obtain:
                                                    θ1
                                            1                   A1 w1              θ θ+1
                                                                                       1
                          λG = (A1 w1 ) θ1 +1 P1θ1 +1 =               θ
                                                                          Θ wA, τ    1
                                                              (θ1 +1)   1



Firm scope: For the most downstream firm in the most downstream country, equation (34)
becomes:
                                  w1 c01 (s1,f =0 ) = λG
This gives:
                                                w1 a1 sθ1,f
                                                         1
                                                            =0 = λG




                                                         10
Using the expression above for λG , we obtain:
                                                                        θ1
                                                                λG         1
                                       s1,f =0 =
                                                               w 1 a1
                                                                           θ1
                                                      γ1 (θ1 + 1)      λG     1
                                                    =
                                                           θ1       w1 A1
                                                      γ1            θ 1+1
                                                    =    Θ wA, τ 1
                                                      θ1

To obtain downstream firm scope for other countries (expression 42), we use the first-order
condition for firm scope for f = 0:

                                                    wn c0n (sn,f =0 ) = λn

which gives:
                                                     wn an sθn,f
                                                              n
                                                                 =0 = λn
                      1           θn
Using λn = (wn An ) θn +1 (Pn ) θn +1 (expression 55) together with the expression for Pn , we obtain:
                                θ1
                         λn        n
        sn,f =0 =
                        wn an
                                                    θ1
                  γn (θn + 1)               λn         n
                =
                       θn                  wn A n
                                       θ 1+1
                  γn (θn + 1)    Pn       n
                =
                       θn       A n wn
                  γn (θn + 1)             1                       1
                                                                               −
                                                                                     θn−1 +1

                =             (An wn )− θn +1 (An−1 wn−1 /τ ) θn −θn−1 (An wn ) (θn +1)(θn −θn−1 )
                       θn
                                            1
                  γn (θn +1) An−1 wn−1 θn −θn−1
                =
                      θn        τ An wn

We follow similar steps to find the scope of the most upstream firm in each country, sn,Fn :
                                                                                  θ     1
                                             (θn +1)γn                  An w n          n+1 −θn
                                sn,Fn      =
                                                 θn                  τ An+1 wn+1

Proof of Proposition 2
Proposition 2: Results in Proposition 2 are obtained simply by taking the derivative of the
expressions above w.r.t trade costs τ . In particular, we find:
                                                    
                                         ∂Θ wA, τ
                                                      >0
                                             ∂τ


                                                                  11
which implies that: i) the price in the final good and iv) the shadow cost λG decrease when
trade costs decrease. Given equation (34)

                                          qn eγn f wn c0n (snf ) = λG ,

we obtain that a decrease in λG affects firm scope everywhere along the chain and leads to a
decrease in snf , conditional on the position on the chain, wages and the set of countries involved
in the chain (point v). As trade costs decrease, however, countries tend to move downstream.
Since firms scope is larger downstream, moving up the chain implies larger average firm scope for
each country i > 1 (except the most downstream one). This can be seen in expressions (42):
firm scope at both end of the chain in country i is a decreasing function of τ (point vi in
Proposition 2). Finally, we can also see above that S1 is an increasing function of trade costs
(conditional on wages), which proves point iii).



Two-country case and proof of Proposition 3
Two-country setting: As stated in the text, we assume that θU > θD . As specified in equa-
tion (10) in section 2, labor efficiency aD (ω) and aU (ω) are distributed Weibull with coefficient
TD and TU respectively for countries D and U . We make no assumption about the relative
ranking of TD and TU . We also make no assumption about relative transaction costs γD and
γU for countries D and U . Also, we normalize wD = 1.
    As shown in equation (23), it is useful to instead define an adjusted labor costs parameter
                           θD                               θU
AD (ω) = aD (ω) γD θDθD+1       and AU (ω) = aU (ω) γU θUθU+1      . The effect of transaction costs
is equivalent to a shift in labor productivity. The resulting AD (ω) and AU (ω) parameters also
follow a Weibull distribution with adjusted shift parameters:45
                                                         −ξθD
                                       T̃D = TD γD θDθD+1
                                                         −ξθU
                                       T̃U = TU γU θUθU+1

Following Dornbusch et al. (1977), we rank varieties ω between 0 and 1 and specify the following
relative cost:                          "            # 1ξ
                              AU (ω)      T̃D    ω
                                     =                      ≡ A(ω)                          (59)
                              AD (ω)      T̃U 1 − ω
where A(ω) is defined as the relative labor requirement in country U . This ordering implies that
U has a comparative advantage in low-ω chains while country D has a comparative advantage
in high-ω chains. For the sake of exposition, we normalize AD (ω) to unity. It is otherwise
equivalent to redefine all prices as relative to AD (ω).
Sourcing patterns: As shown in Proposition 1, the ranking θD < θU determines relative
position on the chain. A chain that involves the two countries necessarily features country U
 45
      Our parameter ξ is the same as the dispersion parameter θ in Eaton and Kortum (2002).


                                                       12
specializing upstream and country D specializing downstream. Some chains may also involve
country U only. However, when country D produces the final good, we find that country U is
also involved in the chain, at least for some of the most upstream tasks.
    When country D produces the final good (with country U involved in upstream tasks), the
price of the final good in D is:
                                  1      h
                                                                     −θ −1
                                                                             iθD +1
                    PD (ω) =               1 − (θU −θD ) (τ wU A(ω))   U  θD
                                                                                                    (60)
                             (θD +1)θD+1

Consumers in U can also import these goods at a price τ PD (ω). When country U produces the
entire range of tasks, the price of final goods in U is:

                                                         wU A(ω)
                                          PU (ω) =                                                  (61)
                                                       (θU +1)θU+1

while consumers in country D can also import these goods for a price τ PU (ω).
   Given the patterns of labor costs across varieties, the ratio of prices PPDU (ω)
                                                                                (ω)
                                                                                    strictly increases
                                                                                     ∗
with ω. For each final destination X ∈ {D, U }, there is a unique threshold ωX          for which the
                                         ∗       ∗
two prices are equal. These thresholds ωD and ωU are implicitly defined by:
                                                ∗             ∗
                                           PD (ωD ) = τ PU (ωD  )                                   (62)
                                                ∗           ∗
                                         τ PD (ωU ) = PU (ωU )                                      (63)
                                                                      ∗
As in Dornbusch, Fisher and Samuelson (1977), these cutoffs ωD          and ωU∗ correspond to the
goods for which consumers (resp. in D and U ) are indifferent between purchasing locally or
importing. There is no analytical solution for ωU∗ but it is easy to check the following solution
    ∗
in ωD :
                             ∗       T̃U τ −ξ wU−ξ (θD +1)−(θU−θD )ξ
                           ωD =
                                  T̃D + T̃U τ −ξ wU−ξ (θD +1)−(θU−θD )ξ

General equilibrium and wages: While production in U only relies on local labor, produc-
tion in D relies on country U to perform upstream tasks. Using the results from Lemma 2, the
demand for labor in U for each dollar of final goods produced in D (at a price PD ) equals:
                                                                         1
                                                                     −
                               wU lU (ω)      (θD +1) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD
                                         =                          − 1
                                                                                                    (64)
                                PD (ω)     1 − (θU −θD ) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD

   Trade balance imposes:
                                              Z   1                          Z   1
                                                      wU lU (ω)                      wU lU (ω)
     wU LU (1 −   ωU∗ )   =        ∗
                              L D ωD   + LD                     dω + wU LU                     dω   (65)
                                                 ∗
                                              ω=ωD     PD (ω)                   ∗
                                                                             ω=ωU     PD (ω)

where the left-hand side correspond to exports of final goods by D and the right-hand side
corresponds to exports of final and intermediate goods by U . Note that the marginal variety
 ∗                w l (ω ∗ )
ωD  is such that: PUDU(ω∗ D) = 1. Hence the trade balance above is equivalent to a trade balance
                          D



                                                       13
in value-added content:
                  Z 1                          Z 1                    
                             wU lU (ω)                      wU lU (ω)
            wU LU         1−             dω = LD      min             , 1 dω                     (66)
                    ω=ωU∗     PD (ω)              ω=0        PD (ω)

    We prove here that τ wU decreases as trade costs τ decrease, which also implies that foreign
labor content wPUDlU(ω)
                      (ω)
                          increases when τ decreases. To prove this result, we show that we arrive
at a contradiction if we assume that τ wU increases when τ decreases. The right-hand-side term
of expression (66) would decrease since it is a strictly decreasing function of τ wU : country
D sources less from U if trade-cost-adjusted wages increase in U . On the other hand the
term on the left would increase because of higher income LU wU , a lower import threshold ωU∗
(since goods from D would become relatively cheaper) and higher foreign value-added content
1 − wPUDlU(ω)
           (ω)
               . Hence it must be that τ wU decreases when τ decreases.

Trade elasticity: For country D, it is easy to check that the elasticity is the same as in Eaton
and Kortum (2002):
                              ∗
                             ωD        T̃U τ −ξ wU−ξ (θD +1)−(θU−θD )ξ
                                 ∗
                                    =
                           1 − ωD                      T̃D
Hence:                                           ∗ 
                                                   ω
                                         d log 1−ωD∗
                                 F                    D
                                εD ≡                       = −ξ
                                             d log τ
For country U , we take the derivative of τ PD (ωU∗ ) = PU (ωU∗ ) with respect to log τ , which gives:

                                        d log A(ωU∗ )     ∂ log PU d log A(ωU∗ )
                                                     
                       ∂ log PD
                   1+           . 1+                    =
                        ∂ log τ            d log τ         ∂ log τ      d log τ

In the expression above, the partial derivative ∂∂log  PU
                                                    log τ
                                                          is equal to unity. The partial derivative
∂ log PD
 ∂ log τ
         is lower than one and equals the share of value coming from U for the threshold variety
  ∗
ωU :
                                      d log PD    wU lU (ωU∗ )
                                               =
                                       d log τ      PD (ωU∗ )
                    d log A(ωU ∗)
After solving for      d log τ
                                  ,   we find:
                                                                         ∗)
                                                                 wU lU (ωU
                                            d log A(ωU∗ )   1+    PD (ωU∗)
                                                          =      wU lU (ωU∗)
                                               d log τ      1−          ∗
                                                                  PD (ωU )


The trade elasticity in final goods for country U is then:
                                  ∗                                                  ∗)
                                   1−ω                                         wU lU (ωU
                           d log ω∗ U      1 d log A(ωU∗ )   1 1+               PD (ωU∗)
                     εFU =            U
                                         =                 =                   wU lU (ωU∗)
                               d log τ     ξ    d log τ      ξ 1−                     ∗
                                                                                PD (ωU )


The lower the trade costs, the higher the trade elasticity. Because lower trade costs leads to

                                                        14
more fragmentation, the foreign labor content for the marginal variety increases. Note that,
when trade becomes frictionless, the foreign labor content for this marginal variety converges
to unity and the trade elasticity εFU goes to infinity.

Vertical specialization and the value-added content of trade: We focus here on Johnson
and Noguera (2012a)’s “VAX ratio”, the ratio of the value-added content of exports and gross
exports. For country D, this corresponds to:
                                  Z 1               
                             1             wU lU (ω)
              V AXD =                  1−              dω
                          1 − ωU∗ ωU∗        PD (ω)
                                                                 − 1
                                  Z 1                                      !
                             1                (θD +1) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD
                      =                1−                                    dω
                          1 − ωU∗ ωU∗                               − 1
                                           1 − (θU −θD ) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD

where 1 − ωU∗ is the share of imported goods by consumers in U and where wPUDlU(ω) (ω)
                                                                                       is the share
of foreign labor in the production of variety ω in country D.
    For a given ω, the term in the integral sum increases with trade-cost-adjusted wages τ wU ,
which itself increases with τ (larger domestic value added share as trade costs increase). This
is a direct effect. There is also a composition effect: ωU∗ increases with τ , so that country D
only exports high-value-added goods (varieties ω closer to one) when trade costs are higher.
This second effect also leads to an increase in the VAX ratio when trade costs increase.
    A similar intuition holds for the VAX ratio for country U , as described in the text. The
VAX ratio for country U equal the one for country D in this two-country example because we
have a trade balance in gross flows as well as in the value-added content of trade.

Gains from trade for country D: For country D, the wage and the price index under
autarky are normalized to zero (in log). Hence the log of the price index with trade also reflects
the gains from trade:
                                                 Z 1               
                                  1
                         ∆ log         = log PD =       log PD (ω)dω
                                 PD                   0

Using expressions above for prices, we obtain:
                      Z ω∗                             Z 1
                      1           D
              ∆ log        =        log (τ wU A(ω)) dω +     log Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω
                     PD        0                           ∗
                                                          ωD


with:                                                                  iθD +1
                                                                − 1
                                      h
                        Θ(τ wU A(ω)) = 1 − (θU −θD ) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD
and:
                                              ∗              ∗
                                    Θ(τ wU A(ωD )) = τ wU A(ωD )
                  ∗
at the threshold ωD .




                                                 15
   The expression for the gains from trade can be rewritten:
                              Z ωD∗                        Z 1
                    1
           ∆ log          = −         log (τ wU A(ω)) dω −        log Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω
                   PD             0                            ∗
                                                              ωD
                                Z ωD∗                     Z 1
                                             A(ω)
                          = −         log        ∗
                                                       dω −      log Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω
                                  0         A(ωD   )          ∗
                                                             ωD
                                    ∗                ∗
                                  −ωD log Θ (τ wU A(ωD ))
                                                                             ∗
There are three terms in the above formula. The first term 1ξ log 1 − ωD
                                                                               
                                                                                 corresponds to the
Arkolakis et al (2012) formula based on final demand trade: the log of the gains from trade
are proportional to the log of the domestic content of consumption, where the proportionality
coefficient is the inverse of the trade elasticity ξ.
   After integrating by part, we can see that it equals the ratio of the change in domestic
consumption share and the trade elasticity ξ for country D:
                            Z ωD∗                     Z ωD∗
                                        A(ω)                  ∂ log A(ω)
                         −        log      ∗
                                                 dω =                     dω
                             0          A(ωD )           0      ∂ log ω
                                                          Z ∗
                                                        1 ωD dω
                                                      =
                                                        ξ 0 1−ω
                                                          1             ∗
                                                                          
                                                      = − log 1 − ωD
                                                          ξ
The second and third terms reflect additional gain from fragmentation:
       Z 1                                                     Z 1
                                    ∗                 ∗             ∂ log Θ ∂ log A
    −      log Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω − ωD log Θ (τ wU A(ωD )) = −                        dω
         ∗
        ωD                                                        ∗ ∂ log A ∂ log ω
                                                                 ωD
                                  Z 1
                                                             1 1 wU lU (ω) dω
                                                               Z
                                      ∂ log Θ 1 1
                                =                      dω =                          > 0
                                    ∗ ∂ log A ξ 1 − ω
                                   ωD                        ξ ωD∗ PD (ω) 1 − ω

using the equality between ∂∂ log Θ
                              log A
                                    and the foreign labor content wPUDlU(ω)
                                                                         (ω)
                                                                             . Hence, for country D,
Arkolakis et al (2012) formula underestimates the gains from trade.

Gains from trade for country U : For country U , the price index under autarky is:
                                     Z 1
                               aut
                                         log wUaut A(ω) dω
                                                       
                          log PU =
                                                0

where wUaut denotes the wage in autarky. With trade, the price index is:
                             Z    ∗
                                 ωU                        Z   1
                  log PU =            log (wU A(ω)) dω +           log τ Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω
                             0                              ∗
                                                           ωU




                                                    16
where Θ (τ wU A(ω)) is defined like above:
                                                                    iθD +1
                                                             − 1
                                   h
                     Θ(τ wU A(ω)) = 1 − (θU −θD ) (τ wU A(ω)) θU−θD

with the following equality at the threshold ωU∗ :

                                   τ Θ (τ wU A(ωU∗ )) = wU A(ωU∗ )

Gains from trade can then be expressed as:
                          Z 1                       Z 1
                  wU
           ∆ log         =       log (wU A(ω)) dω −        log τ Θ (τ wU A(ω)) dω
                  PU           ∗
                              ωU                        ∗
                                                       ωU
                            Z 1                     Z 1                         
                                       A(ω)                       Θ (τ wU A(ω))
                         =       log             dω −       log                      dω
                               ∗
                              ωU       A(ωU∗ )         ωU∗        Θ (τ wU A(ωU∗ ))

Like above, the first term corresponds to Arkolakis et al (2012) formula:
                               Z 1             
                                         A(ω)            1
                                   log      ∗
                                                  dω = − log ωU∗
                                 ∗
                                ωU       A(ωU )          ξ

The second term yields:
              Z 1                              Z 1
                        Θ (τ wU A(ω))                ∂ log Θ ∂ log A
            −     log              ∗
                                          dω = −                     (1 − ω) dω
                ∗
               ωU       Θ (τ wU A(ωU ))            ∗ ∂ log A
                                                  ωU           ∂ω
                                                 Z 1
                                                     ∂ log Θ 1
                                             = −                 dω
                                                   ∗ ∂ log A ξω
                                                  ωU

                                                 1 1 wU lU (ω) dω
                                                  Z
                                             = −                     < 0
                                                 ξ ωU∗ PD (ω) ω

This term is negative, which means that country U gains less than predicted by the Arkolakis
et al (2012) benchmark.


Indexes D and N across industries
Figure 3 plots cross-country averages of index Dik and Nik in the IDE-JETRO data. As
expected, primary commodities such as ores and metals tend to be upstream while finished
goods tend to be downstream. Moreover, one can also see that indexes D and N are not
strongly correlated and capture different moments and industry characteristics. More details
on these indexes can be found in Fally (2012), who documents in particular the robustness of
these indexes to aggregation biases. In Figure 4, we plot the upstreamness index Dik evaluated
for our five largest countries. Index Dik is highly correlated across industries but there are still
large differences across countries. Overall, we find that industry fixed effects can explain about
70% of the variance in Dik across countries and industries.


                                                 17
             Figure 3: Average of indexes Dik and Nik by industry

            Beverage and tobacco                              Upstreamness D
                    Wearing apparel
      Cement and cement products                              Stages N
           Printing and publishing
                Other food products
                   Wooden products
                 Precision machines
      Leather and leather products
    Other made-up textile products
              Milled grain and flour
                              Knitting
              Transport equipment
                              Fishery
                           Machinery
          Other chemical products
                          Food crops
                          Electronics
             Livestock and poultry
                      Metal products
     Other manufacturing products
Other non-metallic mineral products
                              Timber
                     Tires and tubes
                               Paddy
            Other rubber products
    Non-metallic ore and quarrying
         Glass and glass products
                     Non-food crops
                     Pulp and paper
               Weaving and dyeing
                            Spinning
                             Forestry
                  Non-ferrous metal
                       Iron and steel
 Chemical fertilizers and pesticides
         Basic industrial chemicals
                          Metallic ore


                                         0   2        4   6    8           10




    Figure 4: Index Dik across industries for five largest countries

            Beverage and tobacco                                         USA
                    Wearing apparel
      Cement and cement products                                         CHN
           Printing and publishing
              Milled grain and flour                                     JPN
                Other food products
                   Wooden products                                       KOR
                 Precision machines
              Transport equipment                                        IDN
                              Fishery
      Leather and leather products
                          Food crops
    Other made-up textile products
                              Knitting
             Livestock and poultry
Other non-metallic mineral products
                           Machinery
                               Paddy
          Other chemical products
                              Timber
                      Metal products
     Other manufacturing products
                          Electronics
                     Tires and tubes
    Non-metallic ore and quarrying
            Other rubber products
         Glass and glass products
                     Non-food crops
                             Forestry
               Weaving and dyeing
                     Pulp and paper
                            Spinning
                       Iron and steel
                  Non-ferrous metal
 Chemical fertilizers and pesticides
                          Metallic ore
         Basic industrial chemicals



                                         0   2        4   6    8           10




                                                 18
