NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATE TAXATION AND THE REALLOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY:
EVIDENCE FROM ESTABLISHMENT-LEVEL DATA
Xavier Giroud
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 21534
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21534
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

We thank David Colino, Bryan Chang, and Young Soo Jang for research assistance. We are grateful
to Jeffrey Brown, Austan Goolsbee, Holger Mueller, Amit Seru, and seminar participants at Stanford
GSB for helpful discussions. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed
to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21534.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Xavier Giroud and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from Establishment-Level
Data
Xavier Giroud and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 21534
September 2015
JEL No. H25,H71,H73
ABSTRACT
In a sample of over 27 million establishments of U.S. firms with activities in more than one state, we
estimate the impact of state business taxation on business activity. Only firms organized as subchapter C
corporations are subject to the corporate tax code, whereas the income of partnerships, sole-proprietorships,
and S corporations is passed through annually to the firm's owners and taxed at individual rates. For
C corporations, both employment at existing establishments (intensive margin) and the number of
establishments in the state (extensive margin) have corporate tax elasticities of -0.4. Pass-through
entities, which serve as a control group for the corporate tax reforms, respond only to the personal
tax code, with tax elasticities of -0.2 to -0.3. Around half of the effects are driven by reallocation of
productive resources to other states where the treated firms have establishments. Capital shows similar
patterns but is 36% less elastic than labor. A narrative approach confirms that the results are robust
and strongest in the sample of tax changes that were implemented due to inherited budget deficits,
long-run goals, or cross-state variation caused by Federal tax reforms.
Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgiroud@mit.edu
Joshua Rauh
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Knight Management Center
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
rauh@stanford.edu

The impact of state business taxation on employment and capital has been heavily debated
in both academic and policy circles on both theoretical and empirical grounds. State-level
business taxation could depress business activity through several channels. Businesses that
might otherwise have hired or invested might simply not do so due to the di¤erence between
the pre-tax and after-tax pro…ts, or alternatively business might move their activities to another
U.S. state. On the other hand, increased business taxation might not have a negative e¤ect on
business activity if businesses can change their activities to use more tax-favored production
strategies or organizational forms, or if tax revenues are spent on public goods that improve
the state’s business climate. As U.S. states face increasing …scal pressures, the debate over the
e¤ects of state tax policy on state level business activity is likely to intensify.
An empirical literature beginning with Carlton (1979), Carlton (1983) and Barthik (1985),
and surveyed in Barthik (1991), has studied the geographic location decisions of new …rms
or establishments as a function of state tax and other characteristics.1 Studies beginning with
Helms (1985) and Wasylenko and McGuire (1985), and most recently Gale, Krupkin and Rueben
(2015), have used aggregated panel data at the state, county, or industry level to examine the
e¤ect of state and local taxes on economic growth, employment, or capital formation.2
This line of work has faced two main challenges. First, tax policy is not exogenously determined, so that ascribing a causal interpretation to correlations between state tax changes
and counts of businesses or employees has been problematic. The primary concern is that state
governments might change tax policy in anticipation of changing economic conditions. Fox
(1986), Holmes (1998), Holcombe and Lacombe (2004), and Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2014)
have taken one approach to addressing this question by using county-level data to study how
state taxation or business climates a¤ect business activity in border counties between states
that change policy and those that do not. The second challenge is that the studies have lacked
comprehensive micro-data at the establishment level, so that the decisions of individual busi-

1

Other papers taking various approaches to measuring the e¤ect of tax policy on the location of new plants
or …rms include Papke (1991), Wasylenko (1991), Coughlin, Terza, and Vachira (1991), Hines (1996), Guimaraes,
Figueiredo, and Woodward (2003, 2004), Gabe and Bell (2004), Rathelot and Sillard (2008), and Brüllhart,
Jametti, and Schmidheiny (2012).
2

Earlier papers, focusing on one municipal or geographic area, include Grieson, Hamovitch, Levenson, and
Morgenstern (1977) and Grieson (1980) on the New York City and Philadelphia income taxes respectively, Fox
(1981) who examines Cuyahoga County, and Newman (1983) on the South. Papers following on the panel
approach of Helms (1985) using aggregated panel data include Papke (1987), Mo…di and Stone (1990), Goolsbee
and Maydew (2000), Bania, Gray, and Stone (2007), Reed (2008), Serrato and Zidar (2014), and Gale, Krupkin,
and Rueben (2015).

2

nesses cannot be tracked over time, leaving uncertainty as to whether …rms are relocating their
businesses to other regions or reducing the scale of their operations.
This study uses comprehensive and fully disaggregated establishment-level data from the U.S.
Census Bureau to examine the impact of state business taxation on employment and capital.
We focus on …rms with establishments in multiple states. To identify an e¤ect of state tax
policy on establishment counts, employment, and capital, we begin by exploiting the fact that
the corporate tax code only a¤ects …rms organized as subchapter C corporations, whereas …rms
organized as S corporations, partnerships, or sole proprietorships (so-called pass through entities)
are only a¤ected by the individual tax code and other business taxes.3
This setting allows for separate identi…cation of the e¤ects of the corporate tax code on
the activities of C corporations, and of the e¤ects of the personal tax code on the activities of
pass through entities. Furthermore, the establishment-level micro data allow us to disentangle
reallocation versus pure economic disincentives of taxation. Speci…cally, we examine whether
…rms increase their activities in a given state when taxes increase in the other states in which
they are active.
We consider the complete sample of all U.S. establishments from 1977-2011 belonging to
…rms with at least 100 employees and having operations in at least two states. On the extensive
margin, we …nd that a one percentage point increase (decrease) in the state corporate tax
rate leads to the closing (opening) of 0.03 establishments belonging to …rms organized as C
corporations in the state. This corresponds to an average change in the number of establishments
per C corporation of 0.4%.4 A similar analysis shows that a one percentage point change in the
state personal tax rate a¤ects the number of establishments in the state per pass-through entity
by 0.2-0.3%. These e¤ects are robust to controls for local economic conditions and heterogeneous
time trends. Opposite e¤ects of around half of these magnitudes are observed in response to
tax changes in the other states in which …rms operate, so that around half of the baseline e¤ect
is o¤set by reallocation of activity across states. This lends strong support to the view that
tax competition across states is economically relevant, and is consistent with …ndings by Davis

3
C corporations could of course also be a¤ected by state-level personal taxes to the extent that the …rm’s
owners are in-state and are subject to these taxes when removing equity from the …rm. However, we …nd no
evidence that the business activity of C corporations responds to state-level personal tax rates.
4

The standard deviation of the change in the corporate income tax rate is 0.32, so a one standard-deviation
change in corporate income tax rates over this period had an e¤ect of 0.10-0.15% on the number of establishments
per C-corporation …rm.

3

and Haltiwanger (1992) that emphasize the importance in the labor market of shifts in the
distribution of employment opportunities across work sites.
On the intensive margin, we …nd that the elasticity of C corporation employment for a given
establishment is 0.4 with respect to the state corporate income tax rate, and the elasticity of
pass-through business employment is 0.2 with respect to the personal income tax rate, while
the cross-correlations are zero. That is, there is no empirical correlation in the data between
changes in employment at an establishment belonging to a C corporation and the personal tax
rate. Similarly there is no empirical correlation in the data between changes in employment
at an establishment belonging to a pass-through entity and the corporate tax rate. This lack
of cross-correlations supports the identifying assumption in these regressions that there are not
state-level trends in general business activity around changes in tax policy.
Further analysis captures complexities, heterogeneity, and changes in state tax codes regarding apportionment of income in multi-state …rms. If a company has physical presence in more
than one state, the company has to apportion its pro…ts according to each state’s apportionment
factor weights for property, payroll, and sales. Furthermore, if a state has throwback or throwout
rules, companies that have sales in states where they do not have physical presence may need to
apportion pro…ts arising from those sales to states where they do. We show that the response
of moving establishments and employees is greatest when those factors have greater apportionment weights. Even if the sales apportionment factor is large, we also …nd strong e¤ects when
throwback or throwout rules are in e¤ect, as these rules mitigate the tax attractiveness of …rms
moving to high sales-apportionment states.
We examine whether there is any evidence of confounding di¤erential trends in C corporations
versus pass-through entities in the years leading up to tax changes in a subsample of …rms a¤ected
by states that changed at least one of their tax rates by at least 100 basis points. These large tax
changes occurred 161 times during the sample period. Here we …nd similar directional results
of somewhat smaller magnitude, with no evidence of pre-trends. Around half of the e¤ects are
felt in the tax year in which the tax rate changed, with the full force being felt in the following
year.
We further address legislative endogeneity concerns by adopting a narrative approach in the
spirit of Romer and Romer (2010) with reference to these 161 large tax changes. By searching
news articles in the year of each tax change and two years prior, we classify the changes according

4

to the same categories as Romer and Romer (2010), treating those that were passed to deal with
an inherited budget de…cit or to achieve a long run goal as more likely uncorrelated with other
factors that could a¤ect output and economic activity. For these more likely exogenous changes,
we …nd magnitudes very similar to those in the full sample of establishments a¤ected by these
large cuts.
In some instances around the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA81) and the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86), state tax policy changed only as a result of responses to windfalls
or negative shocks to the state …scal position caused by the federal legislation. ERTA81 implemented accelerated depreciation schedules, thereby reducing current tax revenues for many
states that followed federal rules. To o¤set this reduction, four states increased the corporate
income tax rate. The tax base broadening in TRA86 created a positive windfall for many states
that follow federal de…nitions of the tax base, and as a result 10 states and the District of
Columbia reduced their personal tax rates (Ladd (1993)). For two states, Utah and Montana,
TRA86 created a negative shock to the …scal position, and these states raised their personal tax
rates in response. We augment the narrative approach by looking separately at tax changes at
the state level that occurred in response to these windfalls and shocks from ERTA81 and TRA86,
…nding e¤ects of similar magnitude to the other large increases and cuts in the corporate and
personal tax rates.
Analysis on the subset of the Census data on manufacturing …rms allows us to consider
the impact of state taxation on capital formation and location. We …nd that capital shows
similar directional patterns to labor in its response to taxation, but that the elasticities are 36%
smaller. Furthermore, the detailed data on the location of manufacturing …rm property allow
us (by way of apportionment formulas) to consider the impact of a state policy that raises the
actual tax claim on a dollar of total corporate pro…t by one percentage point, as opposed to
increases in the statutory rate by one percentage point. Under this de…nition, which captures
cross-sectional …rm heterogeneity in the extent to which statutory changes a¤ect the tax burden,
we …nd somewhat larger elasticities of around 0.4% for labor and 0.3% for capital.
One concern about the analysis might be that the results could be a¤ected by …rms that
change their organizational form in response to changes in the tax code. Goolsbee (2004) …nds
using cross-state tax variation that the share of economic activity by …rms in corporate form
does in fact respond to the relative taxation of personal to corporate state income, by as much

5

as 0.2-0.6% of state employment for a 1 percentage point change in the corporate rate relative
to the personal rate. However, our sample in this paper consists only of …rms with activity in
more than one state, and …rms must choose one organizational form that will be applicable to all
entities. For these …rms, federal tax policy should be far more important for the organizational
form decision that the mix of state tax policies they face, a hypothesis we con…rm in the data.
Limiting the sample to the 92% of observations belonging to …rms that do not change their
organizational form within 5 years of tax changes leaves the results una¤ected.
Our analysis controls for other state-level tax policy variables including unemployment insurance laws, state sales taxes, a coarse estimate of property tax burdens, and an index of business
tax incentives. These are not the focus of our study, but the results on unemployment insurance
(UI) are informative. We …nd that an increase in state UI rates by 100 basis points at the
median UI base wage would decrease the number of establishments per …rm in the treated state
by -0.025. Our analysis …nds little impact of state sales taxes on the activity of sample …rms.
Overall, our …ndings on the e¤ects of corporate taxation are larger than those found in
work that has examined the impact of tax policy at the national level, such as Mertens and
Ravn (2013) who …nd using narrative approaches that a 1 percentage point cut in the average
corporate income tax rate at the federal level raises employment by a maximum of 0.3 percent.
Some of this di¤erence may be attributable to di¤erences in the measurement of corporate rates
(average versus marginal), the level of analysis (state versus federal), the identi…cation strategy
and the distinction between GDP per capita and the variables we consider. That said, in our
analysis, tax competition across states roughly doubles the baseline e¤ects that would be found
in the absence of …rms’ability to move across states, and for that reason we would extrapolate
that the impact of state policy on state business activity should be about double the impact of
federal business taxation on federal business activity.
This paper is organized as follows. Section I reviews the background and related literature on
business taxation at the state level. Section II discusses the data and methodology, speci…cally
the establishment level data from the U.S. Census Bureau, our compilation of changes in state
tax codes from 1977-2011, the speci…cations, and the implementation of the robustness checks
using the narrative approach and the changes in state tax policy induced by federal legislation.
Section III details the results on the extensive margin, that is, the number of establishments per
…rm in a given state as a function of state business tax policy. Section IV describes the e¤ects of

6

state tax policy on the intensive margin, speci…cally labor and capital inputs per establishment.
Section V o¤ers conclusions.

I

Background and Related Literature

A. Business Taxation at the State Level
In many respects, the structure of state business taxation follows the general outlines of federal
tax law. The decision of a …rm to incorporate allows for limited liability and centralized management, but opens the possibility of entity level taxation under the corporate tax code at the
federal level (Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012)). Firms that are incorporated under subchapter C of the federal tax code (C Corporations) must pay tax at corporation tax rates. Owners of
these …rms then pay individual taxes when they receive dividends from the C Corporations or
when they realize capital gains. Firms that are incorporated under subchapter S of the federal
tax code, as well as unincorporated …rms organized as partnerships and sole proprietorships,
are deemed pass-through entities. Pass-through entities pay no tax at the …rm level, but rather
pass all pro…ts on to their owners, who must pay taxes immediately on their pro…ts.
Firms also have the ability to organize as Limited Liability Corporations (LLCs), a structure
which o¤ers some of the bene…ts of corporate organization, without necessarily being subject
to entity-level taxation under the federal corporate tax code. The …rst LLC was established
in Wyoming in 1977, and IRS rulings in 1988 and 1996 clari…ed the conditions under which
LLCs could choose pass-through taxation, with the latter ruling allowing a checkbox election
for pass-through taxation (Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012)). The CBO describes the LLC
as “full liability protection in a non-corporate environment.” The LLC is a more ‡exible form
than the subchapter S corporation. LLCs are not subject to state-level governance and …ling
requirements for corporations, nor do LLCs have to allocate pro…ts in proportion to ownership
shares, as S corporations do (Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012)).
Our main analysis makes use of these di¤erences in taxation across organizational forms to
identify the e¤ects of state income taxation on the extensive and intensive margin. One concern
might be that the results could be a¤ected by …rms that change their organizational form in
response to the tax code. Gravelle and Kotlifko¤ (1988, 1989, 1993) argue that when …rms can
simply shift production across sectors, the deadweight loss from the corporate income tax can

7

exceed 100 percent of the income generated. Results from Gordon and MacKie-Mason (1990,
1994, 1997) and Goolsbee (1998) suggests that across time periods there is little shifting of
organizational form in response to tax rates. Goolsbee (2004) shows evidence that …rms do in
fact respond to state tax code by changing their organizational form. His estimates are that a
1 percentage point change in the corporate tax rate could reduce the corporate share of …rms
by 0.5-1% and the corporate share of sales and employment by 0.2-0.6%, concluding that the
e¤ects are still “relatively modest.”
We address this issue in several ways. First, we note that our analysis considers only …rms
with establishments in multiple states. As such, the e¤ect of changing organizational form in
response to state taxation is likely to be very muted in the …rms in our sample, and explicit
tests for this shifting in our sample con…rms this. The organizational form of these …rms is
most likely determined more by federal tax policy than by the mix of state tax policies they
face. Second, we provide evidence that there is essentially zero sensitivity of pass-through entity
business activity (establishment counts, labor force, or capital stock) to corporate rates, and
essentially zero sensitivity of corporate entity activity to personal rates. Firms only respond to
changes in the tax code that is relevant for their organizational form as of the time of the tax
change. Third, in robustness analysis, we show that excluding all observations that are within
5 years of a given …rm’s legal change of organization leaves our results una¤ected.
Most states have a standard corporate income tax on pro…ts that resembles the federal
corporate income tax: taxable income is calculated starting with revenues net of allowable cost
deductions, and then a corporate tax rate is applied. However, as of the end of our sample,
three states had no corporate income tax, speci…cally Nevada, South Dakota, and Wyoming.5
Texas had no corporate income tax until 1991. Four states taxed corporations in some other
way, usually a tax on gross receipts. Starting in 2005, Ohio began to phase out its corporate
franchise tax and phased in a Commercial Activities Tax, which applies a rate of 0.26% to taxable
gross receipts of over $1 million. Michigan had a Single Business Tax based on a value-added
calculation from 1975 onward. In 2008 it then began the phase-in of the Michigan Business
Tax, which had a base of gross receipts less purchases, and then …nally implemented a regular
corporate income tax in 2012. Washington has the Business and Occupation Tax, a grossreceipts tax, during the entire sample period. Texas implemented a Corporate Franchise Tax
5

Nevada, however, has a payroll tax called the Modi…ed Business Tax (MBT). This tax is in addition to
unemployment insurance contributions, which is also levied on payroll. This tax is not included in the analysis.

8

in 1992, which was then replaced by the Texas Margin Tax in 2008. In the analysis we control
for the periods where Ohio, Michigan, Texas, and Washington establishments were subject to
these nonstandard forms of corporate taxation by using the appropriate state (or state by time
period) indicator variables interacted with organizational form.6
Further complicating the analysis of the e¤ects of tax policy on corporate activity are the
laws that di¤er by state as to how taxable income must be apportioned for multi-state …rms
for tax purposes. In contrast to the federal tax treatment of multinational …rms, which requires
transfer prices for intermediate production inputs moved by the …rm across borders, states use
apportionment formulas that obviate the need for keeping track of internal prices. In determining
state-level tax liabilities, a …rm must …rst determine which states have the power to tax the
business, or in tax terminology, whether a company has “nexus” in a state. A state only has
taxation authority over a …rm if the …rm has physical presence in the state, speci…cally property
or employees. The …rm must then consider the apportionment formula for each state in which
it has nexus.
Apportionment formulas are typically a function of the location of at least one of three different measures of economic activity: sales, payroll, and property. In essence the apportionment
formula changes the corporate income tax into a tax on each of the apportionment formula
factors (McLure (1980, 1981)). Gordon and Wilson (1986) show how apportionment approaches
can create complex incentives both for multi-state …rms and for state governments setting tax
policy.
To illustrate by way of example, California had a one-third weight on each of sales, payroll,
and property until 1992. That meant that a …rm with nexus in California would calculate the
share of sales, share of payroll, and share of property in California, and the average of these
three components would yield the percent of the …rm’s taxable income apportioned to California.
From 1992 to 2010, the weights in California were 50% on sales, 25% on payroll, and 25% on
property,7 so that relative to the previous regime, …rms with more sales in California but less
physical presence had to allow more of their income to be taxed in California. Conversely, …rms
with few in-state sales but more physical presence saw a reduction in their tax burden. These
changes went even further in 2011, when California implemented a 100% weight on sales.
Under a pure “single-sales” apportionment factor, the only variable that would matter in
6

Nevada also passed a modi…ed gross receipts tax (the Commerce Tax) in 2015.

7

This is sometimes referred to as a “double-weighted” sales apportionment factor.

9

apportioning income to the state (assuming the …rm has any physical presence) is what percent
of the …rm’s sales were in the state itself. However, some states (including California) have socalled throwback rules associated with their apportionment calculations, where states capture
income from sales to other states by requiring companies to add (or “throw back”) sales that
are to buyers in a state where the company has no nexus, or in a state where the company
has nexus but there is no corporate income tax. Three states (Maine, New Jersey, and West
Virginia) have a “throwout” rule instead of a “throwback” rule, which accomplishes a similar
goal, namely to increase the relative weight of in-state sales in the sales factor, thus increasing
the income apportioned to the taxing state. Under throwout rules, states capture income from
the so-called “nowhere”sales by requiring companies to subtract (or “thow out”) nowhere sales
from total sales (i.e., in the denominator).
We include the impact of apportionment rules on the intensive and extensive margin of
business activity in two ways. First, in the full sample, we study the interaction e¤ect between
the corporate tax rate and the sales weight adjusted for throwback and throwout rules. Indeed,
the response of moving establishments and employees should be greatest when either the sales
factor is small, or the sales factor is large but there is a throwback or throwout rule in place.
This approach captures variation in state tax policy. It does not capture …rm-level treatment
heterogeneity in the extent to which di¤erent …rms have di¤erent distributions of employees,
property, and employees at the time of treatment.
This leads us to our second approach, which is only possible in the manufacturing sample
due to the higher detail of the manufacturing data. While not available for non-manufacturing
…rms, the Census data on manufacturing …rms show where a …rm has property. We can therefore
track all states in which manufacturing …rms have nexus, and assign precise values of property
shares and payroll shares in the calculation of apportionment-adjusted tax rates.8 The regression
analysis in this case measures the …rm’s response to a change in the actual tax claim on a dollar
of total (national) corporate pro…t by a given amount, e.g. a percentage point.
Businesses also pay an array of other taxes, notably sales taxes, unemployment insurance
contributions, and property taxes. Furthermore, states often grant …nancial assistance for industry and tax incentives. These taxes are not the primary focus of our paper, but we do include

8

The data do not allow us to observe the geographic distribution of the end point of each establishment’s
sales, requiring us to implement assumptions about the distribution of sales across states. We …nd the results are
not sensitive to the exact method by which we allocate sales to di¤erent states under the apportionment formula.

10

controls for all of these factors in our analysis.
B. Relationship to Literature on the E¤ ects of Business Taxation
The earliest literature on the corporate income tax assessed its e¢ ciency when the corporate
sector produced one set of goods and the noncorporate sector another set of goods (Harberger
(1962), Shoven (1976)). In these classic settings, the corporate income tax resulted in a redistribution of resources in the economy towards the goods produced by the noncorporate sector and
therefore a deadweight loss. Gravelle and Kotliko¤ (1989) examine e¢ ciency costs of corporate
taxation when corporate and noncorporate …rms produce the same good, …nding logically that
such deadweight costs can be substantially higher. Goolsbee (2004) examines how …rms adjust
their organizational form with respect to state taxes at the corporate level, an adjustment margin that we also examine in our data. Since our sample …rms all operate in multiple states, it is
not surprising that we observe quite little leakage out of the corporate sector for these …rms as
a result of state-level tax policy.
A substantial literature has considered new business formation and how taxation a¤ects
the choice of where new …rms decide to locate or where existing …rms decide to open new
establishments. Carlton (1979), Carlton (1983) and Barthik (1985) perform such analysis with
conditional logits. Later studies along these lines include Papke (1991), Wasylenko (1991),
Coughlin, Terza, and Vachira (1991), Hines (1996), Guimaraes, Figueiredo, and Woodward
(2003, 2004), Gabe and Bell (2004), Rathelot and Sillard (2008), and Brüllhart, Jametti, and
Schmidheiny (2012). This literature is uni…ed by the use either of conditional logits or of count
models to model the location of new plants or establishments.
Our paper is more similar to those that follow in the approach of Helms (1985), Wasylenko
and McGuire (1985), Papke (1987), Goolsbee and Maydew (2000), Bania, Gray, and Stone
(2007), and Reed (2008), which use panel data techniques on aggregated data. Our study
is unique in that we use fully disaggregated data and distinguish between …rms of di¤erent
organizational form for tax purposes. We study not only the response of the level of in-state
business activity, but also the extent to which …rms reallocate across state boundaries.
Another feature of our analysis is that when we examine capital investment for manufacturing
…rms we are able to model the e¤ect of apportionment formulas on the tax rate a …rm faces
by operating in a given state. There has been relatively little empirical work studying the
impact of apportionment formulas. Using variation in the payroll weight across states and over
11

time, Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) demonstrate that the within-state employment e¤ect of
reducing the payroll weight is on average substantial, but that such a change has a negative
e¤ect of employment in other states. Gupta and Mills (2002) …nd suggestive evidence that
…rms optimize reported sales locations in response to sales apportionment factors. Klassen and
Shackelford (1998) …nd that manufacturing shipments from states that tax throwback sales are
decreasing in corporate income tax rate on sales.
Serrato and Zidar (2014) exploit variation in both state corporate tax rates and apportionment rules to estimate the incidence of state corporate taxes on workers and owners in a spatial
equilibrium model. Their main goal is to estimate the incidence of the corporate tax rate and
welfare e¤ects of tax policy changes, and they …nd that the incidence of the corporate tax falls
30-35% on workers.
Our paper is clearly related to the literature that explicitly attempts to measure a causal
impact of taxation on economic growth and business activity. The primary concern in any
speci…cation that …nds a correlation between taxes and growth or business activity is that there
is omitted variables bias or reverse causality. Speci…cally, tax reforms might anticipate changes in
growth, and this could bias coe¢ cients either upwards (if tax cuts anticipate increases in business
activity) or downwards (if tax cuts anticipate declines in business activity). Fox (1986), Holmes
(1998), Holcombe and Lacombe (2004), and Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2014) have taken one
approach to addressing this question by using county-level data to study how state taxation or
business climates a¤ect business activity in border counties between states that change policy
and those that do not. In contrast, our primary approach to this identi…cation problem is to
examine how C corporation activity changes di¤erentially with respect to pass-through business
activity in states that change either corporate or personal tax rates.
In further analysis, we also implement the so-called “narrative approach”which has become
popular in the literature that examines the e¤ect of national income taxes. Romer and Romer
(2010) estimate the e¤ects of changes in personal income taxes on GDP growth at the national
level, and Mertens and Ravn (2013) extend this approach to study corporate taxes. In the narrative approach, tax changes are classi…ed according to how likely they are to have been passed in
anticipation of future economic conditions. In this literature, changes that are designed to deal
with an inherited budget de…cit or to achieve a long-run goal are viewed as more informative
about the causal e¤ect of business taxation on outcome variables, whereas those changes that

12

o¤set changes in government spending or other output-related factors are viewed as endogenous.
Our headline estimates provide the response for the average change in spending that would
accompany the tax increase. A state with a …scally balanced budget that raises taxes to spend
the proceeds on business development would probably see di¤erent responses compared to a
state with an imbalanced budget, particularly if the state with the imbalanced budget raises
taxes without any increase in spending that would attract businesses. To address this issue, we
follow the Romer and Romer (2010) narrative approach in our robustness analysis, reading news
coverage of tax changes and classifying them accordingly.
A further caveat is that our results average over di¤erential tax treatment of di¤erent industries through di¤erent depreciation rules. Gravelle (1994) and Gruber and Rauh (2007) calculate
marginal e¤ective tax rates by industry as a function of depreciation rules and investment tax
credits. The true incentive generated by tax policy is determined by the percent of expected
return from new investment that would be collected by the government. Our underlying assumption is therefore that a one percentage point change in the statutory tax rate is accompanied
by a one percentage point change in the e¤ective tax rate, which will on average be the case if
states are not simultaneously changing depreciation rules.
Finally, we note that we also include in the regressions measures of other types of taxes and
tax rules, speci…cally sales taxes, property taxes, and targeted tax incentives. We consider these
primarily as controls as our main goal is to estimate the e¤ects of the income tax codes.

II

Data and Methodology

A. Establishment-Level Data on Firm Business Activity
The establishment-level data are obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD). An establishment is a “single physical location where business is conducted”
(Jarmin and Miranda (2003, p. 15)). The LBD covers all business establishments in the U.S.
with at least one paid employee. For each establishment, the LBD includes data on employment,
payroll, industry sector, location, and corporate a¢ liation.
We supplement the LBD with two other datasets from the U.S. Census Bureau: the Census
of Manufactures (CMF) and the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The CMF covers all
U.S. manufacturing establishments, referred to as “plants”. The CMF is conducted every …ve

13

years, in years ending with 2 and 7 (the so-called Census years). The ASM is conducted in all
non-Census years and covers a subset of the plants covered by the CMF: plants with more than
250 employees are included in every ASM year, while plants with fewer employees are randomly
selected every …ve years, where the probability of being selected is higher for relatively larger
plants. Although the ASM is technically referred to as a survey, reporting is mandatory, and
…nes are levied for misreporting. The CMF and ASM contain detailed plant-level information
such as capital expenditures, total assets, and the value of shipments. Accordingly, while the
ASM/CMF is less comprehensive than the LBD, it provides a richer set of establishment-level
variables.
To create a primary sample for the analysis, we select all multi-unit companies in the LBD
from 1977-2011 with at least 100 employees and establishments in at least two states. The
rationales behind these selection criteria are that we are interested in medium-sized to large
…rms; and we are only interested in companies that consider multiple states in their location
decisions. In this sample, we study the e¤ects of taxation on establishment counts, establishment
location, and employment. This primary sample consists of 27.6 million establishment-year
observations, corresponding to 647,000 …rm-year observations.
A secondary sample consists of those observations in the primary sample that are also in
the ASM/CMF. This subsample allows us to study capital allocation decisions of …rms in the
Census, as the ASM/CMF data contain information on …rm capital stock. We can therefore use
this sample to study the e¤ects of taxation on capital investment and location. This secondary
sample consists of 854,700 establishment-year observations corresponding to 104,400 …rm-year
observations.
The LBD can be matched to the Census Bureau’s SSEL (Standard Statistical Establishment
List), which contains information from the Business Register. In particular, the SSEL provides a
tax-based legal form of organization for all …rms in the LBD. The identi…cation of the legal form
is based on the …rm’s tax …ling status. Firms may be listed as having any one of seven possible
legal forms: individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, taxable cooperative association,
tax-exempt cooperative association, government, or other legal form.9 In this study, we consider
only the …rst three categories (i.e., sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations).
Importantly, the SSEL also contains the precise tax …ling status of each company. Sole
9

Establishments without payroll are classi…ed into speci…ed legal forms of organization according to the type
of income tax form …led (1040C— individual proprietorship; 1065— partnership; 1120 and 1120S— corporation).

14

proprietorships and partnerships are always pass-through entities for tax purposes, but …rms
organized as corporations can be designated for tax purposes as C-Corporations, which are
subject to the corporate income tax, or S-Corporations, which pass through all pro…ts to owners
who then pay individual income tax and other business taxes. Corporations that designate
themselves as LLCs can choose to …le taxes as a partnership, C Corporation, or S Corporation.
The LBD indicates the precise tax …ling status of LLCs.
Figure 1 shows the percent of companies over time in the sample organized for tax purposes
as C-Corporations and S-Corporations, as well as partnerships and sole proprietorships. The
…gure shows the downward trend in C-Corporations and the upward trend in the pass-through
entities over time. This trend began in the early 1980s and accelerated with the passage of the
Tax Reform Act of 1986, which made the tax code more favorable to pass-through entities by
lowering federal individual tax rates below federal corporate rates. By 2011, 64% of …rms in
our sample of multi-state …rms were organized for tax purposes as C Corporations, 24% as S
Corporations, and the remaining 12% as pass-through entities. This composition re‡ects the
fact that multi-state businesses are much more likely to be organized as C Corporations than
businesses operating in one state. According to 2007 statistics from the Congressional Budget
O¢ ce (2012), 94% of businesses in the US are organized as pass-through entities, although they
account for only 38% of federal government business receipts.
Table 1 shows summary statistics for the sample in the paper at the di¤erent levels of
observation used in our analysis. We note the Census Bureau requires us to round observation
counts to the nearest hundred. Panel A shows the summary statistics at the establishment-year
level, covering around 27.6 million observations. Here we can track the number of employees per
establishment, and the capital stock of the 854,700 plant-year observations in the manufacturing
sample. Panel B shows the summary statistics at the …rm-state-year level. There are 4.2 million
…rm-state-year observations where …rms have a nonzero number of establishments. At this level
of observation, we can track the number of establishments a …rm has in each state in each year;
the number of employees a …rm has in each state and each year; and the capital stock of each
…rm in each state in each year. If we expand the sample to 51 observations per …rm year (50
states plus Washington DC), …lling in the states where a …rm has no business activities with
zeros, the sample expands to about 33 million …rm-state-year observations. The …rm-state-year
level of analysis is useful for our speci…cations that examine the extensive margin, whereas

15

the establishment level of analysis is useful for studying the intensive margin. For completeness,
Panel C aggregates the sample to the …rm-year level, which shows that the sample covers 647,000
…rm-year observations, 104,400 of which are in manufacturing.10
The average number of employees at an establishment in the LBD data is 50 for C-Corps and
36 for pass-through entities, while the median number of employees is 11.11 The average number
of establishments a …rm has in a state, conditional on the …rm being active in that state at all,
is 7.1 for C-Corps and 3.7 for pass-through entities, while the medians are 1.3 establishments for
C-Corps and 1.2 establishments for pass-through entities. The higher mean establishment and
employee counts for C-Corps therefore arise primarily due to the right tail of the distribution
of C-Corps, the largest of which may have thousands of employees in some establishments and
hundreds of establishments in some states.
We also provide summary statistics for the capital stock of the manufacturing …rms in the
sample. Capital stock is calculated using the perpetual inventory formula. The appendix describes how capital stock is constructed from the CMF/ASM data. The within-industry variation
in the capital stock variable is coming from each establishment’s annually reported gross capital
expenditures, as the depreciation rates used in the perpetual inventory formula are industryspeci…c.
B. State Tax Codes (1977-2011) and Development of Explanatory Variables
We compile data on many aspects of business taxation at the state level. We focus on the type
of state corporate taxation, corporate tax rates, apportionment factors and throwback rules. We
also collect data on sales taxes, unemployment insurance, personal income tax, property taxes,
and tax incentives, which we include as control variables.
To characterize each state’s corporate tax policy in each year, we obtain the type of state
corporate taxation (whether regular corporate income tax, gross receipts tax, no tax, or other),
and the corporate tax rates from three main sources: the University of Michigan Tax Database
(1977-2002), the Tax Foundation (2000-2011), and the Book of States (primarily the chapter

10
Note that our sample represents 12% of all establishments in the LBD, but less than 1% of all …rms, as
our sample selection criteria (multi-state …rms with at least 100 employees) naturally overweight …rms with more
establishments.
11

Due to the Census Bureau’s disclosure policy, we cannot report median values. Instead, “median” in Table
1 refers to a pseudo-median that is computed as average across all observations between the 40th and 60th
percentiles.

16

“state …nance”).12
Apportionment factors and throwback rules are obtained from the Commerce Clearing
House’s State Tax Handbooks. In our baseline analysis, we examine the sensitivity of business activity to the state tax rate

i .
C

Accordingly, our baseline estimates capture the average

e¤ect of state taxation across di¤erent apportionment regimes. In further analysis, we explicitly
account for apportionment factors and throwback rules. We proceed in two ways.
In the …rst approach, we interact the state tax rate

i
C

with a term that re‡ects the fact that

larger sales apportionment factors dull the incentive for the …rm to relocate plants and employees.
This interaction term is either 1
i
sales (1

1

i
sales

, where

i
sales

is the sales apportionment factor, or

Ithrowback ) where Ithrowback is an indicator variable for whether the state has a

throwback (or throwout) rule. Note that since the property and payroll apportionment factors
are always equal, such speci…cations capture the full state-level heterogeneity in apportionment
factors. The idea is that if a state has a 100% sales apportionment factor and no throwback,
…rms would have little incentive to move property or plant across state borders in response to
changes in

i ,
C

as the location of …rm property and plant would not a¤ect taxes paid, assuming

nexus is not changed.13 If a throwback rule is in place, then the tax rate would matter to the
extent that the …rm is selling in states with either no corporate tax or in which they have no
nexus (property or employees).
In the second approach, we calculate apportionment-factor adjusted corporate tax rates for
each state and …rm. If a company has employees and property (nexus) in one state (i) but sales
in many states, all of the pro…ts will be subject to the tax laws of state i, where it has the
employees and property. In the absence of a throwback or throwout rule, the e¤ective corporate
tax rate in that state would be:

C(AF adj)

=

i
C

2
4

i
payroll

payroll in i
total payroll

+

i
sales

+

i
property

shipments in i
total shipments

property in i
total property

3
5

(1)

12

The data are available from:
http://www.bus.umich.edu/otpr/otpr/default.asp;
http://taxfoundation.org/article/state-corporate-income-tax-rates;
http://knowledgecenter.csg.org/kc/category/content-type/bos-archive.
13

A caveat to this is that even if there is a 100% sales apportionment formula and no throwback, changes in
the rate might give …rms the incentive to move in or out of a state entirely. For example, a …rm producing solely
in Nevada and shipping only to California owes no corporate tax. But once it moves even a small number of
employees to California, it has nexus in California and then must pay California income taxes.

17

and analogously for the personal tax rate that applies to pass-through entities. So the company
would at …rst glance appear to have a break in state i, getting a lower e¤ective tax rate than the
state’s corporate tax rate (

i )
C

based on the fact that it was selling outside of state i. However,

if state i has a throwback rule, all “nowhere”sales (sales to states where the …rm’s activities are
not taxed because the …rm has no physical presence there or because the state has no corporate
tax) must be added into the …nal term of the formula:

i
C

2

i
payroll

4

+

payroll in i
property in i
i
total payroll + property
total property
shipments in i + nowhere sales
i
sales
total shipments

3

5:

If instead the state has a throwout rule, the nowhere sales must be subtracted from the denominator:
i
C

2

payroll in i
total payroll

i
payroll

4

+

i
sales

i
property

+

property in i
total property

shipments in i
total shipments
nowhere sales

3

5:

We are not able to compute “nowhere sales” since we only observe the shipments generated by
each establishment, not the geographical distribution of those shipments. The calculation of
an apportionment- and throwback-adjusted e¤ective tax rate therefore requires an assumption
about the location of the shipments. In this speci…cation, we assume that all the shipments of
the plant go to states where the …rm has no nexus, or states where there is no corporate tax.
The e¤ective tax rate we implement in this case is

C(AF and T B adj)

=

i
C

2
4

i
payroll

payroll in i
total payroll

+

i
sales

+

i
property

property in i
total property

Ithrowback

3

5:

(2)

The other tax variables are obtained from a variety of sources. Personal income tax rates, which
apply to the pass-through entities, are obtained from the NBER database of state-level tax
rates. Sales tax rates are obtained from the University of Michigan Tax Database for 1977-2002
and from the Tax Foundation for 2000-2011.14 Unemployment insurance (UI) provisions are
obtained from the Department of Labor’s “Signi…cant Provisions of State UI Laws.”15 The main
14

The data are available from:
http://www.bus.umich.edu/otpr/otpr/default.asp;
http://taxfoundation.org/article/state-sales-gasoline-cigarette-and-alcohol-tax-rates.
15

http://www.unemploymentinsurance.doleta.gov/unemploy/statelaws.asp

18

UI data we collect are on the UI base (or the amount of wages that is UI-taxable) and the UI
rate. In our regression analysis, we calculate the UI contribution as the UI base times the UI
rate, and estimate speci…cations with the log of this UI contribution as an explanatory control
variable.16
As we were unable to obtain data on property tax rates that could be matched with business
ownership of property, we instead use the total amount of property taxes collected by state
and local governments in the establishment’s state divided by total revenues of state and local
governments in the establishment’s state as a control variable called property tax share in the
analysis. These data are available from the Census of Government State & Local Finances.17
We emphasize that these are rough measures of the property tax burden in a given state that
we include as a control, with the goal being to control for possible correlations between the
income tax variables that are our primary objects of inquiry and other aspects of the business
tax climate that operate through taxes on bases other than income.
Finally, we also collect and control for 33 targeted business incentives that are compiled
annually by the magazine Site Selection (formerly Site Selection and Industrial Development
Handbook ).18 The business incentives are grouped into two categories: 18 di¤erent types of
…nancial assistance for industry (FA) and 15 di¤erent types of tax incentives (TI). Common
examples of …nancial assistance include the existence of a state-sponsored industrial development authority and state or local incentives for establishing industrial plants in areas of high
unemployment. Common tax incentives include corporate or personal income tax incentives for
new businesses or businesses in certain industries, and tax exemptions or moratoria on various
factors of production such as land, capital, equipment, or machinery. For each state-year, we
construct an index that adds one index point for each of the 33 business incentives.19 We label
this index tax incentives index.
Table 2 shows the summary statistics for these tax variables at the state-year level from 19772011. Washington DC is also included, so the total observations are 35 years

51 states = 1,785.

The table shows that the mean corporate tax rate for the state-year observations in the sample
16

The data include additional information, e.g., the amount of weekly earnings that are disregarded, the number
of bene…t weeks, etc. In the analysis, we abstract from these nuances of the UI calculations.
17

http://www.census.gov/govs/local/

18

http://www.siteselection.com/

19

The Site Selection data are not available in all years. To …ll in the missing years, we use the latest available

year.

19

is 6.85% and the mean personal tax rate is 5.29%, with medians slightly higher in each case. The
property tax share is on average 12% of total state and local government revenues. Sales tax rates
are 4.4% at the mean and 5% at the median. The average unemployment insurance contribution
across the state-year observations in the analysis is $699 per worker. States generally set the
payroll and property apportionment factors equal to each other, as re‡ected by the identical
summary statistics on these apportionment factors. At the median the payroll, property, and
sales apportionment factors are 1/3, whereas at the mean the distribution is closer to 50% for
sales, 25% for payroll, and 25% for property. 60% of state-year observations have a throwback
rule.
Figure 2 shows the evolution of the distribution of corporate and personal income tax rates
over time. Panel A shows that state corporate tax rates generally rose during the 1970s and
1980s, and generally fell during the 1990s and early 2000s, with the median corporate rate
ticking up in 2011. The distribution of personal income tax rates as shown in Panel B behaved
di¤erently. The mean remained between 5.0% and 5.5% during the sample period, but the distribution across states becomes more compressed over time. These patterns are further illustrated
in Figure 3, where increases and decreases in each tax rate are counted by year in histograms.
Again one sees that the 1970s and 1980s generally saw more corporate tax increases, and the
1990s and 2000s more decreases. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that changes in the personal tax
rates were overall more common than changes in the corporate rates, and decreases in personal
tax rates during the …nal decade of the sample were particularly common.
Since our identi…cation strategy relies on comparing …rms with di¤erent legal forms of organization and tax …ling statuses, it is important that there is su¢ cient independent variation in
the corporate and personal tax codes. In Table 3, we analyze correlations among changes in the
tax variables. The top panel shows correlations in levels. The corporate income tax rate and
the personal income tax rate have a correlation of 0.21. However, the bottom panel shows that
in …rst di¤erences, there is substantially less correlation, with the aforementioned …gure falling
to 0.04.
Figure 4 further investigates the correlations between the corporate and individual tax rates.
The upper panel of Figure 4 provides a scatter plot of the personal income tax rate (vertical
axis) and corporate income tax rate (horizontal axis) across all state-year observations from 19772011. The bottom panel provides a scatter plot of the year-to-year changes (…rst di¤erences)

20

in the personal and corporate income tax rates. Here again, it is clear that in levels, states
with higher personal income tax rates tend to have higher corporate income tax rates. The
bottom panel, however, reveals many observations where only one rate was changed, or where
there are increases in one rate and decreases in the other, with only weak evidence of positive
correlation. We conclude from this analysis that when including state …xed e¤ects, there is
substantial variation that allows a separate e¤ect to be measured of corporate versus individual
tax rates.
C. Speci…cations
The …rst set of extensive-margin speci…cations examines the relation between state tax rates
and the number of establishments a …rm has in each state in each year. We estimate these
speci…cations at the …rm-state-year level in the sample of 32,997,200 …rm-state-year observations,
which includes zeros for states that have no observations in a given state in a given year. The
dependent variable is the number of establishments …rm i has in state s in year t. At a minimum,
these speci…cations all contain both year …xed e¤ects and …rm-state …xed e¤ects. The primary
linear speci…cation is therefore:
# Establishmentsist =

is

+

+

t

+

C;P

(

C

C;C

(

C

CCorp) +

P assT hrough) +

+ CCorp +

0

P;P
P;C

(

(
P

P assT hrough)

P

CCorp)

X + "ist ;

(3)

where i indexes …rms, s indexes states, and t indexes years. The variables

C

and

P

represent

the state-level corporate and personal tax rates respectively, and X is a vector of other tax
climate variables and controls including the sales tax rate, the log of the UI contribution, the
property tax share, the tax incentives index, and the log of state-level GDP (obtained from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis). The variable CCorp is an indicator variable equal to one if the
establishment belongs to a …rm that is a C-Corp, and the variable PassThrough is an indicator
variable equal to one if the establishment belongs to a …rm that is a pass-through entity.20
The key coe¢ cients of interest are

C;C

and

P;P .

These represent the e¤ect of a one

percentage point change in the corporate tax rate on the number of C-Corp establishments
20

If …rms never changed their form of incorporation, there would be no variation in CCorp within …rm-state
cells over time, and this term would drop out of the equation.

21

in the state, and the e¤ect of a one percentage point change in the personal tax rate on the
number of pass-through establishments in the state, respectively. The cross-terms
P;C

can be thought of as measuring placebo e¤ects.

C;P

C;P

and

re‡ects the correlation between

the corporate tax rate and the number of pass-through establishments in the state, and

P;C

re‡ects the correlation between the personal rate and the number of corporate establishments
in the state. We are testing the null hypotheses that each of the four betas is zero. If the
identi…cation strategy is sound and there is an e¤ect of business taxation on the number of
establishments in a given state, we expect to reject the null hypotheses that
= 0, but not to reject the null hypotheses that

C;P

= 0 and

P;C

C;C

= 0 and

P;P

= 0. We also estimate a

number of robustness speci…cations that include regional trends and industry trends, which are
implemented by including interactions of those variables with year …xed e¤ects.
Linear speci…cations have drawbacks when applied to count data (Hausman, Hall, and
Griliches (1984)), so we also employ Poisson regressions, in which the count dependent variable is assumed to have a Poisson distribution, and estimate analogous coe¢ cients. In addition,
in keeping with the earlier literature on the location decisions of (primarily new) …rms, we estimate conditional logit speci…cations. In order to map our setting into an outcome variable
that takes a value of either zero or one, we de…ne the dependent variable as an indicator for
whether state s had the largest increase in the number of establishments by …rm i in year t.
In an analogous speci…cation, we de…ne the dependent variable as an indicator for whether the
state s had the largest decrease in the number of establishments by …rm i in year t.
One concern with the strategy of relying on di¤erences in tax …ling status to identify an
e¤ect is the possibility that tax …ling status could be endogenous to the state corporate tax
code. As a …rst point, it seems unlikely that the state corporate tax code is determining the
tax …ling status of multi-state companies, given the relative importance of this decision for the
…rm’s liability under the federal tax code. However, we address this possibility in several ways.
First we estimate speci…cations where we exclude all …rms that changed their legal form
of organization (LFO) within a …ve year window around the tax change. Second, we estimate
speci…cations that include LFO-by-year …xed e¤ects, thus accounting for trends in legal form of
organization around tax changes. Third, we test the hypothesis that state-level tax variables
matter little for the organizational form decision for …rms by running the following regression

22

at the …rm level
1 (CCorpit ) =

i

+

t

+

C

(

C)

+

P

(

P)

+

0

X + "it ;

(4)

where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if the …rm is a C-Corp,
and the tax variables are the average tax rates across states where …rm i has establishments.
We …nd no evidence of an e¤ect of these rates on the …rm decision to change its legal form of
organization.
A further general critique that has been brought against studies that rely on variation in
policy parameters is that …rms may plan their investment, employment, and location decisions
in part in expectation of future changes in government policy (Lucas (1976), or more recently
Hennessy and Strebulaev (2015)). For example, if …rms expect taxes to increase at date t and
then taxes do increase at that date but by less than expected, the tax increase would in e¤ect
amount to a tax cut relative to expectations, making estimated coe¢ cients di¢ cult to interpret.
One approach we take to address this question is to estimate predicted values of corporate
and personal tax rates based on one-year lags of those tax rates and other macroeconomic
variables:

C;t

= +

1 C;t 1 + 2 log (GDP )t 1 + 3 U nemploymentRatet 1 + 4 %BudgetSurplust 1 +

(C)

P;t

= +

1 P;t 1 + 2 log (GDP )t 1 + 3 U nemploymentRatet 1 + 4 %BudgetSurplust 1 +

(P )

(5)
where %BudgetSurplus is calculated as

Revenues
Expenditures
Expenditures

at the state level using data from

the Census of Governments State & Local Finances, and the state-level unemployment rate is
obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We then re-estimate our primary speci…cations
using

(C)

instead of

C

and

(P )

instead of

P.

This can then be thought of as the e¤ects of

tax changes that would be unpredictable by the simple lag regression model above.
To establish how much of the measured e¤ects are due to reallocation to other states, we
also estimate a version of our equation (3), but including a set of tax variables set equal to the

23

average tax rates in all other states in which the company has operations:
# Establishmentsist =

is

+

+

t

+

C;P

(

C

C;C

(

CCorp) +

C

P assT hrough) +

(

P;P
P;C

(

P assT hrough)

P

CCorp)

P

+'C;C (eC;

s

CCorp) + 'P;P (eP;

+'C;P (eC;

s

P assT hrough) + 'P;C (eP;
0

+ CCorp +

s

P assT hrough)
s

CCorp)

X + "ist ;

(6)

where the tax variables with tildes are the average rates for all other states except state s. The
variables 'C;C and 'P;P measure the impact of the change in the average tax rates in other
states the …rm is active in on the number of establishments in state s itself.
Finally, our intensive margin speci…cations are analogous to the extensive margin equations.
Speci…cally, we estimate
log (employeesit ) =

i

+

+
C;P

t

+

(

C;C

C

+ CCorp +

(

C

CCorp) +

P assT hrough) +
0

P;P
P;C

(

(

P
P

P assT hrough)
CCorp)

X + "it

(7)

in the full LBD at the establishment-year level, with establishment and year …xed e¤ects,
and

t,

i

respectively. Similarly, in the manufacturing subsample, we estimate equation (7) using

as dependent variable log (capitalit ) to examine capital formation e¤ects.
D. Narrative Approach
In an extension of our analysis, we study a subsample of …rms a¤ected by states that changed
one of their tax rates by at least 100 basis points. These large tax changes— which we refer to
as “treatments”— occurred 161 times during the sample period. We distinguish between four
types of treatments: large increases in
decreases in

C,

large decreases in

C,

large increases in

P,

and large

P.

For each treatment category, we restrict the sample to …rms in the treated states three
years before and three years after the treatment.21 We then estimate the following di¤erence21

We restrict the treatment window to ensure that our analysis is not a¤ected by multiple treatments or
treatment reversals.

24

in-di¤erences speci…cation:
# Establishmentsist =

is

+

t

+

T reatment +

0

X + "ist

(8)

where Treatment is the treatment dummy that equals one for treated …rms in the years following
the treatment. When changes in

C

are considered, the treatment group consists of C-Corps

and the control group of pass-through entities (the other way around for changes in

P ).

In

spirit, this speci…cation is closest to our ideal experiment— we vary a tax parameter and then
study the di¤erential response of C-Corps and pass-through entities within the same state.
An appealing feature of speci…cation (8) is that it allows us to examine the dynamics of the
treatment. Speci…cally, we estimate a variant this speci…cation replacing the treatment dummy
with a set of indicator variables that capture the dynamics of the large tax changes (e.g., one
year before the treatment, year of the treatment, one year after the treatment, etc.). If our
results are driven by pre-existing trends, we should observe an “e¤ect”of the tax changes before
they are even implemented.
Another appealing feature of speci…cation (8) is that it can be used to implement the narrative approach of Romer and Romer (2010). They note that most tax changes have a single,
clearly identi…able motivation that falls into one of four broad categories: (1) o¤setting a change
in government spending; (2) o¤setting some factor other than spending likely to a¤ect output in
the near future; (3) dealing with an inherited budget de…cit; (4) achieving some long-run goal,
such as higher normal growth, increased fairness, or a smaller role for government. Romer and
Romer (2010) classify (1) and (2) as “endogenous,” and (3) and (4) as “exogenous”.
Romer and Romer’s (2010) analysis pertains to changes in federal tax rates. We adopt their
approach with reference to our 161 large tax changes at the state level. Speci…cally, we search
for news articles in the year of each tax change and two years prior. We then classify the changes
according to the same categories as Romer and Romer (2010).
Finding newspaper coverage of state-level tax changes is no easy task. Electronic archives of
local newspapers often do not go back to the 1980s, while large out-of-state newspapers, such as
the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times, often provide no coverage, especially for small
states. After a careful search of major newspaper databases (Factiva, Lexis-Nexis, Newsbank
America’s Newspapers, and Access Newspaper Archive Pro), we could …nd newspaper coverage
for 107 out of the 161 large tax changes. The majority (83) falls into the exogenous subcategories.
25

We then estimate a variant of speci…cation (8) where we decompose the treatment dummy into
Treatment (exogenous), Treatment (endogenous), and Treatment (unclassi…ed).
Despite its appeal, a drawback of the narrative approach is that it is inherently subjective. To
alleviate this concern, we identify a subset of tax changes that are likely exogenous on objective
grounds. Speci…cally, we exploit two federal reforms— the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
(ERTA81) and the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86)— that triggered changes in state tax
policies. ERTA81 implemented the accelerated cost recovery system (ACRS). E¤ectively, ARCS
accelerated depreciation schedules, thereby reducing tax revenues for states that followed federal
rules. To o¤set this reduction, four states (Indiana, Iowa, Nebraska, and Wisconsin) increased
their corporate income tax (Aronson and Hilley (1986)).
Similarly, TRA86 broadened the tax base for the federal income tax, thus creating a revenue
windfall for states that follow the federal de…nition of the tax base. As a result, 10 states
(California, Delaware, Kansas, Maine, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and
West Virginia) and D.C. reduced their personal income tax (Ladd (1993)). For two states,
Utah and Montana, the reform created a negative shock to the …scal position, and these states
raised their personal income tax in response. In the analysis, we account for these federal tax
reforms by decomposing the Treatment (exogenous) dummy into the three dummies Treatment
(ERTA81), Treatment (TRA86), and Treatment (other exogenous).

III

Results

A. E¤ ect of State Tax Rates on the Counts and Locations of Establishments and Employees
This section presents the results of the analysis we conduct on the extensive margin. That is,
how do changes in the state tax code a¤ect the number of establishments a …rm has in a given
state. In Table 4 we analyze this question at the level of the …rm-state-year. As illustrated in
equation (3), the dependent variable is the number of establishments each …rm has in each state
in each year, where that value equals zero if an active company has no observations in the state.
Column (1) shows the results without a control for log(GDP) and column (2) shows the results
in the presence of such a control.
Including the log(GDP) term has the obvious advantage that it prevents the regression from
attributing any changes in establishment counts to changes in economic activity that might

26

be unrelated to tax policy. On the other hand, including the control is tantamount to the
assumption that the changes in economic activity had nothing to do with the tax policy itself. If
tax policy a¤ects GDP growth and does so in part through the e¤ects of tax policy on business
activity, then controlling for GDP will lead to an underestimate of the true e¤ect of the tax
policy. To be cautious, we nevertheless focus on the results that include GDP controls.
Controlling for GDP, the point estimates are

C;C

= –0.031 and

P;P

= –0.010. Both are

statistically signi…cant at the 1% level, with standard errors clustered by state. This means
that a 100 basis point increase in the corporate tax rate would lead to the closure of 0.31
establishments per C-Corp …rm in a given state, out of an average of 7.06 establishments per
state per C-Corp …rm as shown in Table 1. A 100 basis point increase in the personal tax rate
would lead to the closure of 0.10 establishments, compared to an average of 3.72 establishments
per state per pass-through entity as shown in Table 1. These coe¢ cients therefore imply that
a 100 basis point increase (decrease) in the statutory corporate income tax rate corresponds to
a 0.44% decrease (increase) in the number of establishments belonging to corporations. A 100
basis point increase (decrease) in the statutory personal income tax rate corresponds to a 0.27%
decrease (increase) in the number of establishments belonging to pass-through …rms.
The coe¢ cients on the key tax variables in the Poisson speci…cation in column (3) are around
20-30% smaller than in the preferred linear speci…cation in column (2). In Appendix Table A1
we present conditional logit results, de…ning the binary dependent variable as being either the
state with the largest increase in the number of establishments for a given …rm in a given year,
or the largest decrease in the number of establishments. We …nd that for each 100 basis point
increase in the corporate tax rate, a given state is 0.4% less likely to be the state in which a
corporate …rm has the largest increase in the number of corporate establishments for that …rm
in that year. For each 100 basis point increase in the personal tax rate, a given state is 0.3%
less likely to be the state in which a pass-through …rm has the largest increase in the number of
pass-through establishments for that …rm in that year. The parallel speci…cations that examine
the likelihood of being the state with the largest decrease have inverse though somewhat weaker
results.
In the above discussion we focused for simplicity on changes of 100 basis points. A 100
basis point change in tax rates is considerably higher than the standard deviation of the change
in rates. A one standard deviation change in the corporate income tax rate is 32 basis points

27

and a one standard deviation change in the personal income rate is 53 basis points. So a one
standard deviation change in

C

corresponds to a 0.14% (= 0.44%

0.43) change in the number

of corporate establishments and a one standard deviation change in
0.14% (= 0.27%

P

also corresponds to a

0.53) change in the number of pass-through establishments.

The coe¢ cients

C;P

and

P;C

are economically negligible and statistically insigni…cant, so

that we reject neither of the null hypotheses regarding the cross terms. That is, we do not reject
the nulls that
C;C

and

P;P

C;P

= 0 and

P;C

= 0. This is important for our analysis as it suggests that

are actually re‡ecting responses to the tax rates, not spurious correlations. We

can conclude that if there are omitted factors driving both tax policy and the number of …rm
establishments in a state over time, then there now have to be separate omitted factors explaining
why corporate tax policy is correlated with C-Corp business activity and not with pass-through
business activity, and why personal income tax rates are correlated with pass-through business
activity but not corporate activity. Furthermore, the fact that we include all four terms in the
same regression allows corporate business activity to serve as a control for pass-through business
activity around changes in the personal tax rate, and pass-through business activity to serve as
a control for corporate business activity around changes in the corporate tax rate.
Since this speci…cation includes …rm-by-state …xed e¤ects and the legal form of organization
is constant within a …rm across states, the indicator CCorp re‡ects the change in the number of
establishments when a …rm changes its legal form of organization. We address concerns about
whether such changes in legal forms of organization could be driving the results in the next table.
Here we note that when companies change to C-Corp status, there is a substantial increase in the
number of establishments, which is intuitive as C-Corp status will typically only make sense for
larger …rms and particularly those with dispersed ownership, which in some cases (e.g., publicly
traded corporations) will be required to organize as C-Corps.
While we view the other tax items primarily as controls in the analysis of the e¤ect of
the income tax variables, it is nonetheless instructive to consider their magnitude. In this
speci…cation, the sales tax rate has no measured impact on the number of establishments, but
UI policy and the property tax share do have statistically signi…cant e¤ects. For UI, the e¤ect is
best explained by considering the mean values of the inputs and then calculating the comparative
static of changing the UI rate by a certain number of basis points. The mean UI base wage is
$10,658 and the mean UI tax rate is 6.47%, so the log of these means is log(10,658

28

6.47%) =

6.54.22 An increase in the UI rate by 100 basis points will increase the log of the UI contribution
by 0.14. Since the coe¢ cient in column (2) is –0.183, this implies a 100 basis point increase
in the UI tax rate would lead to a decrease in the number of establishments by –0.183
= –0.026 establishments, a magnitude that is between that of the coe¢ cients
and

C;C

P;P

0.14

= –0.010

= –0.031 above. The property tax share variable indicates that companies have fewer

establishments in states with a greater property tax burden. A one-standard deviation (0.05)
increase in the property-tax share variable is correlated with 0.018 fewer establishments.
In Table 5 we conduct robustness analysis on the extensive margin. The …rst column includes
region-by-year …xed e¤ects, to control for possible correlations between shifts in the regional
composition of establishments over time and state tax policy.23 So for example, if tax rates
moved relatively lower over time in the Mountain region, while economic activity was on a
general upward trend in this region, speci…cations without region-by-year …xed e¤ects would
attribute all of the increase in economic activity to the tax policy and not to secular regional
e¤ects. We …nd that the inclusion of regional trends if anything strengthens the results.
The second column of Table 5 includes industry-by-year …xed e¤ects, to control for possible
correlations between shifts in the industry composition of establishments over time and state tax
policy. So for example, if tax rates moved relatively higher in states that had industries in decline
for unrelated reasons, speci…cations without industry-by-year …xed e¤ects would attribute all
of the decrease in economic activity to the tax policy and not to the industry declines. The
inclusion of industry trends reduces the magnitude of the corporate tax coe¢ cient from 0.031
to 0.026, and the personal tax coe¢ cient from 0.010 to 0.006. Industries are measured at the
two-digit SIC level, so in this speci…cation all variation that is due to changes in the industry
composition of economic activity at the state level is absorbed.
The next two columns address the changing composition of legal forms of organization and
the possibility of endogeneity with respect to state tax policy. Column (3) includes trends in
the legal form of organization interacted with year …xed e¤ects, to allow C-Corps and passthrough entities to have di¤erential changes in the number of U.S. establishments each year.
This addresses the possibility that corporate tax reforms might take place at times when C-

22

Note that this is larger than the average of the log UI contribution shown in Table 2, due simply to Jensen’s
Inequality.
23

The regions are the 9 Census regions: Paci…c, Mountain, West North Central, East North Central, West
South Central, East South Central, South Atlantic, Middle Atlantic, and New England.

29

Corp activity would have declined independent of the tax reform. Column (4) excludes all
observations within a 5-year window around any change in the legal form of organization, and
the results remain robust.
In Appendix Table A2 we directly address the question of changes in legal form of organization by showing the results of a linear probability model at the …rm-year level, where the
explanatory variables are the tax variables, computed as (employee-weighted) averages across
all states where the …rm has establishments. Each year, 1.4% of C-Corps become pass-through
entities and 1.1% of pass-through entities become C-Corps. We …nd that the state-level tax variables have no statistically signi…cant e¤ect on the likelihood of changing organizational form,
except that fewer state-level tax incentives may marginally increase the probability of being a
C-Corp. Since …rms must choose one organizational form for the entire …rm, it is reasonable to
believe that federal tax policy has the strongest e¤ect here.
Column (5) of Table 5 uses the residuals from predictive regressions shown in equation (5)
above, instead of the tax variables

C

and

P

themselves. Appendix Table A3 shows the results

of the predictive regression itself.24 The only variation that is used in the residuals is variation
that is not predicted by lagged values of the tax variables, GDP, the unemployment rate, and
the state budget percent surplus or de…cit. Using only this unpredicted component does not
change the results appreciably from the baseline.
Column (6) shows the results only for the manufacturing subsample. Here we …nd that
the e¤ects of tax policy on C-Corps are smaller than in the full sample. For example,

C;C

declines from –0.031 to –0.019, possibly re‡ecting the high …xed costs of establishing and moving
manufacturing establishments.
Finally, in Column (7), the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether
the company has at least one establishment in the state— that is, this speci…cation is a linear
probability model that examines whether state taxation a¤ects companies at the “extensiveextensive margin”. The overall pattern is again similar. Speci…cally, we …nd that a 100 basis
point increase in the corporate (personal) income tax rate reduces the probability of C-Corps
(pass-through businesses) having any operations in the state by 0.3% (0.2%).
Table 6 augments the extensive margin regressions with the tax policies of other states in

24

Appendix Table A3 indicates that corporate tax rate increases are weakly correlated with higher lagged GDP
growth and a lower lagged unemployment rate, whereas personal tax rate increases are correlated with a smaller
lagged budget surplus (or a larger lagged budget de…cit).

30

which the …rm operates, as shown in equation (6). We see the original coe¢ cients of interest

C;C

and

P;P

essentially unchanged from the baseline regression of column (2) in Table

4. As predicted, the coe¢ cients on the average tax rate on the other states where the …rm
operates have opposite signs. So 'C;C , the coe¢ cient on (eC;

s

CCorp), has a point esti-

mate of 0.016 and is statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. Similarly, 'P;P , the coe¢ cient on
(eP;

s

P assT hrough), has a point estimate of 0.005 and is signi…cant at the 5% level. The

cross terms 'P;C and 'C;P are statistically and economically insigni…cant.
Changes in the tax rates of other states where the parent …rm has establishments therefore
have about half of the e¤ect as the tax rates of the state of the establishment itself. So for
example, if all other states in which a …rm operates increase the corporate tax rate by 100 basis
points and state s maintains the level of its corporate tax rate, state s sees an establishment
in‡ow amounting to 0.016 establishments per …rm.25 This in‡ow to state s would then eliminate
around half of the out‡ow from the other states, and is the basis of our conclusion that around
half of the baseline e¤ects are driven by reallocation of productive resources to other states
where the treated …rms have establishments.26
In Table 7, we show analysis that is analogous to Table 4 but now we examine the intensive
margin in terms of number of employees in speci…cations with establishment …xed e¤ects. The
level of observation is now the establishment-year, of which there are 27.6 million belonging to
…rms with more than 100 employees and active in more than one state. The results indicate an
elasticity of C corporation employment of 0.4 with respect to the state corporate income tax
rate, and an elasticity of pass-through business employment of 0.2 with respect to the personal
income tax rate. In other words, a one percentage point change in the state corporate rate has
an opposite e¤ect on employment at existing establishments of C corporations by 0.4 percentage
points. A one percentage point change in the state personal rate has an opposite e¤ect on
employment at existing establishments of pass-through entities by 0.2 percentage points. We

25

As in the baseline speci…cations, moving to a Poisson regression reduces the magnitudes by 20-30%.

26

Firm-level speci…cations that “net out” the reallocation by aggregating the number of establishments at the
…rm level con…rm this …nding. In column (1) of Appendix Table A4, we aggregate the number of establishments at
the …rm level and regress log(establishments) on the …rm-level analogs of the tax items— computed as (employeeweighted) averages across all states in which the company has establishments. As is shown, the coe¢ cient of
CCorp ( P P assT hrough) is –0.0015 (–0.0011), implying that a 100 basis point increase in the corporate
C
(personal) income tax rate corresponds to a decrease in the number of establishments by 0.15% (0.11%). This is
less than half the magnitude of the estimates in Table 4, consistent with our …nding that reallocation across states
o¤sets part of the baseline e¤ect. Column (2) also reports estimates with respect to log(employees); columns
(3)-(5) report estimates pertaining to the manufacturing sector.

31

caution that since our sample is of …rms that already have establishments in multiples states,
the e¤ects we measure are re‡ective of the responses of …rms that are more cheaply able to shift
factors of production across state borders than …rms operating in only one state. As in the
extensive margin analysis, the coe¢ cients on the cross terms

C;P

and

P;C

are economically

negligible and statistically insigni…cant. Also, as can be seen in column (3), we …nd that roughly
half of the e¤ect is o¤set by reallocation across states, similar to what we observed in Table 4.
On the labor adjustment margin, we also …nd an impact of UI contribution requirements.
An increase in the UI rate by 100 basis points will increase the log of the UI contribution by 0.14.
Since the coe¢ cient in column (2) is –0.011, this implies a 100 basis point increase in the UI
tax rate would lead to a decrease in the number of establishments by –0.011

0.14 = –0.15%.

The tax incentive index also enters with a statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient of 0.0009. A one
standard deviation change in this index by 6 points therefore has an e¤ect on employment of
0.5% at existing establishments. Compared to Table 4, the tax incentives index seems to have
a greater e¤ect on employment within existing establishments than on the setting up of new
establishments.
In Table 8, we perform similar robustness tests as in Table 5, but this time we examine the
intensive margin of employment in existing establishments, as in Table 7. The basic patterns
are very similar as in the extensive margin analysis. Under region-by-year …xed e¤ects,
around 26% larger than without, and

P;P

C;C

is

is 11% weaker. With industry trends, both e¤ects

are 16-18% weaker. The results are robust to excluding a 5-year window around LFO changes
and relying solely on the unpredicted component.
B. Large Tax Changes and the Narrative Approach
In this section we focus on large tax changes, which we de…ne as increases or decreases in tax
rates that are at least 100 basis points. The purpose of examining these large changes is to obtain
a sample on which we can manageably conduct analysis of the reasons for the tax changes, and
also so that we can obtain a clean setting without overlapping tax changes for di¤erence-indi¤erence analysis. We identify 56 such changes in the corporate tax rate and 105 such changes
in the personal tax rate, for a total of 161 changes.
Table 9 shows a di¤erence-in-di¤erence analysis of the large tax changes for the extensive
margin, as in equation (8). We construct four samples for this analysis, for each of four di¤erent
types of tax changes: corporate tax cuts, corporate tax increases, personal tax cuts, and personal
32

tax increases. To do this, we select all …rm-state-year observations for the treated states three
years before and three years after the major tax changes of each of the four types. Compared to
coe¢ cients from Table 4 (

C;C

= –0.031 and

P;P

= –0.010), columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) show

coe¢ cients of 0.027, –0.014, 0.018, and –0.005 for the e¤ects of corporate tax cuts, corporate tax
increases, personal tax cuts, and personal tax increases respectively on establishment counts.
The …rst three of these are signi…cant at the 1% level, while the coe¢ cient on the personal tax
increases is not statistically signi…cant at conventional levels. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8)
show the impulse response of the tax changes. Around half of the impact is observed in the year
of the treatment, and the rest in the following year. The coe¢ cients on Treatment(+1) are 0.031,
–0.017, 0.028, and –0.003 respectively, with the …rst three once again signi…cant at 1% and the
personal tax increase impact not statistically signi…cant. Figure 5 shows this dynamic response
graphically by plotting the coe¢ cients from t –2 to t + 2 for each of the four coe¢ cients.
In Table 10, we then implement the narrative approach in this sample as discussed in
Section II.D. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (6), we regress the number of establishments on the
type of treatment: exogenous, endogenous, and unclassi…ed. For categories where the changes
classi…ed as exogenous came through the 1981 and 1986 federal tax reforms, we break those
out separately in columns (3), (5), and (7). In all of the speci…cations, there is no statistically
or economically distinguishable di¤erence among the coe¢ cients on the di¤erent types of tax
changes. For large corporate tax cuts, large corporate tax increases, and large personal tax cuts,
the e¤ects on establishment counts are uniformly of the predicted sign, of a similar magnitude
to the di¤erence-in-di¤erence speci…cation, and statistically signi…cant.
Table 11 provides an analysis parallel to that in Table 9 but on the intensive margin, with
log(employees) on the left hand side. In contrast to the extensive margin results, where we found
statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients on all categories except large increases in the personal income
tax, here we …nd statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients on all categories except large decreases in
the personal income tax. Recall that in the full-sample intensive margin analysis, we found an
elasticity of C corporation employment of 0.4 with respect to the state corporate income tax
rate, and an elasticity of pass-through business employment of 0.2 with respect to the personal
income tax rate. As in Table 9, the coe¢ cients on the responses to treatment most closely match
these one year after treatment, that is in the coe¢ cients on Treatment(+1). Figure 6 shows this
dynamic response graphically by plotting the coe¢ cients from t –2 to t + 2 for each of the four

33

coe¢ cients.
In Table 12 we conduct the textual analysis on the intensive margin with log(employees)
as the dependent variable. Once again, in all of the speci…cations, there is no statistically
or economically distinguishable di¤erence among the coe¢ cients on the di¤erent types of tax
changes. For large corporate tax cuts, large corporate tax increases, and large personal tax
increases, the e¤ects on employment are uniformly of the predicted sign, of a similar magnitude
to the di¤erence-in-di¤erence speci…cation, and statistically signi…cant.
C. Apportionment Factors and Throwback Rules
In Table 13 we present the results of the apportionment factor analysis described in Section II.B.
The …rst column incorporates the fact that if a state has a high sales apportionment factor, then
changes in the state tax rate would be expected to have a smaller e¤ect on the …rm’s decision to
relocate plants and employees than if the state has a higher weighting on payroll and property.
Indeed, relocating plants and employees has only a limited e¤ect on the …rm’s tax burden if
that tax burden is determined largely by the location where the goods are sold, not the location
where the production is located. In the …rst column, the state tax rate
with 1

i
sales

C

is therefore interacted

, whereby we note once again that we do not actually observe the location to

which the …rm’s output is sold.
The baseline e¤ect on a …rm’s establishments in a state with a 100% sales apportionment
factor is measured by the …rst coe¢ cient –0.013, whereas the e¤ect in a state with a 33% sales
apportionment factor (the minimum) would be –0.013 –0.66
to the main coe¢ cient in Table 4 of

C;C

0.041 = –0.040. This compares

= –0.031, which at the mean represented an e¤ect of –

0.44% in the number of establishments. The …rst coe¢ cient in Table 13 therefore implies that the
point estimates of the e¤ect of an increase in the tax rate on the number of establishments would
range from 0.18% to 0.57% depending on the size of the apportionment factor. If …rms generally
tend to sell out of the state, then this di¤erence is explained by the di¤erential incentives facing
…rms in high versus low sales apportionment states. A similar spread is estimated for passthrough entities. Column (3) shows similar results on the intensive margin of employment, with
elasticities ranging from –0.15% when

i
sales

is 100%, to –0.47% when

In columns (2) and (4), the state tax rate

C

is interacted with 1

i
sales

is 33%.

i
sales (1

Ithrowback ) .

If …rms primarily sell not only out of state but also to states with no corporate tax or where
they have no nexus, then throwback rules dampen the e¤ect discussed in the previous para34

graph. That is, throwback rules limit the extent to which sales apportionment factors reduce
the incentives for …rms to relocate establishments and employees. These results mirror those in
columns (1) and (3) albeit with somewhat smaller magnitudes, perhaps because the assumptions
needed about the location of sales do not always hold in the data.
In Table 14 we investigate the e¤ects of apportionment factors and throwback rules using
the second approach, where we track all states in which manufacturing …rms have nexus, and
assign precise values of property shares and payroll shares in the calculation of apportionmentadjusted tax rates. The regression analysis in this case measures the …rm’s response to a change
in the actual tax claim on a dollar of total (national) corporate pro…t by one percentage point.
The data requirements of this analysis require us to focus only on the manufacturing subsample.
However, the availability of the capital stock variable in this subsample allows us to study capital
allocation decisions of …rms in response to tax changes.
Column (1) of Table 14 shows the coe¢ cients in an estimation of equation (7) with
log(employees) as the dependent variable, but only including the 854,700 establishment-level
observations that are in manufacturing, using statutory (not apportionment-adjusted) tax rates.
On the intensive margin within establishments over time, we …nd a coe¢ cient of –0.0033, smaller
than the full-sample coe¢ cient of –0.0041 from Table 7, consistent with a smaller elasticity.
However, when we use e¤ective state tax rates that account for apportionment factors and the
…rm’s share of capital and labor in each state (as in equation (1)), the coe¢ cient returns to
–0.0042 as shown in Column 3, very close to the full-sample estimate using statutory rates.
This estimate is again consistent with an elasticity of labor with respect to the state tax rate
of around 0.4. Columns (3) and (4) show a somewhat lower point estimate of the elasticity
of capital with respect to the apportionment-factor adjusted e¤ective tax rate. The capital
elasticity is measured at 0.27. Columns (5) and (6) additionally implement the throwback rule
as shown in equation (2), using an e¤ective tax rate that adjusts for both apportionment factors
and throwback rules, assuming that all the shipments of the plant go to states where the …rm
has no nexus or states where there is no corporate tax. The results here are a labor elasticity of
0.44 and a capital elasticity of 0.29.
Note that in these regressions we do not …nd statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients on the
pass-through entity response to the personal tax rate. However, this may to some extent re‡ect
the relatively small number of manufacturing …rms operating in multiple states as pass-through

35

entities with more than 100 employees. As shown in Table 1, there are only 11,100 …rms in the
US that …t this description, compared to 93,300 manufacturing C-Corps.
D. Heterogeneous E¤ ects Across Industries
Our …nal set of results examines heterogeneous treatment e¤ects across di¤erent industries. In
the top graph of Figure 7, we plot the coe¢ cients on (

C

CCorp) and (

P

P assT hrough)

from a variant of the baseline extensive margin speci…cation in which the tax variables are also
interacted with industry dummies for eight broad industry categories. The industry sectors are
agriculture and mining (SIC 1-14), construction (15-19), manufacturing (20-39), utilities (4049), wholesale and retail trade (50-59), …nancials (60-69), services (70-89), and other (90-99).27
We see that the industries most responsive on the extensive margin (actual opening and closing
of establishments in response to taxation) are retail/wholesale, services, and …nancials, while
perhaps unsurprisingly agriculture and mining are the least sensitive. In retail/wholesale, a one
percentage point change in the corporate rate a¤ects the number of establishments in the state
per C Corporation …rm by over 0.5%. The e¤ects on manufacturing are in the middle. The
ordering of pass-through coe¢ cients is similar, and the magnitudes are somewhat smaller as in
the full sample.
The bottom graph of Figure 7 shows an analogous investigation for the intensive margin.
The ordering of industries by the strength of response is quite similar to the ordering on the
extensive margin in the top graph. In retail/wholesale and services, we …nd elasticities of employment with respect to the state tax rate of over 1%. The ordering of pass-through coe¢ cients
is again similar, and the magnitudes are again somewhat smaller as in the full sample.

IV

Conclusions

In this paper we have estimated economic responses to state-level business taxation by multistate …rms on both the extensive and intensive margins. We …nd evidence consistent with
substantial responses of these …rms to state tax rates for the relevant tax rules. Corporate entities reduce the number of establishments per state and the number of employees and amount
of capital per plant when state tax rates increase. Pass-through entities respond similarly to

27

This classi…cation is based on SIC divisions, as opposed to SIC major groups (i.e., two-digit SIC industries).

36

changes in state-level personal tax rates, although in somewhat smaller magnitude. Our speci…cations suggest that around half of these responses are due to reallocation of business activity
to lower-tax states.
We have implemented a number of techniques and robustness tests to validate that the results are not due to spurious correlations between tax rate changes and state business activity.
Most importantly, the speci…cations implicitly use pass-through entities as a control sample
around corporate tax changes and corporate entities as a control sample around personal tax
changes. The lack of cross-correlations supports the identifying assumption in these regressions
that there are not state-level trends in general business activity around changes in tax policy.
In addition the results are robust to using innovations in tax policy relative to a baseline regression, to controlling for regional or industry trends, and to excluding …rms that change their
organizational form. Responses begin upon implementation of the tax policy, and we …nd no
evidence of trends prior to the treatment.
These …ndings leave a number of important areas open for further research, of which we
highlight three here. First, we emphasize that we analyze only …rms that already have establishments in multiple states. It seems important also to analyze the behavior of single-state
and smaller …rms with respect to changes in state-level tax policy. It stands to reason that
these would be less elastic in their decision to reallocate business activity, but perhaps not in
their overall response to tax policy. Second, the di¤erential taxation of C corporations and
pass-through entities could distort competition by giving an advantage to one type of …rm or
another. Investigating the impact of state taxation on the product market would shed light on
this phenomenon. Third, we have controlled for non-income-based state and local taxes, such
as unemployment insurance, sales taxes and property taxes, but more work remains to be done
on the impact of changes in these taxes and their structure on business activity.

37

Appendix: Calculation of Capital Stock
Following Lichtenberg (1992), capital stock is computed using the perpetual inventory method.
This method requires an initial value of real capital stock. For each plant, we select the earliest
available book value of capital in the CMF/ASM. To account for depreciation, we multiply this
value by the 2-digit SIC adjustment factor from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). This
adjustment factor is the ratio of industry net capital stock in current dollars to industry gross
capital stock in historical dollars. The adjusted book value of capital is then divided by the
4-digit SIC investment de‡ator from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. If the
earliest available book value of capital corresponds to the year in which the plant was “born”
(as identi…ed by the birth ‡ag in the LBD), no adjustment for depreciation is needed. In this
case, the book value is simply divided by the 4-digit SIC investment de‡ator. The initial value
of real capital stock is then written forward using the recursive perpetual inventory formula
Kit = (1

it )

Kit

1

+ Iit ;

where i indexes plants, t indexes years, K is the value of real capital stock,

is the 2-digit

SIC depreciation rate from the BEA, and I is capital expenditures divided by the 4-digit SIC
investment de‡ator. Until the 1997 Census, all necessary variables are available separately for
buildings and machinery. Accordingly, we calculate the capital stock for each asset category,
and add them together to obtain the …nal measure of capital stock. As of 1997, only aggregate
capital stock variables are available.

38

References
Aronson, Richard, and John L. Hilley, 1986, Financing State and Local Governments, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Bania, Neil, Jo Anna Gray, and Joe A. Stone, 2007, “Growth, Taxes, and Government Expenditures: Growth Hills for U.S. States,” National Tax Journal 60(2), 193-204.
Bartik, Timothy J., 1985, “Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the
E¤ects of Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States,” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 3(1), 14-22.
Bartik, Timothy J., 1991, Who Bene…ts from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Brülhart, Marius, Maio Jametti, and Kurt Schmidheiny, 2012, “Do Agglomeration Economies
Reduce the Sensitivity of Firm Location to Tax Di¤erentials?” The Economic Journal
122(563), 1069-1093.
Carlton, Dennis W., 1979. “Why Do Firms Locate Where They Do?: An Econometric Model,”
in Interregional Movements and Regional Growth, Wheaton, William, ed., Washington,
DC: The Urban Institute.
Carlton, Dennis W., 1983, “The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms: An Econometric Model with Discrete and Continuous Endogenous Variables,” Review of Economic
and Statistics 65(3), 440-449.
Congressional Budget O¢ ce, 2012, “Taxing Business through the Individual Income Tax,”
Publication Number 4298.
Coughlin, Cletus C., Joseph V. Terza, and Vachira Arromdee, 1991, “State Characteristics and
the Location of Foreign Direct Investment within the United States,”Review of Economics
and Statistics 68(4), 675-683.
Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger, 1992, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(3), 819-863.

39

Fox, William F., 1981, “Fiscal Di¤erentials and Industrial Location: Some Empirical Evidence,”
Urban Studies 18(1), 105-111.
Fox, William F., 1986, “Tax Structure and the Location of Economic Activity Along State
Borders,” National Tax Journal 39(4), 387-401.
Gabe, Todd M., and Kathleen P. Bell, 2004, “Tradeo¤s Between Local Taxes and Government
Spending as Determinants of Business Location,”Journal of Regional Science 44(1), 21-41.
Gale, William G., Aaron Krupkin, and Kim Rueben, 2015, “The Relationship between Taxes
and Growth at the State Level: New Evidence,” Tax Policy Center Working Paper.
Goolsbee, Austan, 1998, “Taxes, Organizational Form and the Deadweight Loss of the Corporate Income Tax,” Journal of Public Economics 69(1), 143-152.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Edward L. Maydew, 2000, “Coveting Thy Neighbor’s Manufacturing:
The Dilemma of State Income Apportionment,” Journal of Public Economics 75(1), 125143.
Goolsbee, Austan, 2004, “The Impact of the Corporate Income Tax: Evidence From State
Organizational Form Data,” Journal of Public Economics 88(11), 2283-2299.
Gordon, Roger, and Je¤rey K. MacKie-Mason, 1990, “E¤ects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986
on Corporate Financial Policy and Organizational Form,” in Do Taxes Matter, Slemrod,
Joel, ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, Roger, and Je¤rey K. MacKie-Mason, 1994, “Tax Distortions to the Choice of Organizational Form,” Journal of Public Economics 55(2), 279-306.
Gordon, Roger, and Je¤rey K. MacKie-Mason, 1997, “How much do Taxes Discourage Incorporation?” Journal of Finance 52(2), 477-505.
Gordon, Roger, and John D. Wilson, 1986, “An Examination of Multijurisdictional Corporate
Income Taxation under Formula Apportionment,” Econometrica 54(6), 1357-1373.
Gravelle, Jane G., 1994, The Economic E¤ ects of Taxing Capital Income, Cambridge: MIT
Press.

40

Gravelle, Jane G., and Lawrence Kotliko¤, 1988, “Does the Harberger Model Greatly Understate the Excess Burden of the Corporate Income Tax?” NBER Working Paper #2742.
Gravelle, Jane G., and Lawrence Kotliko¤, 1989, “The Incidence and E¢ ciency Costs of Corporate Taxation When Corporate and Noncorporate Firms Produce the Same Good,”
Journal of Political Economy 97(4), 749-780.
Gravelle, Jane G., and Lawrence Kotliko¤, 1993, “Corporate Tax Incidence and Ine¢ ciency
when Corporate and Noncorporate Goods are Close Substitutes,”Economic Inquiry 31(4),
501-516.
Grieson, Ronald E., 1980, “Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of the E¤ects of the Philadelphia
Income Tax,” Journal of Urban Economics 8(1), 123-137.
Grieson, Ronald E., William Hamovitch, Albert M. Levenson, and Richard D. Morgenstern,
1977, “The E¤ect of Business Taxation on the Location of Industry,” Journal of Urban
Economics 4(1), 170-185.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Joshua Rauh, 2007, “How Elastic is the Corporate Income Tax Base?”
in Taking Corporate Income in the 21st Century, Auerbach, Alan, James R. Hines, and
Joel Slemrod, eds., Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Guimaraes, Paulo, Octavio Figueiredo, and Douglas Woodward, 2003, “A Tractable Approach
to the Firm Location Decision Problem,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(1), 201204.
Guimaraes, Paulo, Octavio Figueiredo, and Douglas Woodward, 2004, “Industrial Location
Modeling: Extending the Random Utility Framework,”Journal of Regional Science 44(1),
1-20.
Gupta, Sanjay, and Lillian Mills, 2002, “Corporate Multistate Tax Planning: Bene…ts of Multiple Jurisdictions,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 33(1): 117-139.
Harberger, Arnold, 1962, “The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax,” Journal of Political
Economy 70(3), 215-240.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches, 1984, “Econometric Models for Count Data
with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica 52(4), 909-938.
41

Helms, L. Jay, 1985, “The E¤ect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time
Series-Cross Section Approach,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 67(4), 574-582.
Hennessy, Christopher, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2015, “Natural Experiment Policy Evaluation: A
Critique,” NBER Working Paper #20978.
Hines, James R., 1996, “Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment
in America,” American Economic Review 86(5), 1076-1094.
Holcombe, Randall G., and Donald L. Lacombe, 2004, “The E¤ect of State Income Taxation
on Per Capita Income Growth,” Public Finance Review 32(3), 292-312.
Holmes, Thomas J., 1998, “The E¤ect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing:
Evidence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (4), 667-705.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, 2003, “The Longitudinal Business Database,”CES Working Paper 02-17.
Klassen, Kenneth J., and Douglas Shackelford, 1998, “State and Provincial Corporate Tax
Planning: Income, Sales, Assets, and Compensation Management,”Journal of Accounting
and Economics 25(3), 385-406.
Ladd, Helen F., 1993, “State Responses to the TRA86 Revenue Windfalls: A New Test of the
Flypaper E¤ect,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12(1), 82-103.
Lichtenberg, Frank R., 1992, Corporate Takeovers and Productivity, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Michael Smolyansky, 2014, “To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact
of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income,” NBER Working Paper #20753.
Lucas, Robert, 1976, “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,”in The Phillips Curve and
Labor Markets, Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 1(1), 19-46.
McLure, Charles, 1980, “The State Corporate Income Tax: Lambs in Wolves’ Clothing,” in
The Economics of Taxation, Aaron, Henry J., and Michael J. Boskin, eds., Washington,
DC: The Brookings Institution.
42

McLure, Charles E., 1981, “The Elusive Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax: The State
Case,” Public Finance Quarterly 9(4), 395-413.
Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn, 2013, “A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates of Tax Multipliers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Mo…di, Alaeddin, and Joe A. Stone, 1990, “Do State and Local Taxes A¤ect Economic Growth?”
Review of Economic Statistics 72(4), 686-691.
Newman, Robert J., 1983, “Industry Migration and Growth in the South,”Review of Economics
and Statistics 65(1), 76–86.
Papke, Leslie, 1987, “Subnational Taxation and Capital Mobility: Estimates of Tax-Price
Elasticities,” National Tax Journal 40(2), 191-203.
Papke, Leslie, 1991, “Interstate Business Tax Di¤erentials and New Firm Location: Evidence
from Panel Data,” Journal of Public Economics 45(1), 47-68.
Rathelot, Roland, and Patrick Sillard, 2008, “The Importance of Local Corporate Taxes in
Business Location Decisions: Evidence from French Micro Data,” The Economic Journal
118(527), 499-514.
Reed, W. Robert, 2008, “The Robust Relationship between Taxes and U.S. State Income
Growth,” National Tax Journal 61(1): 57-80.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, 2010, “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,”American Economic Review 100(3),
763-801.
Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar, 2014, “Who Bene…ts from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A
Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,”University of Chicago Working
Paper.
Shoven, John B., 1976, “The Incidence and E¢ ciency E¤ects of Taxes on Income from Capital,”
Journal of Political Economy 84(6), 1261-1284.
Wasylenko, Michael, and Therese McGuire, 1985, “Jobs and Taxes: The E¤ect of Business
Climate on States’Employment Growth Rates,” National Tax Journal 38(4): 497-511.
43

Wasylenko, Michael, 1991, “Empirical Evidence on Interregional Business Location Decisions
and the Role of Fiscal Incentives in Economic Development,” in Industry Location and
Public Policy, Henry W. Herzog, Jr. and Alan M. Schlottmann, eds., Knoxville, TN:
Univ. Tennessee Press.

44

Figure 1. Legal Forms of Organization over Time
This figure plots the percentage of companies whose legal form of organization is C-corporation, S-corporation, and partnership or sole proprietorship. The
sample includes all multi-unit companies in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) with at least 100 employees and establishments in at least two states. The
sample period is from 1977 until 2011.

C-corporations

S-corporations

Partnerships & Sole proprietorships

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0%

Figure 2. Corporate and Personal Income Tax Rates over Time
This figure plots the evolution of the mean and quartiles of the corporate income tax rate (τc) and personal income
tax rate (τp), respectively, across all states from 1977 to 2011.

Panel (A): Corporate Income Tax Rate
Mean(τc)

25th Pctl(τc)

Median(τc)

75th Pctl(τc)

10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

4.00

Panel (B): Personal Income Tax Rate
Mean(τp)

25th Pctl(τp)

Median(τp)

75th Pctl(τp)

10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0.00

Figure 3. Changes in Corporate and Personal Income Tax Rates over Time
This figure plots the number of changes in the corporate income tax rate (τc) and personal income tax rate (τp),
respectively, across all states from 1977 to 2011.

Panel (A): Changes in Corporate Income Tax Rate
Number of increases in τc

Number of decreases in τc

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0

Panel (B): Changes in Personal Income Tax Rate
Number of increases in τp

Number of decreases in τp

35
30
25
20
15
10
5

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0

Figure 4. Scatter Plots of Corporate and Personal Income Tax Rates
Panel (A) provides a scatter plot of the personal income tax rate (vertical axis) and corporate income tax rate
(horizontal axis) across all state-year observations from 1977 to 2011. Panel (B) provides a scatter plot of the yearto-year changes (first differences) in personal and corporate income tax rates.

Panel (A): Corporate and Personal Income Tax Rates
20
18
16
14
12
τp 10
8
6
4
2
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

τc

Panel (B): Changes in Corporate and Personal Income Tax Rates
5
4
3
2
1
Δ τp 0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1
Δ τc

2

3

4

5

Figure 5. Extensive Margin: Dynamic Effect of Large Tax Changes
This figure plots the coefficients (and 95% confidence intervals) corresponding to the dynamic analysis provided in Table 9. See the legend of Table 9 for details.
Panel (A): Large cuts in corporate income tax rate
# establishments (C-corp versus pass-through)

Panel (B): Large increases in corporate income tax rate
95% CI

# establishments (C-corp versus pass-through)

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

95% CI

-0.03
-2

-1

0

1

2

-2

Panel (C): Large cuts in personal income tax rate
# establishments (pass-through versus C-corp)

-1

0

1

2

Panel (D): Large increases in personal income tax rate
95% CI

# establishments (pass-through versus C-corp)

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

95% CI

-0.03
-2

-1

0

1

2

-2

-1

0

1

2

Figure 6. Intensive Margin: Dynamic Effect of Large Tax Changes
This figure plots the coefficients (and 95% confidence intervals) corresponding to the dynamic analysis in Table 11. See the legend of Table 11 for details.
Panel (A): Large cuts in corporate income tax rate
Log(employees) (C-corp versus pass-through)

Panel (B): Large increases in corporate income tax rate
95% CI

Log(employees) (C-corp versus pass-through)

0.008

0.008

0.006

0.006

0.004

0.004

0.002

0.002

0.000

0.000

-0.002

-0.002

-0.004

-0.004

-0.006

-0.006

-0.008

95% CI

-0.008
-2

-1

0

1

2

-2

Panel (C): Large cuts in personal income tax rate
Log(employees) (C-corp versus pass-through)

-1

0

1

2

Panel (D): Large increases in personal income tax rate
95% CI

Log(employees) (C-corp versus pass-through)

0.008

0.008

0.006

0.006

0.004

0.004

0.002

0.002

0.000

0.000

-0.002

-0.002

-0.004

-0.004

-0.006

-0.006

-0.008

95% CI

-0.008
-2

-1

0

1

2

-2

-1

0

1

2

Figure 7. Industry Sectors
Panel (A) plots the coefficients βC,C (τc × C-Corp) and βP,P (τp × Pass-through) for eight major industry groupings.
To derive these coefficients, we run a variant of the specification in column (2) of Table 4, in which τc and τp are
interacted with eight industry sector dummies. The industry sectors are agriculture and mining (SIC 1-14),
construction (15-19), manufacturing (20-39), utilities (40-49), wholesale and retail trade (50-59), financials (60-69),
services (70-89), and other (90-99). Panel (B) plots similar coefficients, but with respect to the specification in
column (2) of Table 7.

Panel (A): Extensive Margin

0.01
0

τc × C-Corp

-0.01

τp × Pass-through

-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
-0.06

Panel (B): Intensive Margin

0.002
0.000
-0.002
-0.004
-0.006
-0.008
-0.010
-0.012
-0.014

τc × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through

Table 1. Summary Statistics
In Panel (A), observations are at the establishment-year level. “All” refers to all establishments; “C-corp” refers to
establishments belonging to C-corporations; “Pass-through” refers to establishments belonging to pass-through
entities (S-corporations, partnerships, and sole proprietorships). “LBD” refers to establishments in the Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD); “ASM/CMF” refers to establishments in the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) and
the Census of Manufactures (CMF). Capital stock is constructed using the perpetual inventory method, as explained
in the appendix. In Panels (B) and (C), observations are aggregated into the firm-state-year and firm-year level,
respectively. “Median” is the pseudo-median, which is computed as average across all observations between the 40th
and 60th percentiles. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011.
Panel (A): Establishment Level

LBD (all sectors)

# Employees

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

Capital stock ($ 1997)

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

Obs.

ASM/CMF (manufacturing)

All

C-corp

Pass-through

All

C-corp

Pass-through

49
11
228

50
11
235

36
11
112

311
142
757

318
145
772

153
92
209

42,586
11,141
170,941

43,946
11,495
174,555

12,850
5,886
31,723

854,700

817,300

37,400

27,600,100

25,271,400

2,328,700

Panel (B): Firm-State Level

LBD (all sectors)

ASM/CMF (manufacturing)

All

C-corp

Pass-through

All

C-corp

Pass-through

# Establishments

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

6.56
1.25
25.67

7.06
1.26
27.37

3.72
1.21
11.54

1.76
1.00
1.94

1.79
1.00
1.99

1.27
1.00
0.88

# Employees

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

320
58
1550

352
61
1,669

133
46
411

546
201
1,970

569
210
2,029

195
107
318

Capital stock ($ 1997)

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

74,765
15,805
362,123

78,516
16,785
373,066

16,354
6,691
47,513

486,800
5,325,600

457,400
4,758,400

29,400
567,200

Obs.
Obs. (including zeros)

4,207,200
32,997,200

3,580,600
25,225,300

626,600
7,771,900

Table 1
(Continued)
Panel (C): Firm Level

LBD (all sectors)

ASM/CMF (manufacturing)

All

C-corp

Pass-through

All

C-corp

Pass-through

# States

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

6.50
3.37
8.3

7.24
3.70
9.06

4.11
2.30
4.31

4.66
2.28
4.96

4.90
2.29
5.17

2.64
2.00
1.44

# Establishments

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

42.66
8.04
239.83

51.09
8.41
269.31

15.28
6.25
88.43

8.18
3.36
15.02

8.76
3.70
15.76

3.36
2.32
2.67

# Employees

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

2,075
359
11,841

2,547
417
13,480

546
252
1,583

2,547
683
9,251

2,790
767
9,756

516
295
715

Capital stock ($ 1997)

Mean
Median
Std. Dev.

348,551
49,606
1,513,534

384,950
57,151
1,596,842

43,204
18,885
112,904

104,400

93,300

11,100

Obs.

647,000

494,600

152,400

Table 2. Tax Variables
This table shows summary statistics for the tax variables used in the analysis. τc is the top corporate income tax rate (in %). τp is the top personal income tax rate
(in %). Property tax share is the ratio of the total amount of property taxes (collected by the state and local governments) divided by total revenues (of the state
and local governments). UI contribution is the top unemployment insurance (UI) rate multiplied by the maximum base wage (in $). Tax incentives index is an
index of tax incentives that adds one index point for each of the 33 tax incentives compiled in the Site Selection magazine. Sales tax rate is the sales tax rate in
percentage points. Payroll apportionment factor is the apportionment percentage attributed to payroll in percentage points. Property apportionment factor and
sales apportionment factor are defined similarly with respect to property and sales, respectively. Throwback is an indicator variable equal to one if the state has a
throwback (or a throwout) rule. Summary statistics are computed using all available state-year observations from 1977 to 2011.

Mean

Std. Dev.

25th Pctl.

50th Pctl.

75th Pctl.

τc

6.85

2.95

6.00

7.00

8.90

τp

5.29

3.34

3.02

5.82

7.50

Property tax share

0.12

0.05

0.09

0.12

0.15

UI contribution

699

433

378

585

855

Log(UI contribution)

6.38

0.58

5.93

6.37

6.75

Sales tax rate

4.44

1.82

4.00

5.00

6.00

Tax incentives index

21.13

6.42

16.00

23.00

26.00

Payroll apportionment factor

26.82

9.95

25.00

33.33

33.33

Property apportionment factor

26.82

9.95

25.00

33.33

33.33

Sales apportionment factor

46.35

19.88

33.34

33.34

50.00

0.60

0.49

0.00

1.00

1.00

Throwback rule

Table 3. Correlation Matrix
All variables are defined in Table 2. Panel (A) reports the correlation matrix based on the variables in level. Panel (B) reports the correlation matrix based on the
variables in first differences.
Panel (A): Levels

(1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

τc
τp
Property tax share
UI contribution
Log(UI contribution)
Sales tax rate
Tax incentives index
Payroll apportionment factor
Property apportionment factor
Sales apportionment factor
Throwback rule

1.00
0.21
-0.03
0.18
0.21
0.07
0.21
-0.03
-0.03
0.03
-0.21

(2)

1.00
0.08
0.13
0.13
-0.02
-0.04
0.08
0.08
-0.08
0.07

(3)

1.00
-0.16
-0.18
-0.24
-0.24
1.00
1.00
-1.00
0.21

(4)

1.00
0.93
0.05
0.28
-0.16
-0.16
0.16
0.01

(5)

1.00
0.06
0.38
-0.18
-0.18
0.18
-0.02

(6)

1.00
0.25
-0.24
-0.24
0.24
-0.21

(7)

1.00
-0.24
-0.24
0.24
-0.15

(8)

1.00
1.00
-1.00
0.21

(9)

1.00
-1.00
0.21

(10)

1.00
-0.21

(11)

1.00

Panel (B): First Differences

(1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Δ τc
Δ τp
Δ Property tax share
Δ UI contribution
Δ Log(UI contribution)
Δ Sales tax rate
Δ Tax incentives index
Δ Payroll apportionment factor
Δ Property apportionment factor
Δ Sales apportionment factor
Δ Throwback rule

1.00
0.04
0.07
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.01
0.04
0.04
-0.04
0.08

(2)

1.00
0.08
0.01
0.02
0.04
-0.01
-0.02
-0.02
0.02
0.03

(3)

1.00
-0.05
-0.05
0.00
-0.02
-0.05
-0.05
0.05
0.06

(4)

1.00
0.85
0.01
0.05
0.03
0.03
-0.03
0.04

(5)

1.00
0.01
0.06
0.04
0.04
-0.04
0.04

(6)

1.00
0.00
0.02
0.02
-0.02
0.01

(7)

1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

(8)

1.00
1.00
-1.00
-0.01

(9)

1.00
-1.00
-0.01

(10)

1.00
0.01

(11)

1.00

Table 4. Extensive Margin: Main Results
The dependent variable is the number of establishments of a given firm in a given state and year. The number of
establishments is set to zero if an active company has no operation in the state. C-Corp is a dummy variable that
equals one if a company is a C-corporation, and Pass-through is a dummy variable that equals one if a company is
an S-corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship for tax purposes. GDP is the state’s gross domestic product
(from the BEA). Other variables are defined in Table 2. All regressions include dummy variables for MI, OH (post2005), TX (post-1991), and WA, interacted with C-Corp and Pass-through. The sample period is from 1977 to
2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

# Establishments

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.037***
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.016***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.189***
(0.008)
-0.386***
(0.018)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.348***
(0.015)

-0.031***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.010***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.183***
(0.008)
-0.371***
(0.018)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.352***
(0.015)
0.225***
(0.025)

-0.022***
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.008***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.115***
(0.006)
-0.173***
(0.026)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.282***
(0.010)
0.219***
(0.019)

Year FE
Firm-state FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Regression type

OLS

OLS

Poisson

0.73
32,997,200

0.73
32,997,200

–
32,997,200

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
C-Corp
Log(GDP)

R-squared
Observations

Table 5. Extensive Margin: Robustness
This table presents variants of the baseline specification presented in column (2) of Table 4. In column (1), the
regression includes region by year fixed effects. Regions are partitioned according to the nine Census regions. In
column (2), the regression includes industry-by-year fixed effects. Industries are partitioned according to 2-digit SIC
codes. In column (3), the regression includes legal form of organization LFO-by-year fixed effects, where LFO is
the Legal Form of Organization—C-Corp or Pass-through. In column (4), we exclude firm-year observations within
a five-year window around a change in LFO. In column (5), we replace τc and τp by their respective residuals from
the predictive regressions provided in Appendix Table A3. In column (6), the sample is restricted to companies with
coverage in the ASM/CMF. In column (7), the dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the
company has at least one establishment in the state. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

# Establishments

Regional
trends

Industry
trends

LFO
trends

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.026***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.006**
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.192***
(0.008)
-0.387***
(0.021)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.346***
(0.014)
0.243***
(0.024)

-0.029***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.014***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.184***
(0.008)
-0.371***
(0.017)
0.002**
(0.001)

0.224***
(0.023)

-0.029***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009***
(0.003)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.176***
(0.008)
-0.345***
(0.018)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.345***
(0.015)
0.239***
(0.025)

-0.030***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.008
(0.005)
-0.173***
(0.008)
-0.389***
(0.019)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.341***
(0.014)
0.265***
(0.023)

-0.019**
(0.008)
0.005
(0.007)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.012*
(0.007)
0.004
(0.012)
-0.074***
(0.020)
-0.062**
(0.030)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.147***
(0.041)
0.523***
(0.052)

-0.0031***
(0.0012)
0.0010
(0.0013)
0.0008
(0.0005)
-0.0021*
(0.0012)
0.0013
(0.0013)
-0.0084***
(0.0026)
-0.0267***
(0.0079)
0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0150**
(0.0064)
0.0402***
(0.0057)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

0.76
32,997,200

0.76
32,997,200

0.76
32,997,200

0.75
30,288,100

0.74
32,398,000

0.77
5,325,600

0.75
32,997,200

τc × C-Corp

-0.032***
(0.003)
τc × Pass-through
0.002
(0.002)
τp × C-Corp
0.001
(0.002)
τp × Pass-through
-0.013***
(0.003)
Sales tax rate
-0.001
(0.005)
Log(UI contribution) -0.195***
(0.008)
Property tax share
-0.360***
(0.019)
Tax incentives index 0.003***
(0.001)
C-Corp
0.339***
(0.014)
Log(GDP)
0.213***
(0.025)
Year FE
Firm-state FE
Region × year FE
Industry × year FE
LFO × year FE
R-squared
Observations

I(# Establ. > 0)

Excluding 5-year Unpredicted
ASM/CMF
window around component of (manufacturing)
LFO change
τc and τp

"Extensiveextensive"
margin

Table 6. Extensive Margin: Reallocation
This table presents variants of the regressions presented in columns (2) and (3) of Table 4. ̃ (other states) refers to
the average corporate income tax rate in all other states in which the company has operations. The average is
computed using the share of the company’s employees in each state as weights. The other tax items referring to
“other states” are computed analogously. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at
the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
# Establishments
(1)

(2)

-0.031***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.010***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.189***
(0.008)
-0.372***
(0.018)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.016***

-0.024***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.115***
(0.007)
-0.175***
(0.027)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.009***

(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.005**
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.117***
(0.008)
0.227***
(0.029)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.479***
(0.021)
0.225***
(0.025)

(0.003)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.004*
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.004)
0.052***
(0.007)
0.113***
(0.021)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.282***
(0.010)
0.220***
(0.019)

Year FE
Firm-state FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Regression type

OLS

Poisson

0.73
32,997,200

–
32,997,200

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
τ̃c (other states) × C-Corp
τ̃c (other states) × Pass-through
τ̃p (other states) × C-Corp
τ̃p (other states) × Pass-through
Sales tax rate (other states)
Log(UI contribution) (other states)
Property tax share (other states)
Tax incentives index (other states)
C-Corp
Log(GDP)

R-squared
Observations

Table 7. Intensive Margin: Main Results
This table presents variants of the regressions in Tables 4 and 6, except that the analysis is conducted at the intensive
margin. The unit of observation is the establishment-year. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of
employees at the establishment. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

log(employees)

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.0041***
(0.0005)
-0.0004
(0.0010)
-0.0007
(0.0004)
-0.0024***
(0.0009)
-0.0003
(0.0007)
-0.0223***
(0.0009)
-0.0128
(0.0107)
0.0008***
(0.0001)

-0.0038***
(0.0005)
-0.0001
(0.0010)
-0.0003
(0.0004)
-0.0019**
(0.0009)
-0.0003
(0.0007)
-0.0110***
(0.0014)
-0.0032
(0.0107)
0.0009***
(0.0001)

0.0015
(0.0051)

0.0028
(0.0051)
0.2417***
(0.0054)

-0.0042***
(0.0005)
0.0002
(0.0011)
-0.0003
(0.0004)
-0.0017*
(0.0010)
-0.0003
(0.0007)
-0.0102***
(0.0015)
-0.0079
(0.0115)
0.0008***
(0.0002)
0.0020***
(0.0006)
-0.0003
(0.0013)
-0.0001
(0.0006)
0.0008
(0.0014)
-0.0004
(0.0012)
0.0048*
(0.0028)
0.0032
(0.0025)
0.0003
(0.0003)
-0.0104
(0.0078)
0.2411***
(0.0054)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.88
27,600,100

0.88
27,600,100

0.88
27,600,100

τ̃c (other states) × C-Corp
τ̃c (other states) × Pass-through
τ̃p (other states) × C-Corp
τ̃p (other states) × Pass-through
Sales tax rate (other states)
Log(UI contribution) (other states)
Property tax share (other states)
Tax incentives index (other states)
C-Corp
Log(GDP)
Year FE
Establishment FE
R-squared
Observations

Table 8. Intensive Margin: Robustness
This table presents regressions similar to those in Table 5, except that the analysis is conducted at the intensive
margin. The unit of observation is the establishment-year. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of
employees at the establishment. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

log(employees)

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
C-Corp
Log(GDP)

Year FE
Establishment FE
Region × year FE
Industry × year FE
LFO × year FE
R-squared
Observations

Regional
trends

Industry
trends

LFO
trends

Excluding 5-year Unpredicted
window around component of
LFO change
τc and τp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0048***
(0.0005)
-0.0012
(0.0009)
-0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.0017**
(0.0008)
-0.0004
(0.0007)
-0.0110***
(0.0015)
-0.0017
(0.0100)
0.0008***
(0.0001)
0.0025
(0.0046)
0.2524***
(0.0054)

-0.0031***
(0.0005)
-0.0011
(0.0009)
0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.0016*
(0.0008)
-0.0010
(0.0007)
-0.0117***
(0.0015)
-0.0095
(0.0102)
0.0008***
(0.0001)
0.0027
(0.0046)
0.2468***
(0.0053)

-0.0041***
(0.0004)
-0.0002
(0.0009)
-0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.0019**
(0.0008)
-0.0002
(0.0006)
-0.0119***
(0.0013)
-0.0062
(0.0098)
0.0009***
(0.0001)

0.2434***
(0.0049)

-0.0038***
(0.0005)
-0.0002
(0.0010)
-0.0003
(0.0004)
-0.0020**
(0.0009)
0.0008
(0.0007)
-0.0057***
(0.0015)
-0.0072
(0.0106)
0.0006***
(0.0002)
0.0013
(0.0052)
0.2457***
(0.0055)

-0.0039***
(0.0005)
-0.0005
(0.0010)
-0.0006
(0.0004)
-0.0015*
(0.0009)
-0.0003
(0.0007)
-0.0103***
(0.0014)
-0.0099
(0.0110)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
0.0032
(0.0050)
0.2368***
(0.0055)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

0.90
27,600,100

0.90
27,600,100

0.88
27,600,100

0.88
26,416,300

0.88
27,175,000

Table 9. Extensive Margin: Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Large Tax Changes
This table estimates the treatment effect of large tax changes (increases or decreases in tax rates that are at least 100 basis points) on the number of
establishments. In columns (1) and (2), the treatments are large decreases in the corporate income tax rate. The sample includes all firm-state-year observations in
the treated states three years before and after the treatments (i.e., the treatment group consists of C-corporations; the control group consists of pass-through
entities). In column (1), Treatment is a dummy variable equal to one for C-corporations in the years following the treatment. In column (2), Treatment(–2) is a
dummy variable equal to one for C-corporations two years prior to the treatment. Treatment(–1), Treatment(0), Treatment(+1), and Treatment(+2) are defined
similarly. The analysis in columns (3)-(8) is conducted analogously with respect to large increases in the corporate income tax rate and large decreases/increases
in the personal income tax rate, respectively. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

# Establishments

Large cuts in τc

(1)

Treatment

(2)

0.027***
(0.005)

Treatment (–2)

Large increases in τc

(3)

-0.014***
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.017**
(0.007)
0.031***
(0.008)
0.030***
(0.009)

Treatment (–1)
Treatment (0)
Treatment (+1)
Treatment (+2)

(4)

Large cuts in τp

(5)

(6)

0.018***
(0.004)
0.000
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.007*
(0.004)
-0.017***
(0.004)
-0.017***
(0.005)

Large increases in τp

(7)

(8)

-0.005
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.015***
(0.004)
0.028***
(0.005)
0.026***
(0.007)

0.001
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)

Controls
Year FE
Firm-state FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.88
1,748,600

0.88
1,748,600

0.92
3,144,600

0.92
3,144,600

0.87
3,561,900

0.87
3,561,900

0.86
4,697,400

0.86
4,697,400

Table 10. Extensive Margin: Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Large Tax Changes—Textual Analysis
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) of Table 9, decomposing the treatment into exogenous, endogenous, and other
types of treatments using the methodology of Romer and Romer (2010). ERTA81 refers to the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981; TRA86 refers to the Tax
Reform Act of 1986. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.
Panel (A): Romer and Romer (2010) Classification
τc
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Offsetting a change in government spending (endogenous)
Offsetting some factor other than spending likely to affect output (endogenous)
Dealing with an inherited budget deficit (exogenous)
Achieving some long-run goal (exogenous)
Unclassified

Total

τp
6
6
7
18
19

7
5
34
24
35

56

105

Panel (B): Difference-in-Differences Analysis
# Establishments
Large cuts in τc

Treatment (exogenous)

Large increases in τc

(1)

(2)

0.029***
(0.007)

-0.016***
(0.005)

Treatment (ERTA81)

(3)

Large cuts in τp
(4)

(5)

0.019***
(0.005)

Large increases in τp
(6)

(7)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.014**
(0.007)

Treatment (TRA86)
Treatment (other exogenous)

0.018*
(0.010)
0.016***
(0.005)

0.019***
(0.007)
0.019**
(0.008)
0.018*
(0.010)
0.016***
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.006)

-0.007
(0.017)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.006)

0.033**
(0.013)
0.022**
(0.011)

-0.015**
(0.007)
-0.014***
(0.003)

-0.017***
(0.005)
-0.015**
(0.007)
-0.014***
(0.003)

Controls
Year FE
Firm-state FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.88
1,748,600

0.92
3,144,600

0.92
3,144,600

0.87
3,561,900

0.87
3,561,900

0.86
4,697,400

0.86
4,697,400

Treatment (endogenous)
Treatment (unclassified)

Table 11. Intensive Margin: Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Large Tax Changes
This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 9, except that the analysis is conducted at the intensive margin, i.e. at the establishment-year level. The
dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of employees at the establishment. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

log(employees)

Large cuts in τc

(1)

Treatment

0.0032***
(0.0007)

Treatment (–2)

Treatment (0)
Treatment (+1)
Treatment (+2)

R-squared
Observations

(3)

(4)

-0.0034***
(0.0006)
-0.0007
(0.0010)
-0.0016
(0.0011)
0.0015
(0.0011)
0.0027**
(0.0012)
0.0033***
(0.0011)

Treatment (–1)

Controls
Year FE
Establishment FE

(2)

Large increases in τc

Large cuts in τp

(5)

(6)

0.0009
(0.0006)
0.0007
(0.0007)
0.0011
(0.0007)
-0.0018**
(0.0008)
-0.0045***
(0.0009)
-0.0051***
(0.0011)

Large increases in τp

(7)

(8)

-0.0022***
(0.0004)
0.0002
(0.0007)
-0.0003
(0.0008)
0.0007
(0.0009)
0.0008
(0.0010)
0.0014
(0.0011)

0.0003
(0.0006)
0.0002
(0.0006)
-0.0011
(0.0007)
-0.0027***
(0.0007)
-0.0031***
(0.0008)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.94
1,326,800

0.94
1,326,800

0.95
1,950,600

0.95
1,950,600

0.93
2,420,100

0.93
2,420,100

0.94
3,364,500

0.94
3,364,500

Table 12. Intensive Margin: Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Large Tax Changes—Textual Analysis
This table presents regressions similar to those in Table 10, except that the analysis is conducted at the intensive margin, i.e. at the establishment-year level. The
dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of employees at the establishment. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

log(employees)

Large cuts in τc

Treatment (exogenous)

Large increases in τc

(1)

(2)

0.0030***
(0.0009)

-0.0036***
(0.0006)

Treatment (ERTA81)

(3)

Large cuts in τp

(4)

0.0009
(0.0008)

Treatment (other exogenous)

Treatment (unclassified)

Controls
Year FE
Establishment FE
R-squared
Observations

(6)

(7)

-0.0022***
(0.0005)

-0.0043***
(0.0016)

Treatment (TRA86)

Treatment (endogenous)

(5)

Large increases in τp

0.0008
(0.0009)
0.0009
(0.0013)

0.0010
(0.0012)
0.0009
(0.0008)
0.0008
(0.0009)
0.0009
(0.0013)

-0.0018*
(0.0010)
-0.0021**
(0.0010)

-0.0018
(0.0019)
-0.0023***
(0.0006)
-0.0019*
(0.0010)
-0.0021**
(0.0010)

0.0037*
(0.0022)
0.0033*
(0.0017)

-0.0029***
(0.0008)
-0.0031**
(0.0013)

-0.0035***
(0.0007)
-0.0028***
(0.0008)
-0.0032**
(0.0013)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.94
1,326,800

0.95
1,950,600

0.95
1,950,600

0.93
2,420,100

0.93
2,420,100

0.94
3,364,500

0.94
3,364,500

Table 13. Apportionment Factors and Throwback Rules
This table presents variants of the regressions in column (2) of Table 4 (extensive margin) and column (2) of Table 7
(intensive margin), accounting for apportionment factors and throwback rules. αSales denotes the sales apportionment
factor; IThrowback is an indicator variable equal to one if the state has a throwback (or throwout) rule. The sample
period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Extensive margin
# Establishments # Establishments

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
[τc × (1 – αSales )] × C-Corp
[τc × (1 – αSales )] × Pass-through
[τp × (1 – αSales )] × C-Corp
[τp × (1 – αSales )] × Pass-through

log(employees)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.013**
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.007)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.041***
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.013**
(0.006)

-0.010**
(0.005)
0.000
(0.006)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.006)

-0.0015*
(0.0008)
-0.0001
(0.0014)
-0.0002
(0.0008)
-0.0009
(0.0012)
-0.0049***
(0.0008)
-0.0004
(0.0015)
-0.0002
(0.0008)
-0.0021*
(0.0012)

-0.0013*
(0.0008)
-0.0000
(0.0016)
-0.0003
(0.0008)
-0.0006
(0.0013)

-0.026***
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.011**
(0.005)

[τc × (1 – αSales × (1 – IThrowback ))] × Pass-through
[τp × (1 – αSales × (1 – IThrowback ))] × C-Corp
[τp × (1 – αSales × (1 – IThrowback ))] × Pass-through

R-squared
Observations

log(employees)

(1)

[τc × (1 – αSales × (1 – IThrowback ))] × C-Corp

Controls
Year FE
Firm-state FE
Establishment FE

Intensive margin

-0.0032***
(0.0008)
-0.0002
(0.0019)
-0.0003
(0.0008)
-0.0017*
(0.0010)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

0.73
32,997,200

0.73
32,997,200

0.88
27,600,100

0.88
27,600,100

Table 14. Apportionment Factors and Throwback Rules―Manufacturing
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table 7. The sample is restricted to establishments in
the ASM/CMF. Log(capital) is the logarithm of the establishment’s capital stock. Capital stock is constructed using
the perpetual inventory method. τc (AF-adjusted) is the apportionment factor-adjusted corporate income tax rate. τc
(AF-& TB-adjusted) is the apportionment factor and throwback rule-adjusted corporate income tax rate. τp (AFadjusted) and τp (AF & TB-adjusted) are defined analogously. The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

log(emp.) log(capital) log(emp.) log(capital) log(emp.) log(capital)
(1)
τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0042*** -0.0027***
(0.0012)
(0.0008)
-0.0013
-0.0005
(0.0023)
(0.0015)
-0.0010
-0.0003
(0.0008)
(0.0005)
-0.0027
-0.0014
(0.0022)
(0.0015)

τc (AF-adj.) × Pass-through
τp (AF-adj.) × C-Corp
τp (AF-adj.) × Pass-through
τc (AF- & TB-adj.) × C-Corp

-0.0044*** -0.0029***
(0.0013)
(0.0009)
-0.0012
-0.0006
(0.0025)
(0.0017)
-0.0011
-0.0004
(0.0008)
(0.0005)
-0.0026
-0.0014
(0.0023)
(0.0015)

τc (AF- & TB-adj.) × Pass-through
τp (AF- & TB-adj.) × C-Corp
τp (AF- & TB-adj.) × Pass-through

R-squared
Observations

(6)

-0.0033*** -0.0021***
(0.0011)
(0.0008)
-0.0003
0.0001
(0.0023)
(0.0015)
-0.0009
-0.0002
(0.0008)
(0.0005)
-0.0025
-0.0013
(0.0022)
(0.0015)

τc (AF-adj.) × C-Corp

Controls
Year FE
Establishment FE

(5)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.92
854,700

0.96
854,700

0.92
854,700

0.96
854,700

0.92
854,700

0.96
854,700

Appendix Table A1. Extensive Margin: Conditional Logit
This table presents variants of the baseline specification presented in column (2) of Table 4, except that the
dependent variable is a dummy indicating the state with the largest increase (and decrease, respectively) in the
number of establishments for a given firm in a given year. The regressions are estimated using a conditional logit.
The sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

τc × C-Corp
τc × Pass-through
τp × C-Corp
τp × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
Log(GDP)

Regression type
Observations

1(largest
increase in #
establishments)

1(largest
decrease in #
establishments)

(1)

(2)

-0.004***
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.003**
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.033***
(0.006)
-0.056***
(0.008)
0.001
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.003)

0.003***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.023***
(0.006)
0.052***
(0.008)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.010***
(0.003)

C-logit

C-logit

32,997,200

32,997,200

Appendix Table A2. Changes in Legal Form of Organization
The dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the company is a C-corporation. ̅ refers to the average
corporate income tax rate in all states in which the company has operations. The average is computed using the
share of the company’s employees in each state as weights. The other tax items are computed analogously. The
sample period is from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

C-Corp

τ̅c
τ̅p
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
Log(GDP)

Year FE
Firm FE
R-squared
Observations

-0.0009
(0.0010)
0.0006
(0.0011)
0.0011
(0.0020)
-0.0099
(0.0085)
-0.0114
(0.0377)
-0.0009*
(0.0005)
0.0025
(0.0040)
Yes
Yes
0.79
647,000

Appendix Table A3. Predictive Regressions for τc and τp
This table reports the regressions underlying the calculation of the “unpredicted component” of τc and τp used in
column (5) of Tables 5 and 8. GDP is the state’s gross domestic product (from the BEA). Unemployment rate is the
state unemployment rate (from the BLS). Budget surplus is the state’s budget balance, computed as (revenues –
expenditures) / expenditures, using data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s State & Local Finances database. All other
variables are defined in Table 2. The sample period is from 1978 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

τc, t

τc, t -1

0.9930***
(0.0058)

-0.0141*
(0.0076)
0.0087*
(0.0047)
-0.0785
(0.0906)

0.9636***
(0.0087)
0.0172
(0.0194)
-0.0004
(0.0115)
-0.2837***
(0.0939)

0.98
1,734

0.96
1,734

τp, t -1
Log(GDP)t -1
Unemployment ratet -1
Budget surplus t -1

R-squared
Observations

τp, t

Appendix Table A4. Firm-Level Regressions
This table presents firm-level analogues of the regressions in Tables 4, 7, and 14. ̅ refers to the average corporate
income tax rate in all states in which the company has operations. The average is computed using the share of the
company’s employees in each state as weights. The other tax items are computed analogously. The sample period is
from 1977 to 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

LBD (all sectors)

ASM/CMF (manufacturing)

log(establishments) log(employees) log(establishments) log(employees)

τ̅c × C-Corp
τ̅c × Pass-through
τ̅p × C-Corp
τ̅p × Pass-through
Sales tax rate
Log(UI contribution)
Property tax share
Tax incentives index
C-Corp
Log(GDP)

Year FE
Firm FE
R-squared
Observations

log(capital)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0015***
(0.0004)
0.0003
(0.0006)
-0.0002
(0.0003)
-0.0011*
(0.0006)
0.0011
(0.0007)
-0.0082***
(0.0019)
-0.0117*
(0.0070)
0.0011***
(0.0002)
0.0610***
(0.0041)
0.0047***
(0.0014)

-0.0022***
(0.0006)
0.0003
(0.0009)
0.0004
(0.0005)
-0.0015*
(0.0009)
0.0012
(0.0011)
-0.0064**
(0.0030)
-0.0127
(0.0110)
0.0004
(0.0003)
0.0755***
(0.0064)
0.0124***
(0.0023)

-0.0016*
(0.0010)
0.0001
(0.0022)
0.0001
(0.0008)
-0.0012
(0.0024)
0.0036
(0.0032)
-0.0327***
(0.0088)
-0.1861***
(0.0693)
0.0034***
(0.0007)
0.0790***
(0.0278)
0.0048
(0.0054)

-0.0018**
(0.0009)
0.0001
(0.0021)
-0.0002
(0.0008)
-0.0013
(0.0023)
-0.0003
(0.0031)
-0.0173**
(0.0085)
-0.0672
(0.0669)
0.0013*
(0.0007)
0.0067
(0.0268)
0.0217***
(0.0052)

-0.0015*
(0.0009)
0.0003
(0.0020)
0.0003
(0.0008)
-0.0010
(0.0022)
-0.0028
(0.0030)
-0.0145*
(0.0082)
-0.0563
(0.0642)
0.0021***
(0.0007)
0.0396
(0.0257)
0.0084*
(0.0049)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.87
647,000

0.88
647,000

0.82
104,400

0.86
104,400

0.90
104,400

