                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE IMPACT OF FORECLOSURE DELAY ON U.S. EMPLOYMENT

                                         Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                          Lee E. Ohanian

                                        Working Paper 21532
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21532


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We are grateful for comments from Manuel Amador, Michael Boskin, V.V. Chari, Satyajit Chatterjee,
John Cochrane, Steve Davis, Peter Diamond, Carlos Garriga, Kris Gerardi, Patrick Kehoe, Juan Sanchez,
Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Robert Shimer, and seminar participants at the Hoover Institution, NBER Summer
Institute, IMF Jacques Polak Conference, HULM, and the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and
St. Louis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kyle F. Herkenhoff and Lee E. Ohanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Foreclosure Delay on U.S. Employment
Kyle F. Herkenhoff and Lee E. Ohanian
NBER Working Paper No. 21532
September 2015
JEL No. E24,J0,R3

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper documents that the time required to initiate and complete a home foreclosure rose from
about 9 months on average prior to the Great Recession to an average of 15 months during the Great
Recession and afterward. We refer to these changes as foreclosure delay. We also document that many
borrowers who are in foreclosure ultimately exit foreclosure and keep their homes by making up for
missed mortgage payments. We analyze the impact of foreclosure delay on the U.S. labor market as
an implicit credit line from a lender to a borrower (mortgagor) within a search model. In the model,
foreclosure delay provides unemployed mortgagors with additional time to search for a high-paying
job. We find that foreclosure delay decreases mortgagor employment by about 0.75 percentage points,
nearly doubles the stock of delinquent mortgages, increases the rate of homeownership by about 0.3
percentage points, and increases job match quality, as mortgagors search longer. Severe foreclosure
delays, such as those observed in Florida and New Jersey, can depress mortgagor employment by up
to 1.3 percentage points. The model results are consistent with PSID and SCF data that show that employment
rates rise for delinquent mortgagors once the mortgagor is in the foreclosure process.


Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
kfh@umn.edu

Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction

Prior to the Great Recession, the average time required to initiate and complete the pro-
cess of home foreclosure in the United States was about 9 months. However, foreclosure
time rose substantially in many states beginning in the Great Recession. A combination of
housing policies, as well as delays due to the enormous increase in the number of delinquent
properties being processed by courts and lenders, considerably increased the time of com-
pleting foreclosure. Policies include both state and national foreclosure moratoria, as well
as the National Mortgage Settlement (also known as the “robo-signing” settlement) which
permanently slowed foreclosures.1

    On average, the time to foreclose in the United States rose from about 9 months prior
to the Great Recession to about 15 months around the time of the Great Recession and
continued afterward. As a result of these delays, the probability that a delinquent borrower
(hereafter referred to as a delinquent mortgagor) received a foreclosure notice, which is the
initiation of the foreclosure process, fell by one-third across all U.S. states. Similarly, the
probability that a delinquent mortgagor who was already in the foreclosure process was
evicted fell by one-third across all U.S. states. We call these changes foreclosure delay.

    This paper analyzes the impact of foreclosure delay on the U.S. labor market, with a focus
on how this delay has qualitatively and quantitatively affected the labor market decisions
of unemployed mortgagors. Two sets of statistics, which to our knowledge are new to the
literature, motivate this study. One statistic, which is presented and discussed in detail in
Sections 2 and 3, is that the employment rate of persistently delinquent mortgagors is very
low, but this rate increases when the mortgagors are in foreclosure and thus are at risk of
losing their homes. The second statistic, which is presented and discussed in detail in Section
5, is that many of the mortgagors who persistently miss mortgage payments ultimately
resolve their delinquency before foreclosure is completed. This resolution is accomplished
by the mortgagor making up for previous missed payments and late fees. This process of
successfully exiting delinquency/foreclosure is known as curing. Although curing has been
discussed in the literature (see Adelino et al. [2009]), the relative frequency of curing as well
as the transitions out of delinquency to curing have not been documented to our knowledge.

   The facts that (i) mortgagor reemployment rises as foreclosure becomes more likely, and
that (ii) many persistently delinquent mortgagors ultimately cure lead us to construct a
    1
    See Gerardi et al. [2011] and Cordell et al. [2013] for a summary of policies and a discussion of congestion
which led to foreclosure delays during the 2007-2009 recession and afterward.




                                                       2
search model of the labor market that includes homeownership, mortgages, and mortgage
default with the possibility of curing. We use this model to assess how foreclosure delay has
had an impact on the level of employment among mortgagors since the Great Recession. In
the model, unemployed households choose their search intensity, which affects the likelihood
of receiving a job offer that pays a stochastic wage, and they also choose a reservation wage.
Additionally, households choose whether to default on their mortgage payment. In this
model, foreclosure delay is an implicit line of credit between the mortgage lender and the
borrower. By defaulting on their mortgage payment, mortgagors open an implicit credit line
with the lender that has a limited duration that depends on the time it takes to complete
foreclosure. The credit line is closed either with the mortgagor curing or with a completed
foreclosure. Foreclosure delay thus provides unemployed mortgagors with additional time
to search for a high-paying job. However, as foreclosure becomes more likely, mortgagors’
choices regarding search intensity and their reservation wage change as they try to cure
and avoid eviction. In the past, unemployed mortgagors would use cash-out refinancing to
extract equity from their homes to smooth consumption (see Hurst and Stafford [2004]), but
the cash-out refinancing market collapsed during the 2007-2009 recession.2

    The affect of foreclosure delay bears some similarity to the impact of unemployment
insurance. Both of these mechanisms allow unemployed mortgagors to smooth consumption
while searching for a good match (a high paying job). Unemployment benefits and mortgage
foreclosure delay have two key differences, however. One is that the delinquent mortgage
payments ultimately must be resolved if the mortgagors are to stay in their homes. The
second is that the incentives to find a job near foreclosure for a mortgagor may be stronger
than in the case of the expiration of unemployment benefits because of the implications of
foreclosure for (i) the cost of leaving the home and living elsewhere, (ii) the decline in credit
access, and (iii) the potential deficiency judgment against a foreclosed mortgagor.

    We conduct a quantitative experiment with three economies that are identical except for
having different foreclosure timelines. Each economy experiences the analogue of the Great
Recession with exogenously lower productivity, a higher rate of job destruction, and a lower
rate of job creation. One economy has a 9-month timeline to foreclosure, which is the average
prior to the Great Recession, another has a 15-month timeline, which is the U.S. average
during and after the Great Recession, and another has a 24-month timeline, which is roughly
   2
    Hurst and Stafford [2004] estimate that during the recession, there were roughly 100 million homeowners,
roughly 31 percent refinanced in 1993, and 18 percent of the homeowners who refinanced were unemployed.
These refinances drew down roughly $16,000 of equity on average. Appendix 15 documents the collapse of
the cash-out refinancing market.




                                                     3
the average of the 10 longest foreclosure timeline states. We then compute the solution to
the three models and measure unemployed mortgagor decisions regarding mortgage default
and curing, homeownership rates, delinquency, search intensity, their reservation wage, their
employment level, and the average match quality, which is measured using the average wage.

    Our main finding is that the increase in foreclosure time had a significant impact on
mortgagor employment rates. Specifically, we find that the employment rate for mortgagors
is about 1.3 percent lower in the 24-month timeline and is about 0.75 percent lower in the
15-month timeline economy compared with the 9-month timeline economy. This impact of
foreclosure delay on employment is roughly comparable to extending employment benefits
by 6 months and 4 months, respectively. Foreclosure delays increase the stock of delinquent
mortgagors by a factor of 2 but also allow more mortgagors to remain in their homes. As
a result homeownership rates rise by .3 percentage points with foreclosure delays. We also
find that match quality improves in the delay economies as the average wage rises, reflecting
the fact that unemployed mortgagors remain unemployed longer but on average find higher-
paying jobs.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sections 2 and 3 document new
facts about employment near foreclosure, Section 4 describes the details of the foreclosure
process, Section 5 explains changes in transition rates into and out of default, Section 6
describes the model, Section 7 describes the calibration and steady state results, Section 8
includes the main foreclosure delay experiment, Section 9 discusses the mechanism in light
of unemployment insurance and wage ladders, and Section 10 concludes.



2    Mortgagor Employment Rates Rise during Foreclo-
     sure

This section presents data that are consistent with our theory by showing that employment
rates are higher for delinquent borrowers who are in foreclosure compared with delinquent
borrowers who are not yet in foreclosure. We use data from two surveys: the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). These data allow us
to track employment rates among mortgagors over various mortgage delinquency horizons.
The data show that employment rates among delinquent borrowers are roughly constant
as delinquency duration increases (e.g., delinquency increases from 60 days late to 90 days
late), but the employment rate increases considerably when the mortgagor is in foreclosure.



                                             4
    The model economy developed in Section 6 will interpret these data on the duration of
delinquency, foreclosure, and employment as follows: unemployed mortgagors will choose to
miss mortgage payments to smooth consumption while searching for a job, but they will
then lower their reservation wage when losing their home through foreclosure is imminent,
and thus their employment rate will rise.


2.1    PSID Evidence

We use data from the 2009-2011 PSID Core/Immigrant sample and the 2009-2011 PSID
Housing, Mortgage Distress, and Wealth Supplement to construct data on mortgagor em-
ployment rates and mortgage delinquency and foreclosure status. The observations are for
all working-age heads of household with mortgages. The PSID collects data on delinquency
status as of the survey date and whether the lender initiated the foreclosure process as of
the survey date. We then separated these mortgagors into 5 bins according to their reported
delinquency status: (1) “No Missed Payments,” (2) “30 Days Late,” (3) “60 Days Late,”
(4) “90 or More Days Late,” and (5) “In Foreclosure,” and within each bin we classify their
employment status as either employed or not employed. In Appendix 11, we also consider
the employment status of the spouse and find a similar patterns to the heads-only sample.

    Table 1 shows employment rates among mortgagors in these 5 mortgage payment statuses
for both the 2009 and 2011 PSID. Employment rates are higher for those in foreclosure
compared with those 90 or more days late for all categories except for the 2011 sample of
mortgagors who are in states in which initiating foreclosure requires a court order, which is
known as a “judicial state.”

    We will show later that there are some statistically significant differences in employment
rates between delinquent mortgagors who are in the foreclosure process and thus at risk of
losing their home immediately, and delinquent mortgagors who have not yet entered the
foreclosure process and thus have no risk of losing their home immediately.

    To estimate the impact of these 5 mortgage payment statuses on employment rates, we
fit a linear probability model (LPM), a logit model, and a probit model of a {0,1} binary
employment indicator on dummy variables for each of the 5 mortgage payment statuses. We
also control for variables that are often used in binary employment/unemployment regres-
sions and which are also available in the PSID: previous income (measured as annual gross




                                              5
family income), unemployment duration, and liquid assets to income.3 In addition, we also
estimate regressions that control for compositional demographic differences. Demographic
controls include age, sex, marital status, and education. To capture legal differences in the
foreclosure process across states, we also control for whether or not the mortgagor is in a
judicial state as described earlier, and whether or not they are in a recourse state, which is a
state in which the borrower may be liable for losses suffered by the lender. We describe the
foreclosure process in judicial states and recourse in detail in Section 4. We conduct these
compositional corrections using both a random effects and a fixed effects specification.

    These three approaches (LPM, logit, probit) are all used frequently in analyzing models
with a binary dependent variable. We therefore used all three approaches for completeness.
The LPM is cited as performing well in terms of unbiasedness and consistency if there are
relatively few predicted probabilities that lie outside of the unit interval (see Wooldridge
[2010] and Horrace and Oaxaca [2006]). This is indeed the case in this application, with
only 10 percent of predicted probabilities outside of the unit interval, and many of those are
indeed very close to one. The logit and probit specifications are also widely used and have
the benefit of restricting predicted values to lie in the unit interval. However, the logit and
probit specifications face a challenge in that those procedures drop all observations when
using fixed effects for households that either never default or remain in default for the entire
panel (2007-2009).4 Since the logit and probit results are very similar, we only report the
logit results.

    The regression coefficients on the mortgage payment status indicators are used to con-
struct a regression analogue to the data presented in Table 1. Specifically, Figure 1 plots the
statistics from that table, along with the regression constant plus the coefficients from the
mortgage payment status variables from column (1) of Table 2. We use the random effects
model for the compositional correction, as the fixed effects specification results were very
similar. Figure 1 shows that employment per capita is lower among defaulters, as one would
anticipate. However, note that employment increases for those in foreclosure, compared to
the other delinquency states. Specifically, the employment rate for mortgagors in foreclosure
is about 17 percentage points higher than it is for those who are 90 or more days late without
correcting for demographics, (Table 2, Column (2)), and it is about 11 percentage points
higher than it is for those who are 90 or more days late, after controlling for demographic
differences, (Table 2, Column (1)).
  3
     Here we use the PSID question that asks about checking and savings account balances, money market
funds, certificates of deposits, Treasury securities, and other government savings bonds.
   4
     If included, those observations would have fixed effects of ±∞.




                                                  6
   Tables 2 and 3 show the linear probability and logit regression statistics. Using the linear
probability model, we find that in both the random effects and fixed effects regressions,
the employment rate is significantly different for households that are 90 or more days late
versus households in foreclosure. Households in foreclosure are more likely to be employed
than households that are 90 or more days late, controlling for composition. In the logit
specification, employment per capita is significantly different from households that are 90
or more days late versus those households in foreclosure for the fixed effect specification at
the 10 percent level. However, the difference in employment in the logit specification with
random effects is not significant at the 10 percent level.


2.2     SCF Evidence

We present additional evidence on foreclosure and employment by conducting the same
analysis as earlier, but using the 2007-2009 SCF panel. The SCF surveys mortgagors on
their delinquency. The responses allow us to classify them into one of three statuses: “30
Days Late,” “60 or More Days Late,” and “In Foreclosure.” The “30 Days Late” and “60
or More Days Late” statuses refer to mortgagors who are in default on any type of debt,
including mortgage debt. Thus, we do not know the specifics of their default. However, our
hypothesis that homeowners avoid foreclosure by lowering their reservation wage indicates
that the SCF mortgagors should also have higher employment in foreclosure, subject to
attenuation bias. As in the PSID, the sample is all working-age heads of household with
mortgages as of the 2009 survey date.

    Figure 2 is analogous to Figure 1, as it plots the compositionally corrected LPM coef-
ficients from the delinquency status indicator variables from the 2009 SCF.5 In both sets
of data, even after controlling for compositional differences, there is a significant increase
in employment during foreclosure compared with being delinquent but not in foreclosure.
Table 4 shows these results for both the linear probability model (Columns (1) and (2)) and
the logit model (Columns (3) and (4)). The result that employment during foreclosure is
higher than that in the “60 or More Days Late” category is statistically significant at the 5
percent level in both the linear probability model and the logit model.
   5
     Mortgagors in the “30 Days Late” category are defined as those who reported being late on debt payments
over the prior year, but never missing two or more months’ worth of payments. Those who missed two or
more months’ worth of payments over the prior year were counted as 60 or more days late. Due to privacy
issues, the state of residence is omitted from public use files. Therefore, we are unable to include the controls
for judicial/recourse states used in the previous analysis with the PSID.




                                                       7
    Taken together, data from the PSID and the SCF indicate that employment is higher
among foreclosed homeowners than among delinquent homeowners who have not entered
foreclosure.



3       Mortgage Delinquency as Implicit Credit

Missing mortgage payments is a costly implicit credit line, reflecting late fees that range
from 3 percent to 6 percent per month. It is therefore reasonable to expect that unem-
ployed mortgagors who do skip mortgage payments have likely exhausted lower-cost means
of smoothing consumption, such as using their other assets.

    We indeed find that unemployed mortgagors who are delinquent have little or no liquid
assets. Figure 3 shows the PSID’s measure of liquid asset holdings relative to income,
for all heads of household with mortgages from the 2009-2011 PSID. Liquid assets include
checking and savings account balances, money market funds, certificates of deposits, Treasury
securities, and other government saving bonds.6

    The graph splits liquid asset holdings into bins ranging from liquid assets between zero
to 5 percent of prior annual gross family income, up to 50 percent or more, and shows
liquid assets for unemployed and employed mortgagors. Note that 85 percent of unemployed
mortgagors have exhausted or nearly exhausted their liquid assets, which suggests that they
are indeed significantly constrained in being able to make their mortgage payment.7



4       The Process of Mortgage Delinquency and Foreclo-
        sure

Before presenting statistics on mortgage delinquency, foreclosure, and curing, we provide
some background information on the actual delinquency and foreclosure process. To our
knowledge, the model developed in this paper will include considerably more detail about
the actual features of the delinquency and foreclosure process than other papers in the
    6
     The PSID definition of liquid assets does not include stocks or bonds outside of federal government
bonds. Adding these measures to the PSID’s liquid assets does not change these results in any substantive
way.
   7
     Gerardi et al. [2013] provide additional evidence that mortgagors who default are severely financially
constrained.




                                                    8
literature. This detail will be qualitatively and quantitatively important for this study.

    A delinquent borrower means that a borrower is 30 or more days late. A notice of default
begins the process of foreclosure and is typically given to borrowers who are 90 or more days
late. A foreclosure sale is conducted by auction, and a notice of sale is given one month prior
to the auction. A borrower is evicted from the home after the sale. A foreclosed borrower
may be liable for a deficiency judgment if the sales price is less than the mortgage balance. A
foreclosed borrower is ineligible for government-backed loans for 7 years (see Lowrey [2010]).

    There are two main types of foreclosures in the United States: judicial and nonjudicial
(see Ghent and Kudlyak [2011] for state classifications). To complete a judicial foreclosure,
the bank that owns the mortgage must sue the person living in the home in a state court.
A judge is required to rule on the case before a foreclosure sale can occur.

    A nonjudicial foreclosure, also known as a foreclosure by power of sale, allows the bank to
sell the house without a court’s approval. A notice of default is sent to the mortgagor which
explains that the bank intends to sell the property. Typically, a sale will not take place for
at least a month after receiving this notice. Additional details about the foreclosure process
are presented in Appendix 17.


4.1    Interest on Missed Payments

Mortgage payments are usually due on the first day of the month, and a late fee is typically
assessed if the payment is not received within the first two weeks of the month. The late fee
is a fraction of the payment amount. If the scheduled payment is $1,000 and the late fee is 3
percent, then the mortgagor must pay $1,030 in the following month. Most late fee interest
rates fall in the range of 3 percent to 6 percent per month (see Goodman [2009]).



5     Time to Foreclose and Transitions In and Out of
      Delinquency

In nearly all models with limited commitment and mortgages, missing even a single mortgage
payment means that the mortgagor is evicted (see Garriga and Schlagenhauf [2009], Cor-
bae and Quintin [2009], Campbell and Cocco [2011], Chatterjee and Eyigungor [2011], and




                                              9
Hatchondo et al. [2012]).8 This common modeling assumption about the foreclosure process,
however, stands in contrast to two facts that will be relevant for analyzing the impact of
foreclosure time on labor market actions: (1) default is protracted and typically involves
a borrower repeatedly missing payments without being evicted, and (2) mortgagors often
successfully exit the delinquency and foreclosure process by making up for missed mortgage
payments.9

    This section presents data that highlight two features of the actual foreclosure process.
One is that many mortgagors who are in default self-cure, which means that the borrower
makes up for missed payments plus penalties. In fact, even mortgagors who miss enough
payments to enter the foreclosure process self-cure about as often as foreclosure is completed
(see Pennington-Cross [2010]). The other key feature of these data is that the time to
complete foreclosure was much longer after 2009 than before.

    Figure 5 presents data that summarizes the evolution of default, which includes missing
payments, the foreclosure process, self-cure, and foreclosure completion. These data are from
Lender Processing Services, Inc. (hereafter called LPS – see Elul [2015] for a full description
of the data), which has compiled detailed mortgage data on roughly 2/3 of U.S. mortgages.
LPS is one of two standard datasets that are used in mortgage analyses.10

   Figure 5 is a transition matrix which describes how mortgagors transit across mortgagor
payment states. The possible states are “current,” “60 Days Late,” “90 or More Days Late,”
“In Foreclosure,” two measures of completed foreclosure (“Real Estate Owned” [REO] and
“Liquidated”), and “Paid Off,” which means that the mortgagor sold the home.11 The
rows are the beginning states, and the columns are the ending states. The period is one
month. The table includes two sets of entries: the black entries refer to the transition
matrix calculated from 2009-2011 data, in which foreclosure was significantly delayed, and
   8
     Our model is also related to Karahan and Rhee [2011], Hedlund [2011], and Head and Lloyd-Ellis [2012],
who incorporate search in a model with housing, Herkenhoff [2013] and Athreya et al. [2014] who consider
the way unsecured debt interacts with labor markets, and Benjamin and Wright [2009] and Benjamin and
Mateos-Planas [2011], who consider debt renegotiation.
   9
     The standard assumption that eviction is immediate also makes it difficult for models to match actual
default rates. Several authors use a period length of 2-4 years so that the discount rate is effectively small
enough to generate default.
  10
     We use a sample of around 470,000 mortgages per year from LPS. This is a larger sample than used
in other analyses of mortgages who use Core Logic, Inc., which typically range from 130,000 mortgages to
400,000 mortgages (see Elul et al. [2010] among others).
  11
     We eliminated the “30 Days Late” state, since this state includes mortgagors who miss a payment simply
as an error. These errors include forgetting to send in a payment, mailing the payment late, the payment
being lost in the mail, the payment being returned due to insufficient funds in a checking account, so on.




                                                     10
the red underlined entries are for the 2001-2003 data. Figure 5 presents the following:12


   1. Delinquency is often temporary, with frequent transitions from delinquent to current
      (current means up-to-date on payments) and transitions resulting in a mortgagor be-
      coming closer to being current (i.e., the lower triangular entries for the states “30 Days
      Late,”“60 Days Late,”and “90+ Days Late” are nonsparse).

   2. Foreclosure, which we define as the time between the delivery of the default notice
      and eviction, is often temporary. This means that there are frequent transitions out of
      the foreclosure into curing. Specifically, the probability that a mortgagor will success-
      fully exit foreclosure is about the same as the probability that a mortgagor who is in
      foreclosure will suffer a completed foreclosure.

   3. Entry into foreclosure is slow, and became slower after 2008. Specifically, loans that
      were “90 or More Days Late” were in that category for 3.2 months on average during
      the 2001-2003 period and 6.2 months on average during the 2009-2011 period. The
      unconditional monthly hazard rate of receiving a foreclosure notice, after being 90 or
      more days late, dropped by 40 percent between the 2001-2003 survey and the 2009-2011
      survey, declining from 8.3 percent to 4.8 percent.

   4. Foreclosure is a slow process, and became slower after 2008. Specifically, conditional
      on reaching foreclosure, mortgagors remained in foreclosure on average for 4.0 months
      during the 2001-2003 period, and for 8.3 months in the 2009-2011 period. Consequently,
      the unconditional monthly hazard of having a completed foreclosure, either as a bank-
      owned property, or as a liquidated property, dropped by 36 percent, declining from 8.6
      percent in 2001-2003 to 5.5 percent in 2009-2011. The increase in time to foreclose
      is concentrated among a group of states in which foreclosure delay rose substantially.
      These states include California, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts,
      New Jersey, New York, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Some other states,
      including Alabama, Arizona, Georgia, Iowa, Missouri, North Carolina, Oregon, Texas,
      Virginia, and Washington, did not experience a large increase in time to foreclose.13

   5. The self-cure probabilities, which we define as the lower triangular entries of the matrix,
      decreased in every single entry between 2001-2003 and 2009-2011.
  12
     This is a transition matrix, so in order to read this table, the rows are the starting state at the beginning
of the month and the columns are the possible states next month. For instance, in a given month the
probability of moving from being current to 30 days late is 1.7 percent during the 2009-2011 period.
  13
     See RealtyTrac [2012] for a detailed foreclosure timeline report and ranking of states.




                                                       11
    In summary, these data show that (1) there is considerable movement of mortgagors
across different levels of delinquency, (2) mortgagors typically spend considerable time in
mortgage delinquency before entering foreclosure, (3) foreclosure takes considerable time,
(4) delinquent mortgagors often self-cure, and (5) the time spent in “90 or More Days Late”
and “In Foreclosure” categories rose considerably in the 2009–2011 period, and the self-
cure probabilities declined during this period. The model in the following section features
a delinquency and foreclosure process that is tailored to capture these features described
earlier, and is used to conduct an experiment comparing 2001-2003 with 2009-2011.



6      Search Model with Persistent Mortgage Default and
       Curing

This section describes a model that features a labor search process with a reservation wage
for unemployed agents and a housing market in which mortgagors can persistently default
as well as exit default or exit foreclosure through repaying their delinquent balances. The
model is decision-theoretic in that the prices in the model are exogenous. This simplification
allows us to include substantial heterogeneity in the model in terms of individual employment
histories, asset histories, and mortgage histories, while at the same time keeping the model
tractable. The analysis thus quantifies how the labor market is affected by changes in the
time to foreclose, given prices.14

    Unlike other papers in the literature, this paper allows mortgagors to self-cure by making
up for missed payments, including late fees and accumulated interest. To our knowledge, this
is the first analysis that is consistent with the fact that delinquent mortgagors can self-cure
within a model featuring mortgage finance and job search.

   Time, indexed by t = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., is discrete and runs forever. The model economy is
populated by a heterogeneous mass of risk-averse and finitely lived agents who are subject
to both idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks. In each period, agents may participate in three
markets: the labor market, the asset market, and the housing market.

   The labor market features search frictions similar to those in Ljungqvist and Sargent
[1998] and Krueger and Mueller [2010]. Unemployed agents exert a search effort st at a
  14
    It would be interesting to try to extend this to a general equilibrium environment. However, this
would complicate the solution of the model enormously, particularly in terms of the pricing of mortgages in
conjunction with general equilibrium search and matching in the labor market. We leave this to future work.




                                                    12
utility cost x(st ) to increase the probability of receiving a wage offer. Wage offers are drawn
from an exogenous and stationary distribution F (·), and agents can reject or accept offers.
This gives rise to a reservation wage profile w∗ (·), which is a function of the state space
of the agent. Once an offer is accepted and the agent is employed, we consider two wage
processes: one in which the wage is constant for the duration of the match and one in which
the wage follows a Markov process. The job match continues until it is terminated by an
exogenous and stochastic job destruction shock, in which the agent becomes unemployed
and then searches as described earlier.

   In the asset market, agents can save (at > 0) at a fixed risk-free rate r̄ in order to smooth
their consumption.15

   In the housing market, homeowners can sell their homes, but once agents become renters,
they are renters for the remainder of their lives as in Corbae and Quintin [2009]. Homeowners
receive a flow utility from housing services given by zh and renters receive a flow utility of
housing given by zr where zr < zh . In our model and similar to the model in Chatterjee
and Eyigungor [2009], every homeowner has a mortgage perpetuity and must either make
the required payment or default. The key difference in this model from existing models in
the literature is that both mortgage default and foreclosure are protracted and potentially
reversible events, both of which influence job search and consumption decisions.16

    Agents maximize discounted expected utility, in which preferences are defined over the
expected stream of consumption of a nondurable good, c, housing services, zi , where it ∈

  h, r (h denotes homeowner, and r denotes renter), and search effort (if unemployed), s,
in which x(s) is the disutility of searching and x is weakly increasing and is convex in s. We
define βb = (1 − pd )β as the death-adjusted discount factor where pd is the probability of
an agent dying and β is the household discount factor. The household objective function is
given by

                                          ∞
                                          X
                                                βbt u(ct , zit ) − x(st ) .
                                                                         
                                     E0
                                          t=0


   The model includes an aggregate shock that allows us to analyze the impact of foreclosure
delay during the Great Recession. We define θt to be the aggregate state at date t, where
  15
     It is standard in defaultable debt models to take the risk-free savings rate as exogenously given (see
Eaton and Gersovitz [1981] or Benjamin and Wright [2009]).
  16
     This model is of the same general type explored in an earlier paper (Herkenhoff and Ohanian [2011a])
where mortgage default does not necessarily lead to eviction.




                                                       13
θt follows a two-state Markov process, in which it can be either high (H) or low (L). As
described in detail later, the aggregate state governs the job-finding rate, the job destruction
rate, and house prices.

    While unemployed, agents search for a job with search intensity, st , and their search
disutility is given by (x(st )). The probability of obtaining an offer, which we hereafter call
the job-finding probability, is a function of the aggregate state. This is denoted as π(st , θt )
and is increasing and concave in st . Note that π(st , H) > π(st , L) for all st . If the agent finds
a job, the wage offer is drawn from a stationary distribution F (w). The agent can either
accept or reject the job offer, which gives rise to a reservation wage profile w∗ (·) that is a
function of the state vector of the agent. We denote δ(θt ) as the state-contingent probability
of a job being destroyed, in which δ(H) < δ(L).

   In the housing market, mortgages are modeled as perpetuities, which helps keep the
model tractable. When agents die, they are replaced by newborns, who are endowed with
zero liquid assets and who are randomly assigned to homeownership, with fraction fm being
endowed with a home (and a mortgage). Newborn agents begin with wages and benefits
drawn from F (w). A fraction 1 − u begin employed with u = .06.

   Mortgages have a constant payment per period, ch , which is denoted in units of the
nondurable consumption good. The house price (p(θt )) is governed by the aggregate state
such that p(L) ≤ p(H). In the high state, the price of a home is given as p(H) = crhb ,
where rb is the fixed mortgage interest rate. In the low state, we allow potentially for
underwater homeowners, p(L) ≤ crhb , but in the baseline parameterization we will assume
that p(H) = p(L) = crhb is constant.17


6.1     Homeowner Delinquency and Foreclosure

This section describes the model details regarding mortgagor decisions on their mortgage
payment and whether they choose to sell the home. Consider a mortgagor at date t. Mort-
gagors are either current, which means that they are not delinquent on past payments, or
they are in default, which means that they are delinquent on at least one previous mortgage
payment. We denote the number of periods of delinquency at date t as nt .
  17
     As Mian et al. [2011] show, foreclosures may lead to house price declines, and thus foreclosure intervention
may prevent negative equity. We note that (i) since foreclosure delays may mitigate house prices drops, in
order to avoid overstating the mechanism, we study delays in an environment in which house prices remain
constant throughout the Great Recession and no agents are under water, and (ii) closing the housing market
would require closing the mortgage market, and either of these tasks makes the problem intractable.




                                                       14
     A mortgagor who is current chooses to either (i) make the date t mortgage payment
ch , (ii) miss the date t mortgage payment ch , or (iii) sell the house. A mortgagor who is in
default chooses to either (i) make the two most delinquent payments, including penalties, (ii)
continue in default by missing the date t payment, or (iii) sell the house. A mortgagor who
is delinquent risks foreclosure, which means that the mortgagor is evicted from the home. A
delinquent mortgagor can temporarily stop foreclosure by making two delinquent payments,
including the penalty interest payment. If a delinquent mortgagor does this in period t, but
has remaining unpaid mortgage payments in period t + 1, the mortgagor must make another
two mortgage payments in t + 1 in order to stop the foreclosure process for date t + 1.

    For simplicity, the mortgagor must pay the two longest outstanding mortgage payments
with penalty interest ((1 + rb )n−1 ch + (1 + rb )n ch ), where rb is the penalty interest rate. This
feature of the model is consistent with the fact that the empirical transitions in Figure 5
show that homeowners slowly transit out of delinquency, rather than curing immediately by
making good on all missed payments and penalties. Moreover, the assumption in our model
that initiation of mortgagor self-curing stops the foreclosure process is consistent with the
fact that lenders prefer receiving late fees to foreclosure (see Thompson [2010]).

    A delinquent mortgagor is able to smooth consumption by missing a payment, but risks
foreclosure. The time to foreclosure is governed by the function λF (nt ), which denotes the
probability of foreclosure as a function of the number of missed payments by the mortgagor.
As the time spent in default (nt ) increases, the probability of foreclosure increases: λF (n) ≤
λF (n0 ) ∀n0 > n (see Figure 4 for the foreclosure probability for (A) the 9-month timeline,
(B) the 15-month timeline, and (C) the 24-month timeline). If the homeowner sells or is
foreclosed upon, they become permanent renters. The mortgage payment is greater than the
rental payment (ch > cr ), but the utility flow from owning a home strictly dominates the
utility flow from renting (zh > zr ). The rental payment is set to zero such that the renter
with the lowest possible unemployment benefits given by b can consume at least c = b, where
c is subsistence consumption.

    To model the possibility of a deficiency judgment against a foreclosed mortgagor, a fore-
closed house is sold at a discount of 1 − χ. For example, if χ = .95, this corresponds to a
5 percent discount and the house is sold for χ · p(θt ). For homes sold at a loss, G(·) is a
function which describes the potential deficiency judgment owed by the ex-homeowner as a
function of the proceeds of the sale.

   The unique focus of this model is that prolonged mortgage default will have an impact




                                                 15
on the labor market by affecting the reservation wage and search effort of an unemployed
homeowner. Specifically, initial default will be associated with a low foreclosure probability,
which means that agents will have a relatively high reservation wage and may also economize
on their search effort. As foreclosure becomes more likely, search effort will rise and the
reservation wage will decline.


6.2    Employed Discrete Choices

We focus on the recursive representation of the maximization problems for the agents, so we
will now drop time subscripts and use primes to denote the date t + 1 value. We denote value
functions associated with a discrete choice with a tilde, e.g., W  f . We begin with employed
agents. The value function for the discrete choice faced by an employed homeowner with wage
w, liquid assets a, with no late payments (n = 0), and in aggregate state θ is W     fh (w, a, 0; θ).
This agent chooses among the following options: pay the mortgage (Whg (w, a, 0; θ)), default
and face the risk of foreclosure (Whd (w, a, 0; θ)), or sell the home (Whs (w, a, 0; θ)). Thus, the
value of entering the period in current standing is

                                                       Whg (w, a, 0; θ), Whd (w, a, 0; θ), Whs (w, a, 0; θ) .
                                                   
        W
        fh (w, a, 0; θ) =          max
                            P ay, Def ault, Sell



    When n ≥ 1, the mortgagor has missed n payments and owes the lender a minimum of
two payments plus penalties to stop foreclosure. The delinquent mortgagor chooses between
paying to stop foreclosure (Whp (w, a, n; θ)), missing another payment, which means that
foreclosure occurs with probability λF (n), or selling the property (Whs (w, a, n; θ)). The value
for the employed homeowner who has missed at least one payment (n ≥ 1) is given as

                                                           Whp (w, a, n; θ), λF (n)Whf (w, a, n; θ)
                                                       
    W
    fh (w, a, n; θ) =             max
                        P ay T wice, Def ault, Sell

                                                           + (1 − λF (n))Whd (w, a, n; θ), Whs (w, a, n; θ) .


   Let Dh (b, a, n; θ) summarize the discrete choice decision for homeowners.


6.3    Employed Value Functions

We begin with renters. An employed renter with wage w and liquid assets a has value
function Wr (w, a; θ). The only choice made by an employed renter is next period’s liquid



                                                             16
asset holdings a0 . At the end of the period, with probability δ(θ0 ), an employed renter is
laid off and receives unemployment benefits of b(w). The flow utility from renting is zr , the
rental payment is cr , βb is the death adjusted discount factor, and r̄ is the return on savings.
Thus, the problem solved by an employed renter is as follows

                                      b (1 − δ(θ0 ))Wr (w0 , a0 ; θ0 ) + δ(θ0 )Ur (b(w), a0 ; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                 
       Wr (w, a; θ) = max
                       0
                          u(c, zr ) + βE
                             a


such that
                                      c + cr + a0 = w + (1 + r̄)a.

   An employed homeowner with wage w, liquid assets a, current payments n = 0, and
aggregate state θ that pays on time has a value function Ehg (w, a, 0; θ). The mortgage pay-
ment is ch consumption units, zh is the flow utility from living in the house, and δ(θ) is the
aggregate state contingent job destruction probability.

   Ehg (w, a, 0; θ) = max             b (1 − δ(θ0 ))W
                                                    fh (w0 , a0 , 0; θ0 ) + δ(θ0 )U
                                                                                  eh (b(w), a0 , 0; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                       
                       0
                          u(c, zh ) + βE
                         a


such that
                                      c + ch + a0 = w + (1 + r̄)a.

   An employed mortgagor in default (n > 0) with wage w and liquid assets a who chooses
to miss an additional payment solves the following problem:

Whd (w, a, n; θ) = max            b (1−δ(θ0 ))W
                                              fh (w0 , a0 , n+1; θ0 )+δ(θ0 )U
                                                                            eh (b(w), a0 , n+1; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                   
                    0
                       u(c, zh )+ βE
                     a


such that
                                       c + 0 + a0 = w + (1 + r̄)a.

Since the household missed an additional payment, the delinquency indicator becomes n0 =
n + 1.

   A mortgagor can temporarily stop the foreclosure process by making two payments plus
penalties (Whp (w, a, n; θ)). In this case, the delinquency indicator transitions to n0 = n − 1.
To reduce the size of the statespace, the mortgagor must pay the two longest outstanding
mortgage payments plus penalties: ((1 + rb )n−1 ch + (1 + rb )n ch ). The full problem is written




                                                     17
as follows:

Whp (w, a, n; θ) = max            b (1−δ(θ0 ))W
                                              fh (w0 , a0 , n−1; θ0 )+δ(θ0 )U
                                                                            eh (b(w), a0 , n−1; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                   
                    0
                       u(c, zh )+ βE
                     a


such that
                         c + (1 + rb )n−1 ch + (1 + rb )n ch + a0 = w + (1 + r̄)a.

    An employed homeowner who sells has value function (Whs (w, a, n; θ)). A seller must pay
all late interest penalties ( ni=1 (1 + rb )i ch ), and these penalties are collected directly from
                             P

the sale of the home (see Thompson [2010]):

      Whs (w, a, n; θ) = max             b (1 − δ(θ0 ))Wr (w0 , a0 ; θ0 ) + δ(θ0 )Ur (b(w), a0 ; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                    
                          0
                             u(c, zh ) + βE
                           a


such that                                                           n
                               0                        ch X
                         c + a = w + (1 + r̄)a + p(θ) −    −     (1 + rb )i ch .
                                                        rb   i=1


    In the event of foreclosure, χ < 1 is the foreclosure discount on the house price, so the
sales price is given by χp(θ). Late fees ( ni=1 (1 + rb )i ch ) are also collected directly from
                                            P

the sale proceeds. As discussed in Section 4, a foreclosure may also involve a deficiency
judgment against the mortgagor. Recall that G(·) is the function that governs the deficiency
judgment. The deficiency judgment is limited to wages and assets in excess of subsistence
consumption. We define subsistence consumption as c.

   An employed homeowner that is foreclosed upon solves the following problem:

      Whf (w, a, n; θ) = max             b (1 − δ(θ0 ))Wr (w0 , a0 ; θ0 ) + δ(θ0 )Ur (b(w), a0 ; θ0 ) ,
                                                                                                    
                          0
                             u(c, zh ) + βE
                           a


such that
                                                            n
                                                     ch X                  
               c + a0 = max w + (1 + r̄)a + G χp(θ) −          (1 + rb )i ch , c .
                           
                                                         −
                                                      rb   i=1



6.4      Unemployed Discrete Choices

The problem for the unemployed is similar to the employed. The main difference is that the
unemployed choose their search intensity, s, which influences their job finding probability,
π(s; θ). Unemployed agents receive unemployment benefits, b, which are described in detail



                                                     18
later.

   An unemployed mortgagor who is current (n=0) chooses to either pay the mortgage,
default, or sell the home:

                                                              Uhg (b, a, 0; θ), Uhd (b, a, 0; θ), Uhs (b, a, 0; θ) .
                                                          
               U
               eh (b, a, 0; θ) =          max
                                   P ay, Def ault, Sell


For n ≥ 1, the unemployed mortgagor is in default and owes the lender past mortgage
payments and penalties. The mortgagor must choose to either make two payments (including
penalties), miss another payment and continue in default, or sell the home:

                                                                  Uhp (b, a, n; θ), λF (n)Uhf (b, a, n; θ)
                                                              
         U
         eh (b, a, n; θ) =              max
                             P ay T wice, Def ault, Sell

                                                                  + (1 − λF (n))Uhd (b, a, n; θ), Uhs (b, a, n; θ) .


6.5        Unemployed Value Functions

An unemployed renter must choose their search intensity, s, which has a convex utility cost
x(s). The job-finding probability π(s; θ) is weakly concave, which ensures an interior solution
to the search choice. The variable b is the current unemployment benefit, a is liquid assets,
and ŵ is the wage drawn from F (ŵ). The wage is drawn, and then the unemployed renter
can choose to accept the offer ŵ or reject the offer and keep benefits b0 , which stochastically
expire. Let pb be the probability that benefits expire, and if benefits expire, agents are given
a minimum benefit amount b,


                                                                h
                     Ur (b, a; θ) = max    u(c, zr ) − x(s) + βE
                                                              b   (1 − π(s; θ0 ))Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 )
                                     a0 ,s
                                             Z                                                  i
                                  + π(s; θ ) max Wr (ŵ, a0 ; θ0 ), Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                           0
                                                      
                                                ŵ


such that
                                             c + cr + a0 = b + (1 + r̄)a.

   The max operator implies a reservation wage for which an agent accepts or rejects a wage
wr∗ (b, a0 ; θ0 ),
            in which wr∗ indicates this is a reservation wage, and the subscript indicates the
renter status. We assume the upper bound for the support of w is w̄, and therefore the




                                                                    19
reservation wage is determined as follows:
                     Z
                         max Wr (ŵ, a0 ; θ0 ), Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 ) dF (ŵ)
                             
                      ŵ
                                                              Z w̄
                            0 0 0         ∗ 0 0 0
                     = Ur (b , a ; θ )F (wr (b , a ; θ )) +               Wr (ŵ, a0 ; θ0 )dF (ŵ).
                                                                  wr∗ (b0 ,a0 ;θ0 )



   An unemployed homeowner with benefits b, liquid assets a, no late payments (n = 0),
and who pays the current mortgage payment solves the following problem:
                                                         h
       Uhg (b, a, 0; θ)    = max   u(c, zh ) − x(s) + βE (1 − π(s; θ0 ))U
                                                      b                       eh (b0 , a0 , 0; θ0 )
                             a0 ,s
                                               Z                                                            i
                                             0          fh (ŵ, a0 , 0; θ0 ), Ueh (b0 , a0 , 0; θ0 ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                                      
                                   + π(s; θ ) max W
                                                    ŵ


such that
                                             c + ch + a0 = b + (1 + r̄)a.

   An unemployed homeowner who is in default (n ≥ 1) and who makes no payments has
their number of months late transition upward to n0 = n + 1.

   A defaulting nonpayer solves the following problem:
                                                  h
  Uhd (b, a, n; θ)   = max
                        0
                            u(c, zh ) − x(s) + βE (1 − π(s; θ0 ))U
                                               b                    eh (b0 , a0 , n + 1; θ0 )
                       a ,s
                                        Z                                                                   i
                                      0          fh (ŵ, a0 , n + 1; θ0 ), U
                                                                           eh (b0 , a0 , n + 1; θ0 ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                               
                            + π(s; θ ) max W
                                              ŵ


such that
                                              c + 0 + a0 = b + (1 + r̄)a.

    The reservation wage wd∗ (b, a0 , n + 1; θ0 ) (where the subscript d indicates default) is a
key function to characterize, and we will characterize this reservation wage below both
theoretically and numerically. The reservation wage is the point at which the value of taking
a job during default is just equal to the value of continuing in default while unemployed:

                         fh (w∗ (b0 , a0 , n + 1; θ0 ), a0 , n + 1; θ0 ) = U
                         W                                                 eh (b0 , a0 , n + 1; θ0 ).
                              d



    An unemployed homeowner in default that begins to pay current is not subject to fore-
closure. As before, the mortgagor must pay the two most delinquent mortgage payments



                                                             20
((1 + rb )n−1 ch + (1 + rb )n ch ). The value function is as follows:
                                                  h
  Uhp (b, a, n; θ) = max   u(c, zh ) −  x(s) + βE
                                               b    (1 − π(s; θ0 ))U
                                                                   eh (b0 , a0 , n − 1; θ0 )
                     a0 ,s
                                       Z                                                        i
                                     0                   0           0           0 0         0
                                               
                           + π(s; θ ) max Wh (ŵ, a , n − 1; θ ), Uh (b , a , n − 1; θ ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                                 f                        e
                                          ŵ


such that
                         c + (1 + rb )n−1 ch + (1 + rb )n ch + a0 = b + (1 + r̄)a.

    An unemployed homeowner that sells becomes a renter after that. They receive the
state contingent house price p(θ), but they must pay off the remaining mortgage crhb and the
outstanding late payments ni=1 (1 + rb )i ch . Thus an unemployed agent that sells solves the
                           P

following problem:
                                                          h
          Uhs (b, a, n; θ) = max   u(c, zh ) −  x(s) + b (1 − π(s; θ0 ))Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 )
                                                       βE
                             a0 ,s
                                               Z                                           i
                                             0                0 0          0 0 0
                                                       
                                   + π(s; θ ) max Wr (ŵ, a ; θ ), Ur (b , a ; θ ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                                 ŵ


such that                                                            n
                                                              ch X
                         c + a0 = b + (1 + r̄)a + p(θ) −         −     (1 + rb )i ch .
                                                              rb   i=1


    As stated earlier, χ is the discount on the house price p(θ) if foreclosed upon and G(·)
reflects the institutional details of foreclosure sales. Thus, an unemployed homeowner who
is foreclosed upon solves the following problem:
                                                         h
          Uhf (b, a, n; θ)   = max
                                0
                                    u(c, zh ) − x(s) + βE (1 − π(s; θ0 ))Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 )
                                                       b
                               a ,s
                                                Z                                               i
                                    + π(s; θ ) max Wr (ŵ, a0 ; θ0 ), Ur (b0 , a0 ; θ0 ) dF (ŵ) ,
                                              0
                                                       
                                                 ŵ


such that
                                                           n
                     0
                                                    ch X                  
                                                              (1 + rb )i ch , c .
                                 
               c + a = max b + (1 + r̄)a + G χp(θ) −    −
                                                     rb   i=1




                                                      21
6.6     Equilibrium

An equilibrium in this economy is a set of policy functions for (i) the savings decision
 j0                                                                    
  ai (b, a, n; θ) i=h,r j=E,U , (ii) search intensity for the unemployed si (b, a, n; θ) i=h,r , (iii)
the reservation wage, wi∗ (b, a, n; θ) i=h,r , and (iv) beginning-of-period pay, default, or sell
                          

decisions for homeowners Dhj (b, a, n; θ) j=E,U that solve the households’ dynamic program-
                              

ming problem, where households take as given the parametric wage distribution F (w), the
interest rates r̄ and rb , house prices p(θ), and the law of motion for the aggregate state.

    We solved the model by iterating on the value functions. The details of the model solution
are in Appendix 13. After solving the model, we simulated the model for 25,000 households
for 240 periods, and then we repeated this procedure until the model moments stabilized.18
We report steady state results by averaging outcomes over this period and by discarding the
first 100 periods.


6.7     Theoretical Characterization

This section provides a characterization of how foreclosure delay affects the reservation wage
and search intensity. Lemma 6.1 shows how the reservation wage falls as protection increases,
and Lemma 6.2 shows how search effort declines as protection increases.

Lemma 6.1. Define ψ(n) = 1 − λF (n) as the degree of default protection (the probability
of not being foreclosed upon). Let θ be constant, let δ be the constant job destruction rate,
and let b be the constant benefit rate. Suppose that the domain of the household dynamic
programming problem is convex and the return function u(c, z) − x(s) is concave, then the
optimal reservation wage wi∗ (b, a, n; θ), i ∈ h, r is increasing in the degree of protection
                                              

for any interior points of the state space.

Proof. See Appendix 14.

Lemma 6.2. Consider a version of the model that satisfies the hypothesis of Lemma 6.1.
Under the additional assumptions that the disutility of search is increasing and strictly convex
in search effort, x0 (s) > 0 and x00 (s) > 0 ∀s > 0, and π(s, θ) is linear in s with ∂π(s, θ)/∂s =
  18
     We anticipated needing to repeat this procedure many times, but since we have so many agents in the
economy, we found that the model moments were changed very little after 2 replications. We therefore
terminated repeating the procedure at 5 replications. We also found that 240 model periods per simulation
was sufficient. Specifically, since the initial draw was from the ergodic age distribution, we found the
stationary distribution typically by 100 periods.




                                                   22
αs , then the optimal search effort s∗h (b, a, n; θ) is decreasing in the degree of protection for
any interior point in the state space.

Proof. See Appendix 14.

    Lemmas 6.1 and 6.2 are at the heart of the quantitative mechanism. In both cases,
foreclosure protection is a form of debtor protection that allows delinquent mortgagors to
smooth consumption while searching for higher-paying jobs less intensely.



7     Calibration and Steady State Results

7.1    Calibration

The period length is one month, which is the payment period for most mortgages. Krueger
and Mueller [2010] take a similar labor market model to time-use survey data (their model
abstracts from asset accumulation and home ownership), and we use the same preferences
for nondurable consumption and the cost of searching:

                Preferences for Consumption : u(c, z) = log(c) + log(z)

                             Disutility of Search : x(s) = αs s2

Agents have a 42-year working life; thus the monthly probability of death, pd , is set to .002
as in Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998]. The functional form for the probability of receiving
an offer is also taken from Krueger and Mueller [2010], but we extend their specification to
incorporate a state contingent coefficient to model cyclical changes in job finding:

                                        π(s; θ) = αf (θ)s.

The aggregate state is governed by a transition matrix based on NBER business cycle dates
(see Appendix 13, the top row of the matrix corresponds to the high state), and the matrix
is given as follows:                        "               #
                                              0.9854 0.0146
                             θT ransition =                   .
                                              0.0833 0.9167

    In the high state, αf (H) = 1, which ensures that maximum search effort results in an



                                               23
offer with probability 1 (although there is limited data on offers, both Krueger and Mueller
[2010] and Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] demonstrate that such an assumption is necessary
to deliver plausible job finding rates). Shimer [2005] reports that the average job-finding
rate declines by about 24 percent in recessions, therefore, the offer rate is multiplied by .761
in the low state so that αf (L) = .761. This means that the maximum search effort results
in an offer with probability .761 during a recession.

   The job destruction rate is calibrated using data on layoffs from the Job Openings and
Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), which yields δ(L) = .015 and δ(H) = .013. As in Campbell
and Cocco [2011], the price of a house, p(θ), is exogenously determined. We allow the price of
the house to potentially be a function of the aggregate state, but in the baseline calibration
we set it to be the discounted sum of all future mortgage payments in every state of the
world, p(θ) = crhb , ∀θ.19

    To calibrate the wage offer distribution F (w), we follow Jolivet et al. [2006] and build a
transformation between the observed wages of employed households and the unobserved offer
distribution.20 Wages in the model lie in the interval [w, 1], where we normalize w = .1. Once
employed, we consider two cases for wage dynamics: (i) fixed wage contracts, as in Chetty
[2008] and Krueger and Mueller [2010], which is our benchmark case, and (ii) wage ladders as
in Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] and Hornstein et al. [2007]. To discipline the wage ladder
case, we use information on monthly wage transition rates for employed households from
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Section 9 contains more details.

    The unemployment benefit replacement rate is 50 percent of the wage, which is taken
from the OECD database on U.S. Benefits and Wages.21 To keep the model tractable and
also allow for benefit expiration, we specify a monthly benefit expiration probability of
.165, which implies a 6-month expected duration of unemployment insurance. Upon benefit
expiration, households receive the lowest benefit, b. The unemployment benefit formula is
given by b(w) = max b, 21 w . We normalize the lowest unemployment benefits and the
                       

associated consumption level so that agents never earn below w, i.e. b = c = .1. This value
is taken from Krueger and Mueller [2010] and corresponds to a payment that is about a 13
percent replacement rate.
     19
     In the previous version of this paper, we allowed for underwater homeowners during the crisis, p(L) <
ch
rb < p(H). This does not significantly change the results.
  20
     See Appendix 13 for more details.
  21
     See OECD “Table 3.2. Net replacement rates and unemployment insurance benefit duration in 26 OECD
countries, 2004.” http://www.oecd.org/about/publishing/36965805.pdf.




                                                   24
    The flow utility of renting, zr , can be normalized and is set to one. The cost of renting
is set to zero, cr = 0, to avoid negative consumption. The flow utility to owning, zh , and
the consumption cost of owning, ch , are set to match the transition rate from moving from
90 or more days late to 60 days late, and to match the average debt-to-income (DTI) ratios
observed for defaulters in the PSID. The DTI statistics are described in detail later.

    The foreclosure completion probability function λF (n) is piecewise linear, which allows
us to approximate the distribution of actual foreclosures. Specifically, this function captures
the fact that time to foreclose is stochastic and becomes certain after a sufficient number of
periods have passed:

                                            
                                            f , if n ≤ N
                                              c
                                   λF (n) =
                                            1, if n > N.

    Specifically, households are evicted with probability fc between period n and N, which is
chosen to match the transition rate from the process of foreclosure to completed foreclosure
in Figure 5. After month N , households are evicted with certainty. In addition to matching
the foreclosure completion transition rate, this process also captures other empirical features
of the delinquency and foreclosure process which is described later.

    We analyze three specifications of foreclosure time. The first has a foreclosure timeline of 9
months (N = 9), which corresponds to the modal number of days from default to foreclosure
sale as outlined by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.22 In addition, a few foreclosures occur
before N periods, so fc will be about 3 percent in order to capture this fact. The second
foreclosure timeline is 15 months (N = 15), which is a nationally representative foreclosure
timeline from LPS data for 2009-2011 (see Figure 5). The third foreclosure timeline is based
on the most extreme observed foreclosure delays, which is about 24 months in Florida and
New Jersey. Although the foreclosure completion probability function λF (n) is stylized, it
enables the model to roughly approximate many of the observed transitions across mortgage
payment states.

    The foreclosure discount on the sale price of the home is 22 percent (χ = .22), which
corresponds to the average reported by Pennington-Cross [2006]. A deficiency judgment on
foreclosed homes is equal to the amount owed times the observed deficiency enforcement rate.
 22
    Fannie   Mae,     “Foreclosure   Time    Frames     and    Compensatory    Fee    Al-
lowable             Delays.”             https://www.fanniemae.com/content/guide_exhibit/
foreclosure-timeframes-compensatory-fees-allowable-delays.pdf




                                               25
Fannie Mae’s observed deficiency enforcement rate is .1181. Specifically, Fannie Mae reports
that 35,231 out of 298,327 foreclosures were pursued for a deficiency (see Inspector General
[2012]). The function that governs the deficiency judgment G(·) based on the statistics
provided earlier is given by the following:

                            G(x) = .1181 · x · I(x < 0) + x · I(x > 0).

The model deficiency judgment does not distinguish between recourse and nonrecourse states.
This is because states that are often considered to be nonrecourse states can have recourse
on some mortgages. For example, in California all refinanced loans are recourse and subject
to deficiency judgments (see Ghent and Kudlyak [2011]).

   In terms of the remaining parameters, we set the discount factor β, the fixed mortgage
payment ch , the flow utility from housing zh , the bank interest rate rb , the savings rate r̄,
the fraction of newly born agents endowed with a mortgage fm , the stochastic foreclosure
probability fc , and the disutility of search coefficient αs for the model to capture the following
targets: the 60 days late delinquency rate from LPS data from 2001 to 2003, the average
back-end debt-to-income ratio for defaulters and nondefaulters in the PSID, the cure rate for
60 days late mortgagors, the cure rate for 90 days late mortgagors, the fraction of defaulting
and nondefaulting mortgagors with a ratio of liquid assets to income between 0 and 5 percent,
the mortgagor rate, the liquidation rate, and the homeowner as well as the economy-wide
unemployment rate. Note that there are more targets than parameters, so the model will
not match these targets exactly. We report how well the model matches these targets in
Section 7.2.

   To specify the mortgagor rate, we use 2007 census data, which is just prior to the Great
Recession. These data indicate a homeownership rate of about 68.2 percent and that 64.4
percent of households have a mortgage.23 Therefore, the mortgagor rate is 43.91 percent.

   To measure debt, we calculate average back-end debt-to-income ratios in the PSID. The
back-end debt-to-income ratio captures the fact that households have other obligated pay-
ments in addition to their mortgage payments, including insurance and other debt payments.
Since these other obligations are not in our model, but since they do impact ability to pay,
we deal with these by removing those payments out of the PSID incomes. We do this by
  23
    The data on the number of mortgages are from Census Table 963. “Mortgage Characteristics – Owner
– Occupied Units: 2007”, which provides data on nearly 76 million owner-occupied housing units. The data
on homeownership is from Census Table 5. “Homeownership Rates for the United States and Regions: 2006
to 2012”.




                                                  26
applying the NBER’s TAXSIM program to the 2009 PSID dataset to generate after-tax in-
come.24 From the after-tax income, we further subtract insurance expenses, lease outlays,
and an imputed unsecured debt service flow equal to 14.31 percent of the stock of unse-
cured debt (14.31 percent is the average credit card interest rate taken from the 2009 Flow
of Funds). The ratio of mortgage payments, including first and second mortgages, to this
adjusted after-tax income number is what we will call the back-end debt-to-income ratio.
Table 5 tabulates these ratios.25

   The ergodic unemployment rate that we will target is 6.5 percent.26 The cure rates
are taken to be the lower triangular entries in Figure 5, summed across columns to yield a
model-equivalent measure. We target the cure rate from 60 days late (DL) to current and
from 90 days late to 60 days late. Liquid assets are measured as in Section 3 and depicted in
Figure 3. We target the fraction of homeowners with liquid assets to annual income between
0 and 5 percent.


7.2     Model Statistics Compared with Data Targets

Since the model has more targets than parameters, we chose parameters by minimizing the
sum of squared deviations between the model and the data statistics. Table 6 shows that
the calibration does reasonably well in approximating these targets. Defaulters have back-
end debt-to-income ratios in line with the data, and the mortgagor unemployment rate is
identical to the data. Defaulters also have similar liquid asset holdings as in the data.

    As is standard in any default model, it is necessary to have a high discount rate: the β in
the model corresponds to an annual discount rate of roughly 16 percent.27 The bank interest
rate corresponds to an annual rate of 5.8 percent, and the savings rate corresponds to an
annual yield of 1.08 percent. These interest rates primarily determine the cure rate and the
fraction of liquid assets held by homeowners, respectively. The cure rate is quite high in the
data, even during the recession, and thus the bank fees must be low. Note that by omitting
mortgage modifications, we may be biasing downward the bank penalty rate, since a large
  24
     TAXSIM is a program made by the NBER specifically for computing tax liabilities. As in any tax
return, TAXSIM takes as inputs the marital status in filing, exemptions, and deductions, including mortgage
deductibles, etc. TAXSIM then yields the federal and state tax liabilities of households.
  25
     In the event that a household had negative income after these adjustments, we dropped them from the
sample, thus understating the burden of mortgage debt.
  26
     Our model has no participation margin and thus the unemployment rate in our model corresponds to a
number more like U6.
  27
     The discount rate cannot be too high since it also shifts the asset distribution.




                                                    27
number of homeowners have had their mortgages modified or had late fees forgiven.28

    In this calibration, the model does not generate home sales except through foreclosure.
However, this feature of the calibration may not be important, as home sales were very low
during this period, falling by a factor of eight (see Figure 5). The search disutility parameter
is set to match the 6.5 percent ergodic unemployment rate; however, the disutility of search
parameter also indirectly affects the mortgagor rate and cure rates.



8      Impact of Foreclosure Delay during Great Recession

This section quantifies the impact of the large increased time to foreclosure that occurred
during the Great Recession.29 Our approach is as follows. We take three identical economies
with the 9-month foreclosure timeline and which had been in the high aggregate state for the
preceding 12 months. All three economies next enter the low state, θ=L, and remain in that
state for 18 months, which is about the length of the Great Recession as defined by the NBER
(December 2007 to June 2009). At the onset of the low state, one economy continues with
the 9-month foreclosure timeline, and we call this the “no delay economy.” The foreclosure
timeline in the second of the economies increases to 15 months, which corresponds to the
national average, and we call this the “foreclosure delay economy.” The foreclosure timeline
in the third of the economies increases to 24 months, which is roughly the average foreclosure
time for the 10 most delayed states, such as Florida, California, and New York. We call this
the “long foreclosure delay economy.” Thus, the only difference between the three economies
is that one has a 9-month foreclosure timeline, one has a 15-month foreclosure timeline, and
one has a 24-month foreclosure timeline.

   Figure 4 plots how the probability of foreclosure depends on the number of months in
default. In the no delay economy, there is a constant foreclosure rate of 3.02 percent for
borrowers who are delinquent between 1 and 8 months, and certain eviction occurs in the
9th month. Recall that we chose the 3.02 percent eviction rate to account for the small
number of early foreclosures that do occur in the data. In the delay economy, there is also a
constant foreclosure rate of 3.02 percent for borrowers who are delinquent between 1 and 14
  28
     In a working paper version of the model we include modifications as a random event that competes
with foreclosure. Including means tested modifications distorts job taking behavior even more. See Mulligan
[2008] and Herkenhoff and Ohanian [2011a] for more.
  29
     This experiment relates to work by Mulligan [2008, 2010, 2011] and Herkenhoff and Ohanian [2011b]
who study the way various government housing policies, including mortgage modifications, have increased
unemployment by distorting incentives to find and accept jobs.




                                                    28
months, and certain eviction occurs in the 15th month. There is an analogous process for
the long foreclosure delay economy, with certain eviction in the 24th month.

     The job-finding rate and the job destruction rate during the Great Recession were quite
different from those in previous, milder recessions. We therefore adjust the model’s job-
finding and job destruction rates, using data from JOLTS. We find that the job-finding rate
fell by about 37 percent and that the job destruction rate rose by about 27 percent between
2007 to 2009. Table 7 summarizes the impact of the 2007-2009 recession on job-finding and
layoff rates in the data. To capture the severity of the Great Recession, we unexpectedly
reduce job offers and increase job destruction rates during the 18 months for which the
economy is in the low aggregate state. Specifically, the job-finding rate in the low state is
adjusted down from αf (L) = .76 to .64. Similarly, the job destruction rate in the low state,
δ(L), is adjusted from 1.5 in the low state to 1.7.30

    At the end of 18 months in the low state, both economies enter the high state, which
continues thereafter, and in which job destruction and job creation rates return to their high
state levels, and the time to foreclose continues.

       The main experiment is summarized as follows:


   • Both economies are identical, including the 9-month foreclosure timeline, had been in
     the aggregate high state for the previous 12 months, and before that had been in the
     ergodic steady state.

   • Date t

           – Both economies enter the low state for 18 months. The job destruction rate
             and the job creation rate are modified as described earlier to capture the job
             destruction and job creation that occurred between 2007 and 2009.
           – One economy introduces default protection through a 15-month foreclosure time-
             line, which we call the foreclosure delay economy, whereas the other economy
             maintains a 9-month foreclosure timeline, which we call the no delay economy.
  30
    We choose to set the Great Recession job destruction and job creation rates as unexpected events based
on forecasts that the economy would recover much more quickly than it did. Specifically, Romer [2009]
forecast a relatively quick recovery in the labor market. Sahm [2015] documents economic forecasts during
the Great Recession and finds that FOMC forecasts significantly overpredicted GDP growth in 2009 and 2010.
Specifically, she reports that the forecasted GDP growth for 2009 and 2010 was much stronger than actual
growth, and that unemployment would be in the range of 6.6 percent to 7.5 percent in 2011 (see Sahm [2015]
and http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20090128SEPcompilation.pdf).




                                                   29
   • Date t + 18: Both economies enter the high aggregate state (θ = H) and remain there.
     Each economy maintains its time to foreclose.


8.1    Model Transitions In and Out of Delinquency and Foreclosure

To illustrate how foreclosure delay affects defaulting and curing, Figure 6 presents the transi-
tion matrix across mortgage payment states for the no delay economy and for the foreclosure
delay economy from this experiment. The black numbers are for the foreclosure delay econ-
omy, and the red underlined numbers are for the no-delay economy and are thus interpreted
as the counterfactual. For simplicity, note that the model transition matrix does not include
as many states as the empirical transition matrix from Figure 5.

    We focus on two features of these model statistics. The first is that the model approxi-
mately captures the impact of foreclosure delay, as the probability of a borrower who is in
foreclosure and who remains in foreclosure is about 89 percent in the data for 2009-2011
and is about 88 percent in the model for this period. The second is that foreclosure delay
results in a lower foreclosure rate. The model foreclosure rate is 9.9 percent for the no delay
economy and is 4.5 percent for the foreclosure delay economy. Although there is no empirical
analogue for comparison, given that the no delay economy is a counterfactual, it is interest-
ing to note, however, that the actual foreclosure rate drops from 8.6 percent in 2001-2003 to
5.5 percent in 2009-2011.

    Foreclosure delay also has an impact on borrowers’ decisions to default and to cure.
Specifically, borrowers default more frequently and cure more slowly with foreclosure delay.
The model predicts that the monthly default rate is about 0.3 percentage points (.0105-.0077)
higher when there is a 15-month foreclosure timeline (this is roughly a third higher relative
to the 9-month foreclosure timeline). Similarly, the cure rate from 90 or more days late to 60
days late in the 15-month foreclosure economy drops by about 0.8 percentage points (.1762-
.1685). Since more borrowers default and also remain in the 90 or more days late category
longer, they experience more foreclosures. Thus, with foreclosure delay the foreclosure rate
rises roughly 3.8 percentage points (.1063-.0675), which represents a 57 percent increase
compared with the economy with no delays.




                                              30
8.2     Quantitative Impact of Foreclosure Delay

Figures 7 to 11 illustrate the time paths of mortgagor employment, aggregate employment,
the stock of homes with delinquent mortgages, and the fraction of households with mortgages
(the mortgagor rate) in the three economies during the experiment. The main finding is
that foreclosure delay considerably affects borrower decisions to default and cure. This in
turn depresses employment but improves match quality as unemployed mortgagors have
additional time to search, which results in higher wages. As we describe later, the impact
from foreclosure delay on employment is equivalent to extending unemployment benefits
between about 4 months, which is for the average foreclosure delay across all states, to
about 6 months, which is for the states with the longest delays.


8.2.1   Impact of Foreclosure Delay on Employment

Figure 7 plots employment per capita among mortgagors in the three economies. We find
that mortgagor employment in the economy with the 24-month foreclosure timeline, which
characterizes the increase in foreclosure delays that occurred in Florida, New York, New
Jersey, California, and several other large states, is about 1.3 percentage points lower than
in the no delay economy. In levels, the employment rate is about 89.5 percent in the economy
with a 9-month foreclosure timeline and about 88.2 percent in the economy with the 24-month
foreclosure timeline. Aggregate employment in these states, which combines mortgagor
employment with employment of renters and of homeowners without mortgages, is about 0.5
percentage points lower, which reflects the fact that those with mortgages make up roughly
43 percent of the model economy’s agents. The employment rate among mortgagors in the
economy with the 15-month foreclosure timeline, which captures the average increase that
occurred for all states, and which includes several states with little if any foreclosure delay,
is about 0.75 percentage points lower than in the economy with the 9-month foreclosure
timeline, and aggregate employment is about 0.3 percentage points lower.

    Figure 8 plots the differences in mortgagor employment rates for the three economies
in order to highlight these differences. Lemmas 6.1 and 6.2 indicate why employment is
lower when time to foreclose rises. Specifically, the self-insurance provided by mortgage
default results in lower employment as the foreclosure timeline becomes longer. Thus, longer
foreclosure delay means greater default protection, which in turn means a larger difference in
employment between these economies. Foreclosure delay is a de facto implicit line of credit
from the lender to the mortgagor, and by extending the duration of this credit line with



                                              31
foreclosure delays, this extra self-insurance has an impact on unemployed worker search
decisions and reservation wages. To gauge the model relative to the data, we note that
mortgagor employment among PSID respondents drops by about 6 percent between 2007
and 2009, which is of similar magnitude to our experiment. Appendix 16 shows that the
drop in employment per capita among mortgagors in the model is consistent with the data.
Averaging across states with delays and without delays, Figure 9 plots the difference in
aggregate employment per capita, which includes both mortgagors and nonmortgagors in
each model economy.

    To assess whether our model produces a reasonable quantitative impact of foreclosure
delay on employment, we measure the impact of changes in unemployment insurance in this
model, given that this topic has been studied considerably. We do this as in Nakajima [2012],
who constructs a Mortensen-Pissarides model with risk aversion and asset heterogeneity to
assess the impact of unemployment insurance (UI) extensions on unemployment during the
2007-2009 recession. We find that our model produces an unemployment benefit elasticity
of .43, which is defined as the increase in unemployment durations in weeks resulting from
a 10 percent increase in the benefit replacement rate for a regular 6-month duration of
UI. Unemployment benefit elasticity is commonly referenced in the empirical literature on
unemployment insurance. Card et al. [2015] provide a summary of this literature and report
that this same elasticity measure varies from 0.3 to 2 in U.S. data across several studies. Card
et al. [2015] also report measures of this elasticity from data during the Great Recession,
which range from 0.65 to 0.9. Our model therefore produces a response of employment to
unemployment benefit changes that is on the lower end of existing estimates.

    Since the topic of foreclosure delay and its impact on employment has not been previously
studied, we next place our quantitative estimates in context by calculating the equivalent
impact on employment within our model that results from extending unemployment benefits.
Specifically, we calculate how many additional months of unemployment benefits would result
in 0.5 percent lower aggregate employment, which is the employment decline in the 24-month
timeline economy, and 0.3 percent lower aggregate employment, which is the employment
decline in the 15-month timeline economy.31 We find that the employment decline resulting
from the 24-month foreclosure timeline is equivalent to the impact of about a 6-month
extension of unemployment benefits, and that the employment decline from the 15-month
foreclosure timeline is equivalent to about a 3.7-month benefit extension.
  31
    A 24-month UI policy increases the unemployment rate by 1.9 percent. We simply scale this ratio of UI
duration to UR to arrive at our estimates in the paper of the impact of foreclosure delay on unemployment.




                                                   32
    The employment declines resulting from foreclosure delay are the consequence of different
levels of search intensity and reservation wages, both of which depend on delinquency status.
Specifically, reservation wages are about 4 percent higher with the 24-month foreclosure
timeline compared with the 9-month foreclosure timeline economy at a mortgage payment
delinquency ranging between 1 to 4 months. Near foreclosure, however, reservation wages
in both the 9-month timeline economy and the 24-month timeline economy drop by roughly
10 percent, and search effort increases as households attempt to find a job quickly in order
to prevent eviction.

    Although foreclosure delay does not account for the majority of the decline in U.S. em-
ployment observed since 2008, its relative quantitative impact appears to be similar to several
other factors that have been studied. This includes analyses of mismatch employment (Kara-
han and Rhee [2011], Şahin et al. [2012]), structural changes in the labor market (Charles
et al. [2013]), and uncertainty (Schaal [2012]). All of these papers find that these factors
account for only a modest amount of the recent change in employment. Fratto and Uh-
lig [2014] study the impact of several shocks within a single model framework, including
monetary shocks, government spending shocks, preference shocks, technology shocks, and
wage/price markup shocks, and find that no single factor accounts for more than 2-3 per-
centage points of the recent change in employment.

    Figure 10 plots the fraction of mortgagors in default in the model economy. The stock
of mortgages in default reaches its maximum 6 quarters after the recession begins. The
delinquent stock declines thereafter as the economy switches back to the high state. In the
economy with the 24-month foreclosure timeline, delinquencies peak at about 14.2 percent
of the total stock of mortgages, which is roughly equal to the delinquent stock among the
10 most delayed states.32 The economy with a 15-month foreclosure timeline has a peak
delinquency stock of 11.2 percent, which is modestly higher than the national average of
about 10.57 percent.33 The economy with the 9-month foreclosure timeline, which is the
counterfactual, has a peak delinquency stock of about 6 percent. These large differences in
the stock of delinquencies are driven by households’ choices to default more frequently and
cure more slowly with foreclosure delay. Empirical work by Pace and Zhu [2011] has demon-
strated a similarly strong link between delays and default. The consumption smoothing
motive of default is also consistent with evidence in Baker and Yannelis [2015] and Gelman
et al. [2015], and it is in line with Guiso et al. [2010] and Gerardi et al. [2013], who both find
 32
      See McBride [2011] for delinquency rates by state.
 33
      Based on LPS data, see McBride [2012] for details.




                                                     33
very limited roles for strategic default.34

   Figure 11 illustrates the fraction of households with mortgages in each economy. In the
economy with the 24-month foreclosure timeline, homeownership (with mortgages) drops by
about 0.5 percentage points, from 42.5 percent to 42.0 percent, 6 quarters after the onset of
the recession, whereas homeownership drops to 41.7 percent over this same time period in
the counterfactual economy with the 9-month foreclosure delay timeline. Thus, foreclosure
delay results in fewer foreclosures and more ultimate curing.


8.2.2    Employment and Foreclosure Across States

The model experiments involving a 24-month timeline, which corresponds to the longest delay
states, a 15-month timeline, which corresponds to the U.S. average, and a 9-month timeline,
which corresponds to no delay and which is consistent with many states such as Arizona,
Georgia, Iowa, Texas, and Washington, predict that foreclosure delay reduces employment.
This section uses the Current Population Survey (CPS) to assess the model’s quantitative
results. To exploit the variation in foreclosure times across states, we categorize households
according to their state and conduct a difference-in-difference analysis. Specifically, we
compare employment rates across renters and homeowners in slow and fast foreclosure states,
controlling for a host of individual characteristics. We rank states based on the speed at which
homeowners transition from foreclosure to liquidation (including REO). Table 9 includes our
classification of slow and fast foreclosure states. We then isolate the top 10 fastest and top
10 slowest foreclosure states in the 2001 through 2013 March Supplement CPS surveys. We
then compare employment status of homeowners and renters in fast and slow foreclosure
states, splitting the sample before and after the large increase in foreclosure delays.

    Table 10 presents these results. The dependent variable is a dummy variable if the
household is employed, and we include demographic, occupation, and industry controls.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 10 show that homeowners, as compared with renters, have
a lower employment rate in states with slow foreclosure processes as compared with states
with fast foreclosure processes. The magnitude of this effect ranges between a 0.4 percent
to a 0.8 percent reduction in employment per capita depending on the control set, which is
consistent with the results of our structural model presented Section 6. Columns (3) and
(4) of Table 10 split the sample between pre-2007 and post-2007. We see that the impact
  34
   Evidence in Dobbie and Song [2013] about earnings outcomes and debt protection is consistent with our
mechanism.




                                                  34
of foreclosure delay is weaker in the 2003-2007 period, which is consistent with the fact that
there was much less variation in foreclosure time across states in 2003-2007.35


8.2.3    Impact of Foreclosure Delay on Wages

Foreclosure delay also affects the quality of jobs that are accepted by the unemployed, as
well as the economy’s wage bill. Table 8 shows that foreclosure delays result in wages that
are higher by about 0.2 percent to about 0.3 percent. The extra self-insurance provided by
the default protection has two effects: (i) fewer people are working, which results in a lower
employment rate, but those who are working have higher wages. Table 8 indicates that the
improved match quality (higher average wages) more than offsets the effect of fewer workers.

    This result is consistent with a large literature that includes Ehrenberg and Oaxaca
[1976], Feldstein and Poterba [1984], Addison and Blackburn [2000], and Hagedorn et al.
[2013], who have found that unemployment insurance extensions improve wage outcomes.
In our model, we find that unemployed defaulters find jobs that pay 0.8 percent greater
in a stochastic steady state with the 15-month foreclosure timeline relative to the 9-month
foreclosure timeline. As noted earlier, the 15-month foreclosure timeline is roughly equivalent
to the 4 month benefit extension, which implies that our wage gains from foreclosure delay
are at the lower end of estimates from U.S. data.36 Some studies based on European data
such as Schmieder et al. [2013] find mixed evidence regarding wage outcomes, but other
studies such as Nekoei et al. [2013], who use Austrian data, find that a UI extension of 9
weeks raises re-employment wages by 0.5 percent, which is consistent with our findings.37

   Herkenhoff et al. [2015] provide additional support for the wage findings in this paper.
They merge US credit reports and census employment histories to study the impact of credit
access on non-employment durations and replacement wages of displaced workers. They find
that credit access is an important source of self-insurance for unemployed households. They
  35
      We thank Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for suggesting this analysis.
  36
      Addison and Blackburn [2000] provide a comprehensive survey of the literature, showing that the major-
ity of studies that consider the impact of unemployment benefits on re-employment earnings find significant
and positive impacts of UI on wages. The magnitudes vary, and the units of analysis vary, but the general
consensus of the literature is that unemployment insurance improves wage outcomes.
   37
      The results in Schmieder et al. [2013] are not particularly informative for our study because of large
differences in the asset positions of the households we study, and of the 40-42 year old German workers studied
in Schmieder et al. [2013]. Specifically, the OECD reports that the German household private savings rate
is 10 percent, which suggests that the German households have a significant buffer stock of assets, whereas
we documented that the delinquent mortgagors we study have no buffer stock. Thus, our theory indicates
that the impact of UI extensions will be very different across these two different groups.




                                                      35
find that households with greater amounts of unsecured credit, and thus more insurance, take
longer to find jobs, and find higher wage jobs that are in line with the estimates presented
here.


8.3    Employment, Delinquency, and Foreclosure: Model and Data

Figure 12 shows the model’s employment per capita by delinquency status for the 15-month
timeline economy. Employment rises in the model as delinquencies rise, with borrowers rais-
ing their search intensity and reducing their reservation wages. The mortgagor employment
rate in the model rises by about 5 percent between being 60 days late and being in the fore-
closure process. This increase in the model’s mortgagor employment rate is smoother than
the increase in the data, in which the latter is characterized by an increase that primarily
occurs for mortgagors who are in the foreclosure process. The increase in the employment
rate in the actual data is about 10 percent.

    There are two likely reasons why the model employment increase is smoother than the
increases displayed in Figures 1 and 2 from the PSID and the SCF, and is also not as large
as in those data. One reason is that our model, like all standard search models, does not
produce as many long-term unemployed as in the data. This is because unemployment in
standard search models is Markovian. This means that search models generate very few
individuals who are unemployed for long periods of time (e.g., more than a few months),
whereas 45 percent of the unemployed between 2009 and 2011 were unemployed for longer
than 6 months. We are unaware of any models that are capable of producing this share of
long duration unemployed.

    Another reason is that there is no heterogeneity in the flow utility derived from housing
in our model. This means that the opportunity cost of eviction is identical for all borrowers.
However, it is likely that there are some households who are very strongly attached (well
matched) to their homes, and who choose to prevent eviction even at a very high cost. This
is not included in this model.




                                             36
9      Sensitivity Analyses: Wage Ladders and Extended
       Unemployment Insurance

This section considers the sensitivity of the results to two changes to the benchmark model:
(i) wage ladders as in Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] and (ii) unemployment insurance ex-
tensions.


9.1     Wage Ladders

This section reports findings for the case of a wage ladder, rather than the fixed wage
contract. The impact of foreclosure delay is similar to that with fixed wages. Figure 13 shows
the difference in employment per capita between the economy with a 15-month foreclosure
timeline and the economy with a 9-month foreclosure timeline under different assumptions
about on-the-job wage growth. From SIPP data, we calculate that the probability of a wage
increase of at least $1 per month is about 4.66 percent.38 This measure includes transitory
wage changes, so we take this as an upper bound on the rate at which a worker may climb
the wage ladder. Prior studies such as Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] indirectly inferred
this parameter, and if we use their values for wage growth, the model results remain largely
unchanged. As Figure 13 shows, the difference in employment rates between the 24-month
foreclosure timeline relative to the 9-month foreclosure timeline is about 0.1 percentage points
smaller with wage ladders.


9.2     Extended Unemployment Benefits

Next, to assess the relative importance of foreclosure delays in an environment with ex-
tended unemployment benefits, we compare our benchmark model with a model in which
unemployment insurance lasts for 2 years (in expectation). The impact on the steady state
of the economy from a 2-year permanent benefit extension is to raise the unemployment rate
by 1.9 percent. This increase in unemployment is nearly identical to that found in Nakajima
  38
    See Appendix 13 for the full transition matrix. We use the SIPP-constructed wage rate “wage,” which
is described as the “Hourly rate this month” deflated by the CPI. The gross probability reported earlier is
the average probability of transiting up the wage ladder by $1 or more in any given month. If we calculate
net wage increases, i.e. we subtract from this measure the probability of going down at least $1 or more, the
transition probability is 1.36 percent. If we further isolate permanent changes, this number declines further
and the fixed contract model becomes a closer approximation to the wage ladder model.




                                                     37
[2012] (Table 4 of his paper) who also considers a 2-year permanent benefit extension but in
a Mortensen-Pissarides style model. As Nakajima [2012] discusses, this magnitude response
is consistent with UI studies such as Katz and Meyer [1990], Chetty [2008], Rothstein [2011]
and Hagedorn et al. [2013]. To complete the sensitivity analysis, Figure 14 demonstrates
that the impact of foreclosure delay on employment in the economy with a 2-year benefit
extension is only about 0.05 percentage points weaker than under the baseline case.



10     Summary and Conclusion

This paper documents the fact that mortgage default as well as the home foreclosure process
are persistent and reversible states, as homeowners who enter mortgage default often remain
in default for a long period of time, and that these same homeowners often exit default or
cure even when they have entered the foreclosure process. To our knowledge, the persistence
of default and foreclosure, and the frequent curing from these states, are absent from the
literature. We also present evidence from the PSID and the SCF that mortgage default is
associated with job acceptance, as the employment rate among delinquent mortgagors in
foreclosure is higher than that for delinquent mortgagors who have yet to enter foreclosure.

    We construct a labor search model with homeownership that structurally interprets these
facts as unemployed households using mortgage default as a means to help smooth consump-
tion and search for a high-paying job, and who accept jobs to exit foreclosure when eviction is
imminent. Our main finding is that the large increase in time to foreclose in some U.S. states
in which foreclosure required about two years, including New York, New Jersey, and Florida
(among others), reduced the employment rate of homeowners with mortgages by 1.3 per-
cent and reduced total employment within these states by about 0.5 percent. To assess the
plausibility of this impact, we conducted a difference-in-difference estimate of employment
rates between homeowners and renters across states and find that homeowner employment
rates were between 0.4 percent to 0.8 percent lower. The model also predicts that foreclo-
sure delay of 15 months (the national average) increases the stock of delinquent loans by 45
percent, resulting from longer foreclosure processing time and slower mortgagor curing. To
put the model’s prediction in context, our results indicate that a 15-month increase in the
foreclosure timeline has an impact on the aggregate economy roughly equal to a 6-month
unemployment benefit extension.

   The model also predicts an increase in match quality, as foreclosure delay results in




                                              38
longer unemployment spells, which allows the unemployed to wait for higher-wage jobs. We
find that the wage bill in the economy with foreclosure delay rises by about 0.3 percent.
This positive analysis of foreclosure delay provides an input to policymaking discussions on
alternative approaches in providing additional insurance to homeowners during periods of
substantial job loss and mortgage default.




References
John T Addison and McKinley L Blackburn. The effects of unemployment insurance on postunem-
  ployment earnings. Labour Economics, 7(1):21–53, 2000.

M. Adelino, K. Gerardi, and P.S. Willen. Why don’t lenders renegotiate more home mortgages?
  redefaults, self-cures and securitization. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2009.

Kartik Athreya, Juan M Sánchez, Xuan S Tam, and Eric R Young. Labor market upheaval, default
  regulations, and consumer debt. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series,
  (2014-002), 2014.

Scott R Baker and Constantine Yannelis. Income changes and consumption: Evidence from the
  2013 federal government shutdown. Available at SSRN 2575461, 2015.

D. Benjamin and X. Mateos-Planas. Formal and informal default in consumer credit. 2011.

D. Benjamin and M.L.J. Wright. Recovery before redemption: A theory of delays in sovereign debt
  renegotiations. Unpublished Paper, University of California at Los Angeles, 2009.

J.Y. Campbell and J.F. Cocco. A model of mortgage default. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, 2011.

David Card, Andrew Johnston, Pauline Leung, Alexandre Mas, and Zhuan Pei. The effect of
  unemployment benefits on the duration of unemployment insurance receipt: New evidence from
  a regression kink design in missouri, 2003-2013. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2015.

Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J Notowidigdo. Manufacturing decline, housing
  booms, and non-employment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

S. Chatterjee and B. Eyigungor. Foreclosures and House Price Dynamics: A Quantitative Anal-
   ysis of the Mortgage Crisis and the Foreclosure Prevention Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of
   Philadelphia, 2009.

S. Chatterjee and B. Eyigungor. A quantitative analysis of the us housing and mortgage markets
   and the foreclosure crisis. 2011.




                                                39
R. Chetty. Moral hazard vs. liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.

D. Corbae and E. Quintin. Mortgage innovation and the foreclosure boom. n Unpublished paper,
  University of Texas at Austin, 2009.

Larry Cordell, Liang Geng, Laurie Goodman, and Lidan Yang. The cost of delay. 2013.

Will Dobbie and Jae Song. Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the effects of consumer
 bankruptcy protection. Technical report, working paper, 2013.

J. Eaton and M. Gersovitz. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis.
   The Review of Economic Studies, pages 289–309, 1981.

Ronald G Ehrenberg and Ronald L Oaxaca. Unemployment insurance, duration of unemployment,
  and subsequent wage gain. The American Economic Review, pages 754–766, 1976.

R. Elul, N. Souleles, S. Chomsisengphet, D. Glennon, and R. Hunt. What’triggers’ mortgage
  default? FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 10-13, 2010.

Ronel Elul. Securitization and mortgage default. Journal of Financial Services Research, pages
  1–29, 2015.

Martin Feldstein and James Poterba. Unemployment insurance and reservation wages. Journal of
 Public Economics, 23(1):141–167, 1984.

Chiara Fratto and Harald Uhlig. Accounting for post-crisis inflation and employment: A retro
  analysis. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

C. Garriga and D.E. Schlagenhauf. Home equity, foreclosures, and bailouts. Manuscript, Federal
  Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2009.

Michael Gelman, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis. How
  individuals smooth spending: Evidence from the 2013 government shutdown using account data.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

K. Gerardi, P. Willen, and L. Lambie-Hansen. Do foreclosure delays improve borrower outcomes?,
  2011.

K.S. Gerardi, K.F. Herkenhoff, L.E. Ohanian, and P.S. Willen. Is it strategic? employment, wealth,
  and equity of defaulters. In Progress, 2013.

A.C. Ghent and M. Kudlyak. Recourse and residential mortgage default: evidence from us states.
  Review of Financial Studies, 24(9):3139–3186, 2011.

P.S. Goodman. Lucrative fees may deter efforts to alter troubled loans. NY Times, July, 30, 2009.

Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. The determinants of attitudes towards strategic
  default on mortgages. Forthcoming Journal of Finance, 2010.




                                               40
Marcus Hagedorn, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. Unemployment benefits
 and unemployment in the great recession: the role of macro effects. Technical report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

J.C. Hatchondo, L. Martinez, and J. Sanchez. Mortgage defaults. 2012.

A. Head and H. Lloyd-Ellis. Housing liquidity, mobility and the labour market. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2012.

A. Hedlund. Illiquidity and foreclosures in a directed search model of the housing market. 2011.

K.F. Herkenhoff. The impact of consumer credit access on unemployment. Manuscript, 2013.

K.F. Herkenhoff and L.E. Ohanian. Labor market dysfunction during the great recession. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011a.

Kyle Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole. How credit cosntraints impact job
  finding rates, sorting, & aggregate output. Manuscript, 2015.

Kyle F Herkenhoff and Lee E Ohanian. Labor market dysfunction during the great recession. The
  Cato Papers on Public Policy 2011, 1:173, 2011b.

Andreas Hornstein, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L Violante. Frictional wage dispersion in search
  models: A quantitative assessment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2007.

William C Horrace and Ronald L Oaxaca. Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary least
 squares for the linear probability model. Economics Letters, 90(3):321–327, 2006.

E. Hurst and F. Stafford. Home is where the equity is: mortgage refinancing and household
  consumption. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pages 985–1014, 2004.

Federal Housing Finance Agency Office of Inspector General. Fhfas oversight of the enterprises
  efforts to recover losses from foreclosure sales. Audit Report: AUD-2013-001, 2012.

G. Jolivet, F. Postel-Vinay, and J.M. Robin. The empirical content of the job search model: Labor
  mobility and wage distributions in europe and the us. European Economic Review, 50(4):877–907,
  2006.

F. Karahan and S. Rhee. Housing and the labor market: The role of migration on aggregate
  unemployment. University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 2011.

Lawrence F Katz and Bruce D Meyer. Unemployment insurance, recall expectations, and unem-
  ployment outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4):973–1002, 1990.

A. Krueger and A. Mueller. Job search and job finding in a period of mass unemployment: Evidence
  from high-frequency longitudinal data. Technical report, Princeton University, Department of
  Economics, Industrial Relations Section., 2011.

A.B. Krueger and A. Mueller. Job search and unemployment insurance: New evidence from time
  use data. Journal of Public Economics, 94(3-4):298–307, 2010.



                                               41
W. Li and M.J. White. Mortgage default, foreclosure, and bankruptcy. Technical report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, 2009.

L. Ljungqvist and T.J. Sargent. The european unemployment dilemma. Journal of Political Econ-
   omy, 106(3):514–550, 1998.

A. Lowrey. Strategic default penalties threaten struggling homeowners. Washington Independent,
  2010.

M. Luzzetti and S. Neumuller. Bankruptcy reform and the housing crisis. Available at SSRN
  2001777, 2012.

Bill McBride. Mortgage delinquencies by state: Percent and number, 2011. URL http://www.
  calculatedriskblog.com/2011/05/mortgage-delinquencies-by-state-percent.html.

Bill McBride. Lps: Mortgage delinquencies decreased slightly in july, 2012. URL http://www.
  calculatedriskblog.com/2012/09/lps-mortgage-delinquencies-decreased.html.

Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. Foreclosures, house prices, and the real economy.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

K. Mitman. Macroeconomic effects of bankruptcy & foreclosure policies. 2011.

C.B. Mulligan. A depressing scenario: Mortgage debt becomes unemployment insurance. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.

C.B. Mulligan. Aggregate implications of labor market distortions: The recession of 2008-9 and
  beyond. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.

C.B. Mulligan. Means-tested subsidies and economic performance since 2007. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

Makoto Nakajima. A quantitative analysis of unemployment benefit extensions. Journal of Mone-
 tary Economics, 59(7):686–702, 2012.

Arash Nekoei, Andrea Weber, et al. Does extending unemployment benefits improve job quality?
  Technical report, mimeo, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 2013.

RK Pace and S. Zhu. The influence of foreclosure delays on borrower’s default behavior, 2011.

A. Pennington-Cross. The duration of foreclosures in the subprime mortgage market: a competing
  risks model with mixing. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 40(2):109–129,
  2010.

Anthony Pennington-Cross. The value of foreclosed property. Journal of Real Estate Research, 28
  (2):193–214, 2006.

RealtyTrac.       2011 year-end foreclosure report:      Foreclosures on the re-
  treat,    2012.      URL     http://www.realtytrac.com/content/news-and-opinion/
  2011-year-end-foreclosure-market-report-6984.




                                               42
Christina D Romer. From recession to recovery: The economic crisis, the policy response, and the
  challenges we face going forward. Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee, 2009.

J. Rothstein. Unemployment insurance and job search in the great recession. Technical report,
   National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

Ayşegül Şahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L Violante. Mismatch unemployment.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.

Claudia Sahm.      Forecasts of economic activity in the great recession, 2015.
  URL            http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/
  forecasts-of-economic-activity-in-the-great-recession-20150501.html.

Edouard Schaal. Uncertainty, productivity and unemployment in the great recession. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, mimeo, 2012.

Johannes Schmieder, Till Von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. The causal effect of unemployment du-
  ration on wages: Evidence from unemployment insurance extensions. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

R. Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American economic
  review, pages 25–49, 2005.

D.E. Thompson. Problems in mortgage servicing from modification to foreclosure. Manuscript,
  2010.

Jeffrey M Wooldridge. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press, 2010.




                                              43
Figure 1:     Employment Per Capita      Figure 2:     Employment Per Capita
among Mortgagors by Delinquency Sta-     among Mortgagors by Delinquency Sta-
tus (Source: 2009-2011 PSID)             tus (Source: 2009 SCF)




      Figure 3: Histogram of Liquid Assets to Income (Source: 2009-2011 PSID)




           Figure 4: Transition Experiment: Foreclosure Probability λF (n)




                                         44
Figure 5: Homeowner Transitions 2009-2011 (Black), Homeowner Transitions 2001-2003
(Red and Underlined) (Source: LPS)




Figure 6: Model Homeowner Transitions, (No Delay Economy=Red Underlined Entries,
Delay Economy= Black Entries)




                                       45
     Figure 7: Transition Experiment: Mortgagor Employ-        Figure 8: Transition Experiment: Difference in Mort-
     ment Rate (%)                                             gagor Employment Rate across Economies




      Figure 9: Transition Experiment: Difference in Employ-    Figure 10: Transition Experiment: Delinquency Stock




46
      ment Rate across Economies, All Agents
      Figure 11: Transition Experiment: Homeownership      Figure 12: Transition Experiment: Employment Rate
                                                           by Delinquency Status




47
     Figure 13: Transition Experiment: Difference in Un-   Figure 14: Transition Experiment: Difference in Em-
     employment Rates across Economies with and without    ployment Per Capita across Economies with Regular UI
     Wage Ladders.                                         (6-month duration) vs. Extended UI (2-year duration).
               Table 1: Summary of Employment Per Capita, 2009 and 2011
                                  Employment Per Capita, 2011
                                       No Missed      30   Days   60   Days 90+ Days In Foreclo-
                                       Payments       Late        Late      Late     sure
 All Mortgagors, 2011                  0.88           0.89        0.88      0.78     0.83
 Judicial State Mortgagors, 2011       0.88           0.88        0.92      0.71     0.67
 Nonjudicial State Mortgagors, 2011    0.88           0.89        0.85      0.84     0.92

                                              Observations
 All Mortgagors, 2011                  2718          54           33        94         40
 Judicial State Mortgagors, 2011       1058          26           12        42         15
 Nonjudicial State Mortgagors, 2011    1626          28           20        50         25

                                  Employment Per Capita, 2009
                                       No Missed      30   Days   60   Days 90+ Days In Foreclo-
                                       Payments       Late        Late      Late     sure
 All Mortgagors, 2009                  0.87           0.80        0.83      0.61     0.75
 Judicial State Mortgagors, 2009       0.88           0.74        0.85      0.42     0.69
 Nonjudicial State Mortgagors, 2009    0.86           0.84        0.82      0.72     0.79

                                              Observations
 All Mortgagors, 2009                  3036          80           46        72         32
 Judicial State Mortgagors, 2009       1173          31           13        26         13
 Nonjudicial State Mortgagors, 2009    1854          49           33        46         19

Note: Sample includes 2009-2011 PSID mortgagor heads.




                                                 48
Table 2: Panel Regression Dependent Variable is Employment Indicator. OLS Coefficients
Reported.
                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)

 30 Days Late (d)              -0.041        -0.039       -0.009        -0.003       -0.046        -0.050
                               (-1.52)       (-1.36)      (-0.24)       (-0.10)      (-1.58)       (-1.52)
 60 Days Late (d)              -0.042        -0.022       0.009         0.013        -0.069*       -0.050
                               (-1.17)       (-0.59)      (0.18)        (0.26)       (-1.76)       (-1.16)
 90+ Days Late (d)             -0.086***     -0.147***    -0.078*       -0.111***    -0.073**      -0.160***
                               (-2.89)       (-4.67)      (-1.88)       (-2.67)      (-2.24)       (-4.43)
 In Foreclosure (d)            -0.012        -0.048       0.045         0.025        -0.042        -0.098**
                               (-0.34)       (-1.30)      (0.95)        (0.51)       (-1.10)       (-2.28)
 Unemployment Duration         -0.042***                  -0.030***                  -0.050***
                               (-16.57)                   (-9.13)                    (-17.93)
 Income                        0.000***                   -0.000                     0.000***
                               (5.46)                     (-0.14)                    (7.54)
 Liquid Assets to Income       -0.055***                  -0.022                     -0.073***
                               (-4.51)                    (-1.25)                    (-5.85)


 Specification                 RE            RE           FE            FE           Pooled        Pooled
 Demographic Controls          Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes           No
 State Controls                Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes           No


 P-val Coeff. 90+ DL = Co-     0.09          0.03         0.02          0.01         0.53          0.27
 eff. Foreclosure


 Observations                  6,383         6,482        6,383         6,482        6,383         6,482
 R-squared                     .207          .004         0.043         0.003        0.208         0.004


 Note: t-statistics in parentheses: *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10% .
 Demographic controls include age, sex, marital status, and education. State controls include recourse
 and judicial dummies. Sample includes 2009-2011 PSID mortgagor heads.




                                                     49
Table 3: Panel Logit Dependent Variable is Employment Indicator. Average Marginal Effects
Reported.
                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)

 30 Days Late (d)               -0.045       -0.011       -0.002        0.003        -0.043        -0.050
                                (-1.55)      (-1.10)      (-0.18)       (0.03)       (-1.49)       (-1.41)
 60 Days Late (d)               -0.052       -0.005       0.003         0.057        -0.073*       -0.050
                                (-1.33)      (-0.51)      (0.19)        (0.33)       (-1.79)       (-1.07)
 90+ Days Late (d)              -0.079**     -0.080**     -0.013        -0.201*      -0.060*       -0.160***
                                (-2.30)      (-2.02)      (-0.21)       (-1.90)      (-1.89)       (-3.64)
 In Foreclosure (d)             -0.019       -0.014       0.004         0.085        -0.031        -0.098**
                                (-0.57)      (-0.90)      (0.20)        (0.47)       (-0.83)       (-1.98)
 Unemployment Duration          -0.025***                 -0.001                     -0.031***
                                (-11.43)                  (-0.20)                    (-13.01)
 Income                         0.000***                  0.000                      0.000***
                                (7.36)                    (0.15)                     (10.45)
 Liquid Assets to Income        -0.037***                 -0.004                     -0.042***
                                (-3.72)                   (-0.20)                    (-4.10)


 Specification                  RE           RE           FE            FE           Pooled        Pooled
 Demographic Controls           Yes          No           Yes           No           Yes           No
 State Controls                 Yes          No           Yes           No           Yes           No


 P-val Coeff. 90+ DL = Co-      0.20         0.06         0.09          0.13         0.54          0.35
 eff. Foreclosure (Coeff. Not
 Reported)


 Observations                   6,383        6,482        610           624          6,383         6,482


 Note: t-statistics in parentheses: *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 10% .
 Demographic controls include age, sex, marital status, and education. State controls include recourse
 and judicial dummies. Sample includes 2009-2011 PSID mortgagor heads.




                                                     50
Table 4: SCF Composition Correction. Dependent Variable is Employment Indicator.
Columns (1) and (2) OLS Coefficients Reported. Columns (3) and (4) Average Marginal
Effects Reported.
                                            (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)
            30 Days Late (d)                -0.006          -0.026         -0.010      -0.026
                                            (-0.22)         (-0.90)        (-0.38)     (-0.85)
            60+ Days Late (d)               -0.030          -0.125***      -0.043      -0.125***
                                            (-0.97)         (-3.59)        (-1.23)     (-2.78)
            In Foreclosure (d)              0.094**         0.035          0.091***    0.035
                                            (2.03)          (0.66)         (4.81)      (0.80)
            Unemployment Duration           -0.064***                      -0.033***
                                            (-19.54)                       (-11.96)
            Income                          0.000*                         0.000
                                            (1.84)                         (1.16)
            Liquid Assets to Income         -0.004***                      -0.002**
                                            (-2.63)                        (-2.12)

            P-val Coeff. 60+ DL= Co-        0.022365        0.009973       0.008864    0.042883
            eff. Foreclosure

            Observations                    1,587           1,587          1,587       1,587
            Note: t-statistics in parentheses: *** significant at 1%; **
            significant at 5%; * significant at 10% . Demographic con-
            trols include age, sex, marital status, and education.




                                                       51
                             Table 5: Back-End Debt-to-Income Ratios
                          Back-End DTI, 2009 Mortgagor PSID Heads, Non-Self Employed
       p10         p25          p50          p75              p90    Mean        Std. Dev   Obs
       0.09        0.14         0.21         0.33             0.49   0.32        0.97       2416

                   Back-End DTI, Delinquent 2009 Mortgagor PSID Heads, Non-Self Employed
       p10         p25          p50          p75              p90    Mean        Std. Dev   Obs
       0.14        0.23         0.36         0.49             0.83   0.64        2.03       165

Notes: 2009 PSID heads of household. After tax income generated using TAXSIM. Back-end
debt-to-income ratios are taken as ratio of mortgage payments over after-tax income less insurance
expenses, lease outlays, and an imputed unsecured debt service flow equal to 14.31% of the stock of
unsecured debt. In the event that a household had negative income after these adjustments, we dropped
them from the sample, thus understating the burden of mortgage debt.




                             Table 6: Steady State: Targeted Moments
                                    Data             Source             Model                  Parameters
 Homeownership Rate                 43.91%          Census              43.71%                ch   0.23146
 Unemployment Target                6.50%                               6.88%                 αs   6.4642
 Mean Back-End Debt-to-Income       31.70%          2009     PSID,      31.19%                rb   0.004737
 (DTI)                                              NBER TAXSIM
 Fraction of Mortgagors with 0-5%   50.20%          2009 PSID           56.39%              1 − fm   0.2126
 Liquid Assets to Income
 Foreclosure Rate                   8.61%           LPS 2001-2003       9.92%                 fc     0.030283
 Default Rate                       0.45%           LPS 2001-2003       0.77%                 β      0.98728
 60+ Days Late Cure Rate            39.67%          LPS 2001-2003       45.40%                r̄     0.000899
 90 to 60+ Days Late Cure Rate      15.18%          LPS 2001-2003       17.62%                zh     1.8971
 Homeowner Unemployment Rate        6.29%           2009 PSID           6.22%
 Fraction of Defaulters with 0-5%   84.55%          2009 PSID           95.58%
 Liquid Assets to Income
 DTI Defaulting Homeowners          64%             2009   PSID,        59%
                                                    NBER TAXSIM




                                                         52
Table 7: Monthly Job-Finding Rates (Source: Job Finding Rate from CPS and Code from
Shimer [2005], Layoff Rate from JOLTS)
                                                          JF Rate        Layoff Rate
                   2007                                      0.26              1.34
                   2009                                      0.17              1.71
                   Percent Change ‘07 to ‘09                36.5%             27.6%



                 Table 8: Steady State: Wage Bill and Foreclosure Delays

                                                            9-Month       15-Month        24-Month
        Wage Bill Per Capita                                 0.79254        0.79472          0.79542
        Percentage Gain Relative to 9-Month                                  0.28%            0.36%




  Table 9: Foreclosure Transition Rates from ‘In Foreclosure’ to ‘REO’ or ‘Liquidation’
                                     10 Slowest States, 2009-2011
        State                 Legal     Transition Probability 95% CI, LB         95% CI, UB      Obs
                                        FC to Liquidation
        New Jersey          Judicial    0.01                      0.01                0.02       1042
        Delaware            Judicial    0.02                      -0.02               0.05         61
        New York            Judicial    0.02                      0.01                0.03        660
        Hawaii              Judicial    0.02                      -0.01               0.06         82
        Connecticut         Judicial    0.03                       0.00               0.05        197
        Florida             Judicial    0.03                       0.02               0.03       4673
        Maine               Judicial    0.03                       0.00               0.06        100
        Massachusetts      Nonjudicial 0.03                        0.01               0.05        231
        West Virginia      Nonjudicial 0.03                       -0.01               0.07         64
        Louisiana           Judicial    0.03                       0.00               0.06        155

                                     10 Fastest States, 2009-2011
        State                 Legal     Transition Probability 95% CI, LB         95% CI, UB      Obs
                                        FC to Liquidation
        Colorado           Nonjudicial 0.10                       0.06                0.14        218
        Alabama            Nonjudicial 0.10                       0.05                0.15        143
        Missouri           Nonjudicial 0.10                       0.05                0.15        152
        Iowa                Judicial    0.12                      0.05                0.20         73
        Arizona            Nonjudicial 0.12                       0.10                0.15        610
        Alaska             Nonjudicial 0.13                       -0.04               0.29         16
        Georgia            Nonjudicial 0.14                       0.10                0.18        316
        Arkansas           Nonjudicial 0.16                        0.05               0.26         45
        Michigan           Nonjudicial 0.16                       0.12                0.20        343
        New Hampshire      Nonjudicial 0.17                       0.06                0.28         47
        Note: Based on LPS sample of mortgages originated in 2004. Calculated as monthly probability of
        exiting foreclosure into REO or Liquidation over the 2007-2009 time period.




                                                     53
Table 10: Dependent Variable is Employment Indicator. OLS Regression Coefficients Re-
ported. Sample includes states with the 10 lowest and 10 highest foreclosure to liquidation
rates (Source: CPS and LPS)
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
         Slow Foreclosure (d)                       0.005***        0.002       0.004*       0.006***
                                                      (3.12)        (0.96)      (1.79)        (2.63)
         Homeowner (d)                              0.021***      0.075***    0.022***       0.019***
                                                     (14.44)       (30.20)     (11.22)        (8.63)
         Slow Foreclosure (d) x Homeowner (d)       -0.004**     -0.008***     -0.004*        -0.004
                                                     (-2.25)       (-2.64)     (-1.73)        (-1.50)

         Occupation and Industry Controls              Yes          No          Yes            Yes
         Sample Years                               2003-2013    2003-2013   2007-2013      2003-2007

         Observations                                349,319      349,319      200,562       148,757
         R-squared                                    0.755        0.287        0.743         0.772
         Note: t-statistics in parentheses: *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at
         10%. CPS Heads of Household. All regressions include demographic controls such as age, sex,
         marital status, race, and education. Occupation and industry controls include dummies for “major
         occupation” and “major industry”as designated by the CPS.




                                                       54
   APPENDIX: FOR PUBLICATION ONLINE ONLY


11     Data and Image Descriptions

11.1    PSID Composition Correction

PSID Sample: 2009-2011 PSID Core/Immigrant Sample, Working-Age Heads with Mort-
gages (or Previously Had a Mortgage but was Foreclosed Upon).

   When computing employment rates across delinquency status, we must control for com-
position. For example, it may be the case that those who are in foreclosure also work in
lower-paying jobs and therefore have better employment prospects since the labor market is
polarized. We control for basic differences across households in Tables 2 and 3. We estimate
regressions of the basic form


             I(employedt ) = β0 + β1 delinquentt + β2 f oreclosuret + β3 Xt + t .

   The controls Xt include basic demographic controls for age, sex, marital status, and
education as well as income and asset controls, and state level controls for foreclosure pro-
cedures. Table 1 illustrates employment per capita across delinquency status and states for
both years.


11.2    SCF Composition Correction

SCF Sample: 2007-2009 SCF Sample, Working-Age Heads with Mortgages (or Previously
Had a Mortgage but was Foreclosed Upon).

    We follow the same exact procedure with the SCF to correct for composition. Table 4
reports both the OLS (Columns (1) and (2)) and Logit (Columns (3) and (4)) results used
to construct the composition corrected employment per capita by delinquency in the main
text.




                                              55
12     Spousal Employment Patterns

Using the same methodology as Appendix 11, Table 11 illustrates a similar pattern of in-
creasing employment among spouses who are in foreclosure. The dependent variable is an
indicator if the head’s spouse is employed. Columns (1) and (2) include all heads, and
Columns (3) and (4) only include married heads. Column (1) shows that relative to spouses
who have a head of household that is current on the mortgage, spouses who are 90+ days
late are 7.8% less likely to be employed. However, relative to spouses who have a head of
household that is current on the mortgage, spouses in foreclosure are only 1.9% less likely
to be employed. One possible interpretation of these correlations is that both the head and
the spouse seek jobs in order to stave off foreclosure.

Table 11: Spousal Employment Patterns During Delinquency. Dependent variable is employ-
meny indicator of spouse. Columns (1) and (2) include all heads coding all missing spousal
employment statuses as zero, Columns (3) and (4) condition on the head being married
(Source: PSID 2009-2011).
                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)
  30 Days Late (d)                           -0.060**     -0.039      -0.049    -0.028
                                              (-2.12)     (-1.36)     (-1.30)   (-0.75)
  60 Days Late (d)                            -0.003      -0.022       0.007    -0.025
                                              (-0.08)     (-0.59)     (0.11)    (-0.42)
  90+ Days Late (d)                          -0.078**   -0.147***    -0.095** -0.128***
                                              (-2.45)     (-4.67)     (-2.16)   (-2.89)
  In Foreclosure (d)                          -0.019      -0.048      -0.028    -0.064
                                              (-0.52)     (-1.30)     (-0.53)   (-1.18)
  Unemployment Duration (Spouse)            -0.023***               -0.024***
                                              (-7.28)                 (-6.68)
  Unemployment Duration                        0.003                   0.003
                                              (1.25)                  (0.94)

  Married Only                                  N          N           Y             Y
  Demographic and State Controls                Y          N           Y             N
  Observations                                6,383      6,482       4,525         4,590
  Number of id                                3,864      3,927       2,674         2,718
  Note: t-statistics in parentheses: *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *
  significant at 10% . Demographic controls include head age, sex, marital status, and
  education. State controls include recourse and judicial dummies. Sample includes
  2009-2011 PSID mortgagor heads in Columns (1) and (2), and married heads in
  (3) and (4).




                                            56
13        Computational Details, Wage Offer Distribution and
          Aggregate Transition Matrix

We solved the dynamic programming problem by using value function iteration over a discrete
state space. The grid for search effort is evenly spaced over the interval [0,1] with 21 nodes.
The asset grid is evenly spaced over the interval [0,1] with 21 nodes. The grid for wages is
evenly spaced over the interval [.1, 1] with 37 nodes corresponding to the PSID $1 wage bins
illustrated in Table 12.

    The offer distribution is constructed as follows. Let G(w) be the empirical cumulative
distribution function of wages of employed households. The stock of employed workers
earning w or less is given by (1 − u)G(w). Let the grid of wages be given by [w1 , . . . , wK ],
where grid slots are indexed by k. Let pi,j be the probability of transiting from wage i to
wage j next month. In steady state the following relationship must be true:39
                                   X
                     µuF (wk ) +         pj,k (1 − u)G(wj )                  (flows in)
                                   j>k
                         X             
                     −          pk,j + δ (1 − u)G(wk )                      (flows out)
                          j>k

                     =0

Rearranging, the expression for the offer distribution is given below:
                                  P                             P                      
                                 ( j>k pk,j + δ)(1 − u)G(wk ) −      p
                                                                  j>k j,k (1 − u)G(wj )
           F (wk )           =
                                                               µu

We take the empirical acceptance rate µ from Krueger and Mueller [2011] (from Table 6.1b
= (361*.444+417*.738)/(361+417)=.602), we set the unemployment mass to u = .06, and
the job destruction rate is set to 1.4%. In the rigid wage calibration, pl = ph =0, and in the
flexible wage calibration, we take the transition probabilities from SIPP. To make the text
size readable, Table 15 illustrates the transition rates over a coarse wage grid (the fine wage
grid used in the model has a wage bin size of $1 with the same limits from $5 to $40).

    We also constructed the monthly good-times-bad-times transition matrix from business
cycle data on the NBER website; the probability of transiting from good times to bad times
is .0146 and the probability of staying in good times is .9854:
 39
      This condition is approximate and assumes a constant positive probability of accepting any wage drawn.




                                                       57
Figure 15: Coarse Wage Transition Table (Source: SIPP)




                            "                   #
                                0.9854 0.0146
           θT ransition =                           .
                                0.0833 0.9167




                                58
Table 12: Employed Wage Distribution (PSID: 2007, employed working-age heads of house-
hold)
            w=          5       6       7       8       9      10      11      12      13      14
         Frequency   2.21%   1.34%   1.83%   2.11%   3.01%   3.45%   3.20%   4.25%   4.30%   3.80%
            w=         15      16      17      18      19      20      21      22      23      24
         Frequency   4.20%   4.28%   3.73%   3.44%   2.83%   3.38%   2.88%   2.54%   2.67%   2.54%
            w=         25      26      27      28      29      30      31      32      33      34
         Frequency   2.60%   2.22%   1.79%   1.73%   1.52%   1.60%   1.50%   1.73%   1.12%   0.92%
            w=         35      36      37      38      39      40  w > 40
         Frequency   0.98%   1.03%   1.00%   0.67%   0.95%   0.84% 15.82%




                                                     59
14       Theoretical Characterization: Proofs

Restatement of Lemma 6.1: Define ψ(n) = 1 − λF (n) as the degree of default protection
(the probability of not being foreclosed upon). Let θ be constant, let δ be the constant job
destruction rate, and let b be the constant benefit rate. Suppose that the domain of the
household dynamic programming problem is convex and the return function u(c, z) − x(s)
is concave, then the optimal reservation wage wi∗ (b, a, n; θ), i ∈ h, r is increasing in the
                                                                   

degree of protection for any interior points of the state space.

Proof. Consider an unemployed agent that is comparing the options of (i) turning down
a wage draw equal to their reservation wage, i.e. remaining unemployed, and continuing
to default, versus (ii) accepting a wage draw equal to their reservation wage and paying
current. Suppressing the state space, denote the reservation wage w∗ (b) = wi∗ (b, a, n; θ).
Implicitly, the reservation wage depends on the degree of default protection, thus denote
the reservation wage w∗ (b; ψ). Likewise, suppress the states for the value of defaulting
while unemployed U d (b) = U d (b, a, n; θ) as well as paying and being employed W p (w) =
W p (b, a, n; θ). Implicitly, the value of defaulting and being unemployed (U d (b; ψ)) and the
value of paying and being employed (W p (w; ψ)) depend on ψ (however, the value of realized
and completed foreclosure (U f (b)) does not depend on ψ, but rather on recourse enforcement
etc.). By definition, the reservation wage makes the agent indifferent between option (i) and
option (ii):
                           ψU d (b; ψ) + (1 − ψ)U f (b) = W p (w∗ (b, ψ); ψ)

Differentiating,

      ∂U d (b; ψ)                          ∂W p (w; ψ)              ∂w∗ (b; ψ) ∂W p (w; ψ)
  ψ               + U d (b; ψ) − U f (b) =                                    +
         ∂ψ                                   ∂w         w=w∗ (b;ψ)   ∂ψ          ∂ψ                   w=w∗ (b;ψ)
                                           |               {z                } |        {z                     }
                                                     Indirect Effect                          Direct Effect


and rearranging,
                                       d         ∂W p (w∗ (b;ψ);ψ)
                    ∂w∗ (b; ψ)   ψ ∂U ∂ψ
                                       (b;ψ)
                                             −          ∂ψ
                                                                   + U d (b; ψ)   − U f (b)
                               =                      ∂W p (w∗ (b;ψ);ψ)
                                                                                                                (1)
                      ∂ψ
                                                              ∂w


Consider the effect of protection on a newly employed agent that pays current on the mort-
        p  ∗
gage, ∂W (w∂ψ(b;ψ);ψ) . Since the agent is paying, the agent is not at risk of foreclosure. Thus, it
must be the case that ψ matters only in the case that the agent loses their job and then be-




                                                    60
gins defaulting again. This implies that the derivative is bound in a convenient way (assume
for simplicity that benefits are constant):



                   ∂W p (w∗ (b; ψ); ψ)      ∂U d (b; ψ)                        
                                       ≤ βδ ψ            + U d (b; ψ) − U f (b)                  (2)
                          ∂ψ                    ∂ψ

Subbing (2) into (1) and grouping terms,


                                            d                         
                                            ∂U (b;ψ)    d          f
                    ∂w∗ (b; ψ)     (1 − βδ)   ∂ψ
                                                     + U (b; ψ) − U (b)
                               ≥                 ∂W p (w∗ (ψ))
                                                                                    >0
                      ∂ψ
                                                      ∂w

                         d
The value of default ∂U ∂ψ
                         (b;ψ)
                               > 0 is strictly increasing in the degree of default protection, and
                            ∂W p (w∗ (b;ψ))
the value of employment           ∂w
                                            > 0 is strictly increasing in the wage. That the agent
chooses default implies that U (b; ψ) − U f (b) > 0. Thus the inequality holds.
                                  d



     Restatement of Lemma 6.2: Consider a version of the model that satisfies the hy-
pothesis of Lemma 6.1. Under the additional assumptions that the disutility of search is
increasing and strictly convex in search effort, x0 (s) > 0 and x00 (s) > 0 ∀s > 0, and π(s, θ)
is linear in s with ∂π(s, θ)/∂s = αs , then the optimal search effort s∗h (b, a, n; θ) is decreasing
in the degree of protection for any interior point in the state space.

Proof. Suppressing all household states except for unemployment benefits, let s∗ (b; ψ) =
s∗i (b, a, n; θ) i ∈ h, r be the optimal search decision. Implicitly, the search effort depends
                    

on the underlying degree of default protection ψ (see the first order conditions below). The
assumptions in the hypothesis ensure that first order conditions suffice for search effort
decisions. Consider a defaulting homeowner with n ≥ 1, and let U     eh (b; ψ) = U
                                                                                 eh (b, a, n + 1; ψ)
and W   fh (b; ψ) = Wfh (b, a, n + 1; ψ). Differentiating, the optimal search effort is implicitly
given below:

               ∂x(s∗ (b; ψ)) b h
                            =βE − αs U
                                     eh (b; ψ)
                   ∂s
                                                      Z          w̄                        i
                                               ∗
                             + αs Uh (b; ψ)F (w (ψ)) +
                                   e                                      Wh (ŵ; ψ) dF (ŵ)
                                                                          f
                                                                 w∗ (ψ)




                                                61
To characterize the effects of protection on search effort, apply the envelope theorem:

∂ 2 x(s∗ (b; ψ)) ∂s∗ (b; ψ)
                                                                            Z w̄ f
                                h      ∂U
                                        eh (b; ψ)       ∂U
                                                          eh (b; ψ)              ∂ Wh (ŵ; ψ)        i
                            = βE
                              b   − αs            + αs              F (w) +                   dF (ŵ)
      ∂2s           ∂ψ                    ∂ψ                ∂ψ               w      ∂ψ                  w=w∗ (ψ)

                              b − αs ∂ Uh (b; ψ) + αs ∂ Uh (b; ψ) F (w) + ∂ Uh (b; ψ) (1 − F (w))
                                h       e                e                   e                    i
                            < βE
                                          ∂ψ                ∂ψ                  ∂ψ                    w=w∗ (ψ)

                         =0

The last line follows from the inequality below:

                   ∂W
                    fh (w; ψ)      ∂U
                                    eh (w; ψ)   ∂U
                                                 eh (w; ψ)   ∂U
                                                              eh (b; ψ)
              0<              ≤ βδ            <            ≤            ∀w > b
                      ∂ψ              ∂ψ           ∂ψ           ∂ψ

The intuition behind the inequality is that the effect of protection is strongest for those who
are unemployed with low benefits, as one would expect. Since benefits are constant, the
reservation wage is at least the benefit amount, thus for all the wages above the reservation
wage, the above inequality holds.




                                                    62
15      Cash-Out Refinancing

As shown in Figure 16, the cash-out refinancing mortgage market collapsed during the 2007-
2009 recession in the United States. Large declines in home equity along with tightened
lending standards led to the 5 fold reduction in cash out refinancing mortgage volume.

                        Figure 16: Cash-Out Refinancing (Source: LPS)




16      Employment Per Capita among Mortgagors

As shown in Figure 17, the 2007-2009 recession in the United States is marked by a record
number of non-employed mortgagors and a record number of delinquent mortgagors.40 Em-
ployment per capita drops by more than 6 percent between 2007 and 2009 and remains
depressed through 2011 (the last year plotted). The magnitude of this record reduction in
employment per capita is consistent with our model.
  40
     The image includes several data sources including the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) up
to the most recent publicly available survey in 2011, Lender Processing Services Data (LPS) through 2011,
CoreLogic House Price Data through 2011, and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) business




                                                   63
                  Figure 17: Mortgagor Employment Per Capita (PSID)




17       Institutional Details of Foreclosure

This section provides background information on the way mortgage default and foreclosure
typically work. It is important to note that there is considerable variability across servicers
and states as to how they handle foreclosure.

    The order of events in a foreclosure has potential to distort buyers’ incentives to pay
since foreclosure is a slow and relatively predictable process. The usual order of events is as
follows:


   1. Miss payments (30+ days late, Enter Delinquency)

   2. Notice of Default (Enter Foreclosure)

   3. Notice of Sale (1 month prior to foreclosure sale)

   4. Foreclosure Auction (Sheriff Sale)
cycle dates.




                                              64
   5. Eviction

   6. Potential Deficiency Judgment if Sale Price < Remaining Mortgage Balance

   7. Ineligible for government-backed loans for 7 years (see Lowrey [2010]).


    Legally, if a mortgagor breaks the terms of the mortgage, the bank can ask for the entire
debt to be paid immediately. If the mortgagor cannot pay this entire amount, the bank
can foreclose. There are two main types of foreclosures in the United States: judicial and
nonjudicial (see Ghent and Kudlyak [2011] for state classifications). To complete a judicial
foreclosure, the bank that owns the mortgage must sue the person living in the home in
a state court. A judge is required to rule on the case before a foreclosure sale can occur.
A foreclosure sale is called a “sheriff sale.” A non-judicial foreclosure, also known as a
foreclosure by power of sale, allows the bank to sell the house without the court’s approval.
A notice of default explains that the bank intends to sell the property and that if the debt
is not cured, there will be a public auction for the house. A notice of sale is issued 1 month
prior to the foreclosure auction date. If the bank is unable to sell the home in a public
auction, which means “no acceptable bids are made,” or the bank bids for the house itself,
then the house becomes owned by the bank. The term for this is “real estate owned” (REO).

    It is possible to temporarily postpone the foreclosure process by bankruptcy (however
the courts cannot modify loans) or by challenging the banks’ right to the property they are
trying to foreclose upon.41 One component of the recent robo-signing scandal has to do with
the banks’ inability to prove that they had the right of interest in the property.

    Regardless of the foreclosure procedure, each state has laws about recourse and nonre-
course loans. In a state with recourse, selling a home for less than the amount due may
result in a deficiency judgment. Deficiency judgments mandate that the borrower pay the
difference between the sale price and the amount owed on the mortgage. Many mortgages
however are nonrecourse loans, meaning that the bank cannot sue to obtain the assets of
the person who held the mortgage. As a result, in most cases, borrowers are exempt from
deficiency judgments. In California, for instance, the first purchase-money mortgage for a
residential property is a nonrecourse loan. However, the state laws are not entirely uniform
across all mortgages, e.g. all refinanced loans in California are recourse.

       There is also a chance for homeowners to ‘redeem’ their homes after foreclosure if they
  41
   For more on bankruptcy and foreclosure, see Li and White [2009], Luzzetti and Neumuller [2012], and
Mitman [2011]




                                                 65
are able to raise enough money. These redemption periods can last up to a year and vary
by state.




                                          66
