                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      MISPRICING FACTORS

                                         Robert F. Stambaugh
                                              Yu Yuan

                                         Working Paper 21533
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21533


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We are grateful for comments from Lu Zhang as well as from participants at the 2015 China International
Conference in Finance and the 2015 Center for Financial Frictions Conference on Efficiently Inefficient
Markets. We thank Mengke Zhang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Robert F. Stambaugh and Yu Yuan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mispricing Factors
Robert F. Stambaugh and Yu Yuan
NBER Working Paper No. 21533
September 2015
JEL No. G02,G12,G14

                                             ABSTRACT

A four-factor model with two "mispricing" factors, in addition to market and size factors, accommodates
a large set of anomalies better than notable four- and five-factor alternative models. Moreover, our
size factor reveals a small-firm premium nearly twice usual estimates. The mispricing factors aggregate
information across 11 prominent anomalies by averaging rankings within two clusters exhibiting the
greatest co-movement in long-short returns. Investor sentiment predicts the mispricing factors, especially
their short legs, consistent with a mispricing interpretation and the asymmetry in ease of buying versus
shorting. Replacing book-to-market with a single composite mispricing factor produces a better-performing
three-factor model.


Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

Yu Yuan
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Datong Plaza, 211 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai
P.R.China, 200030
yyuan@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
1.      Introduction

Modern finance has long valued models relating expected returns to factor sensitivities. A
virtue of such models is parsimony. Once factors are constructed, the only additional data
required to compute implied expected returns in standard applications are the historical
returns on the assets being analyzed. Moreover, the number of factors has typically been
small. For many years only a single market factor was popular, following the CAPM of
Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965). Fama and French (1993) spurred widespread use of three
factors, motivated by violations of the single-factor CAPM related to firm size and value-
versus-growth measures.

     Numerous studies identify a wide range of anomalies that violate the three-factor model.
Only occasionally, though, does the literature entertain anomalies as additional factors, given
the virtue of parsimony.1 Recently, however, two additional factors have received significant
attention. Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a) propose a four-factor model that combines market
and size factors with two new factors based on investment and profitability. Fama and French
(2015) add somewhat different versions of investment and profitability factors to their earlier
three-factor model (Fama and French (1993)), creating a five-factor model. Both studies
provide theoretical motivations for the new factors: Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a) rely on an
investment-based pricing model, while Fama and French (2015) invoke comparative statics
of a present-value relation. At the same time, it should be noted that both investment and
profitability are two of the numerous anomalies documented earlier in the literature.2 In
subsequent studies, Fama and French (2014) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015b) examine
their models’ abilities to explain other anomalies.

     We also propose two new factors based on anomalies, but we take a different approach.
Clearly an important dimension on which a parsimonious factor model is judged is its ability
to accommodate a wide range of anomalies. Our approach exploits that range when forming
the factors. Rather than construct a factor using stocks’ rankings on a single anomaly
variable, such as investment, we construct a factor by averaging rankings across the set of
11 prominent anomalies examined by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012, 2014, 2015). In
constructing two such factors, we average rankings within two clusters of anomalies whose
   1
     A notable example subsequent to Fama and French (1993) is the momentum anomaly documented by
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), which motivates the frequently used momentum factor proposed by Carhart
(1997).
   2
     Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) and Xing (2008) show that high investment predicts abnormally low
returns, while Fama and French (2006), Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang (2010), and Novy-Marx (2013) show
that high profitability predicts abnormally high returns.


                                                 1
long-short return spreads exhibit the greatest co-movement. We combine these two factors
with market and size factors to obtain a four-factor model. We find that this four-factor
model’s overall ability to accommodate a wide range of anomalies exceeds that of both the
four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a) and the five-factor model of Fama and
French (2015). This conclusion obtains not only within the set of anomalies used to construct
the factors but also for the substantially larger set of 73 anomalies examined previously by
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a, 2015b). Also, if our two new factors are replaced by a single
factor that simply averages rankings across the set of 11 anomalies, rather than within
clusters, the resulting three-factor model substantially outperforms the three-factor model
of Fama and French (1993).

   Our size factor is constructed using stocks least likely to be mispriced, as identified
by the measures used to construct our mispricing factors. Our resulting SMB delivers a
small-firm premium of 46 bps per month over our 1967–2013 sample period, nearly twice
the premium of 25 bps implied by the familiar SMB factor in the Fama-French three-
factor model. Consistent with mispricing exerting less effect on our size factor, the investor
sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006) exhibits significant ability to predict the Fama-
French SMB but not our SMB.

   The basic concepts motivating our approach are that anomalies in part reflect mispricing
and that mispricing has common components across stocks, often characterized as sentiment.
Both concepts are consistent with empirical evidence. A mispricing interpretation is con-
sistent with evidence that anomalies are stronger among stocks for which price-correcting
arbitrage is deterred by greater risks and impediments. The effects of these deterrents are
especially strong among stocks for which the anomaly variables predict negative alphas,
consistent with arbitrage risks and impediments being especially significant in dampening
short selling that would otherwise correct overpricing. See, for example, Stambaugh, Yu, and
Yuan (2015) and Drechsler and Drechsler (2014). A mispricing interpretation of anomalies is
also consistent with the evidence of McLean and Pontiff (2015), who observe that following
an anomaly’s academic publication, there is greater trading activity in the anomaly port-
folios, and anomaly profits decline. Evidence consistent with a common sentiment-related
component of mispricing is provided, for example, by Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Stam-
baugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012). The latter study finds that the short-leg returns for long-short
spreads associated with each of 11 anomalies are significantly lower following a high level of
investor sentiment. By combining information across anomalies, we aim to construct factors
capturing common elements of mispricing.



                                              2
     Factor models can be useful whether expected returns reflect risk or mispricing. Factors
can capture systematic risks for which investors require compensation, or they can capture
common sources of mispricing, such as market-wide investor sentiment. Kozak, Nagel, and
Santosh (2015), for example, emphasize this point. Moreover, there need not be a clean
distinction between mispricing and risk compensation as alternative motivations for factor
models of expected return. For example, DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldman (1990)
explain how fluctuations in market-wide “noise-trader” sentiment create an additional source
of systematic risk for which rational traders require compensation.

     When expected returns reflect mispricing and not just compensation for systematic risks,
some of the mispricing may not be driven by pervasive sentiment factors but may instead be
asset specific. In other words, a correctly specified factor model may not exist, as discussed
for example by Daniel and Titman (1997). In that sense the concept of “mispricing” fac-
tors potentially embeds some inconsistency. On the other hand, mispricing does appear to
exhibit commonality across stocks, as discussed above, and the extent to which our factors
help describe expected returns is an empirical question. A parsimonious factor model that
outperforms feasible alternatives seems useful from a practical perspective, as no model can
be entirely correct.

     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains the construction of our
factors and examines their empirical properties. The resulting four-factor model is compared
to notable alternative factor models in Section 3. Section 4 constructs a single mispricing
factor and compares the resulting three-factor model to the three-factor model of Fama and
French (1993). Section 5 illustrates a shared limitation of the factor models, showing how
they can seem to explain the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle if the role of mispricing is not
considered. Section 6 reviews our conclusions.



2.      Anomalies and Factors

The first factor in our four-factor model is the excess market return. Constructing the
remaining three factors—a size factor and two mispricing factors—involves averaging stocks’
rankings with respect to various anomalies. We use the same 11 anomalies analyzed by
Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012, 2014, 2015). While the number of anomalies used to
construct the factors could be expanded, we use this previously specified set to alleviate
concerns that a different set was chosen to yield especially favorable results for this study.
Appendix A provides brief descriptions of the 11 anomalies: net stock issues, composite

                                               3
equity issues, accruals, net operating assets, asset growth, investment-to-assets, distress,
O-score, momentum, gross profitability, and return on assets.

       Rather than constructing a five-factor model by adding our two mispricing factors to the
three factors of Fama and French (1993), we opt for only four factors. That is, we do not
include a book-to-market factor and instead include only a size factor in addition to the
market and our mispricing factors. Our motivation here is parsimony and the long-standing
recognition that firm size enters many dimensions of asset returns, such as average return,
volatility, liquidity, and sensitivities to macroeconomic conditions.3


2.1.       The Mispricing Factors

The initial step in constructing the mispricing factors is to separate the 11 anomalies into
two clusters. Identifying an anomaly requires a benchmark model. As Stambaugh, Yu, and
Yuan (2012) explain, the 11 prominent anomalies that we use here are shown in the literature
to have average long-short return spreads that violate the three-factor model of Fama and
French (1993). We maintain that model as the benchmark when estimating comovement of
the anomaly returns for the purpose of forming clusters. To form clusters, for each anomaly
i we first compute the spread, Ri,t, between the value-weighted returns in month t on stocks
in the first and tenth NYSE deciles of the ranking variable in a sort at the end of month t − 1
of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks with share prices greater than $5, where the ordering
produces a positive estimated intercept in the regression

                         Ri,t = αi + bi MKTt + ci SMBt + di HMLt + ui,t ,                               (1)

and MKTt, SMBt , and HMLt are the market, size, and value factors constructed by Fama
and French (1993).4 Next we compute the correlation matrix of the estimated residuals in
equation (1). Our sample period runs from January 1967 through December 2013, except
data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and data for the return-on-assets
   3
     For example, see Banz (1981) on average return, Amihud and Mendelson (1989) on volatility and liq-
uidity, and Chan, Chen, and Hsieh (1985) on sensitivities to macroeconomic conditions.
   4
     For the anomaly variables requiring Compustat data from annual financial statements, we require at
least a four-month gap between the end of month t − 1 and the end of the fiscal year. When using quarterly
reported earnings, we use the most recent data for which the reporting date provided by Compustat (item
RDQ) precedes the end of month t − 1. When using quarterly items reported from the balance sheet, we use
those reported for the quarter prior to quarter used for reported earnings. The latter treatment allows for
the fact that a significant number of firms do not include include balance-sheet information with earnings
announcements and only later release it in 10-Q filings (see Chen, DeFond, and Park (2002)). For anomalies
requiring return and market capitalization, we use data recorded for month t − 1 and earlier, as reported by
CRSP.


                                                     4
anomaly begin in November 1971. To deal with the heterogeneous starting dates, we compute
the correlation matrix using the maximum likelihood estimator analyzed by Stambaugh
(1997). Using this correlation matrix, we form two clusters by applying the same procedure
as Ahn, Conrad, and Dittmar (2009), who combine a correlation-based distance measure
with the clustering method of Ward (1963). The first cluster of anomalies includes net stock
issues, composite equity issues, accruals, net operating assets, asset growth, and investment
to assets; the second cluster includes distress, O-score, momentum, gross profitability, and
return on assets.

      We next average a stock’s rankings with respect to the available anomaly measures within
each of the two clusters. Thus, each month a stock has two composite mispricing measures,
P 1 and P 2. Our averaging of anomaly rankings closely follows the approach of Stambaugh,
Yu, and Yuan (2015), who construct a single composite mispricing measure by averaging
across all 11 anomalies.5

      We construct the mispricing factors by applying a 2 × 3 sorting procedure resembling
that of Fama and French (2015). The approach in that study generalizes the approach in
Fama and French (1993), and a similar procedure is applied in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a).
Specifically, each month we sort NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks (excluding those with
prices less than $5) by size (equity market capitalization) and split them into two groups
using the NYSE median size as the breakpoint. Independently, we sort all stocks by P 1
and assign them to three groups using as breakpoints the 20th and 80th percentiles of the
combined NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ universe. We similarly assign stocks to three groups
according to sorts on P 2. To construct the first mispricing factor, UMO1 (underpriced minus
overpriced), we compute value-weighted returns on each of the four portfolios formed by the
intersection of the two size categories with the top and bottom categories for P 1. The value
of UMO1 for a given month is then the simple average of the returns on the two low-P 1
portfolios (underpriced stocks) minus the average of the returns on the two high-P 1 portfolios
(overpriced stocks). The second mispricing factor, UMO2 , is similarly constructed from the
low- and high-P 2 portfolios.

      One might note that for the breakpoints of P 1 and P 2, we use the 20th and 80th per-
centiles of the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ, rather than the 30th and 70th percentiles of the
NYSE, used by the studies cited above that apply a similar procedure to different variables.
These modifications reflect the notion that relative mispricing in the cross-section is likely
  5
    Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) also report a robustness exercise that employs a clustering approach
similar to that reported above.



                                                  5
to be more a property of the extremes than of the middle. Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015)
find, for example, that the negative (positive) effects of idiosyncratic volatility for overpriced
(underpriced) stocks are consistent with the role of arbitrage risk deterring the correction
of mispricing, and those authors show that such effects occur primarily in the extremes of a
composite mispricing measure and are stronger for smaller stocks. Subsection 3.3 explains
that our main results are robust to the various deviations we take from the more conventional
factor-construction methodology tracing to Fama and French (1993). Appendix B reports
detailed results of those robustness checks.


2.2.       The Size Factor

When constructing our size factor, we depart more significantly from the approach in Fama
and French (2015) and other studies cited above. The stocks we use to form the size factor in
a given month are the stocks not used in forming either of the mispricing factors. Specifically,
to construct our size factor, SMB (small minus big—that we keep), we compute the return
on the small-cap leg as the value-weighted portfolio of stocks present in the intersection of
both small-cap middle groups when sorting on P 1 and P 2. Similarly, the large-cap leg is
the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the intersection of the large-cap middle groups in
the sorts on the mispricing measures. The value of SMB in a given month is the return on
the small-cap leg minus the large-cap return.

      Each 2 × 3 sort on size and one of the mispricing measures produces six categories, so
in total twelve categories result from the sorts using each of the two mispricing measures.
If we were to follow the more familiar approach of Fama and French (2015) and others, we
would compute SMB as the simple average of the value-weighted returns on the six small-
cap portfolios minus the corresponding average of returns on the six large-cap portfolios. By
averaging across the three mispricing categories, that approach would seek to neutralize the
effects of mispricing when computing the size factor. The problem is that such a neutraliza-
tion can be thwarted by arbitrage asymmetry—a greater ability or willingness to buy than
to short for many investors. With such asymmetry, the mispricing within the overpriced
category is likely to be more severe than the mispricing within the underpriced category.
Moreover, this asymmetry is likely to be greater for small stocks than for large ones, given
that small stocks present potential arbitrageurs with greater risk (e.g., idiosyncratic volatil-
ity).6 Thus, simply averaging across mispricing categories would not neutralize the effects of
mispricing, and the resulting SMB would have an overpricing bias. This bias is a concern
  6
      See Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) for supporting evidence.


                                                    6
not just when sorting on our mispricing measures but when sorting on any measure that is
potentially associated with mispricing. Some studies argue that book-to-market, for exam-
ple, contains a mispricing effect (e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)), so one might
raise a similar concern in the context of the version of SMB computed by Fama and French
(1993). By instead computing SMB using stocks only from the middle of our mispricing
sorts, avoiding the extremes, we aim to reduce this effect of arbitrage asymmetry.

   Consistent with the above argument, our approach delivers a small-cap premium that
significantly exceeds not only the value produced by the above alternative method but also
the small-cap premium implied by the version of SMB in the three-factor model of Fama and
French (1993). For our sample period of January 1967 through December 2013, our SMB
factor has an average of 46 bps per month. In contrast, the alternative method discussed
above gives an SMB with an average of 28 bps, close to the average of 25 bps for the
three-factor Fama-French version of SMB. The differences between our estimated small-cap
premium and these alternatives are significant not only statistically (t-statistics: 3.99 and
4.19) but economically as well, indicating a size premium that is nearly twice that implied by
the familiar Fama-French version of SMB. This result is similar to the conclusion of Asness,
Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2015), who find that the size premium becomes
substantially greater when controlling for other stock characteristics potentially associated
with mispricing. Those authors conclude that explaining a significant size premium presents
a challenge to asset pricing theory. Such a challenge is beyond the scope of our study as
well. Even though the size premium is a fundamentally important quantity, our comparison
below of factor models’ abilities to explain anomalies is not sensitive to the method used
to construct the size factor. (We present further discussion and evidence of this point in
subsection 3.3 and in Appendix B.)


2.3.    Factor Betas, Arbitrage Asymmetry, and Sentiment Effects

Table 1 gives parameter estimates from our four-factor model for the individual long-short
strategies based on the anomaly measures used above as well as book-to-market. Panel A
contains the alphas and factor sensitivities (“betas”) of the long-short spreads between the
value-weighted portfolios of stocks in the long leg (bottom decile) and short leg (top decile).
Panel B gives corresponding estimates for the long legs, and Panel C reports estimates for
the short legs. The breakpoints are based on NYSE deciles, but all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ




                                              7
stocks with share prices of at least $5 are included.7 For anomalies in the first cluster, the
long-short betas on the first mispricing factor, UMO1 , are positive with t-statistics between
6.09 and 18.12, whereas the same anomalies’ long-short betas on the second factor, UMO2 ,
are uniformly lower and have t-statistics of mixed signs that average just 1.27. Similarly, for
anomalies in the second cluster, the long-short betas on UMO2 are positive with t-statistics
between 5.02 and 24.10, while the betas on UMO1 have mixed-sign t-statistics averaging
−0.17. These results confirm that averaging anomaly rankings within a cluster produces
a factor that captures common variation in returns for the anomalies in that cluster. Not
surprisingly, for each anomaly with respect to its corresponding factor, the short-leg beta
is significantly negative and the long-leg beta is significantly positive, with the long leg for
accruals being the only exception.

      Also observe in Table 1 that the short-leg betas are generally larger in absolute magnitude
than their long-leg counterparts. With the first-cluster anomalies, for example, the average
short-leg UMO1 beta is −0.46, whereas the average long-leg UMO1 beta is 0.20. Similarly,
for the second-cluster anomalies, the short-leg UMO2 betas average −0.49 as compared to
0.30 for the long legs. If the factors indeed capture systematic components of mispricing, a
greater short-leg sensitivity is consistent with the arbitrage asymmetry discussed above. This
arbitrage asymmetry leaves more uncorrected overpricing than uncorrected underpricing,
implying greater sensitivity to systematic mispricing for overpriced (short-leg) stocks than
for uncerpriced (long-leg) stocks.

      Arbitrage asymmetry is also consistent with the relation between investor sentiment and
anomaly returns. For each of the anomalies we use to construct our factors, Stambaugh, Yu,
and Yuan (2012) observe that the short leg of the long-short anomaly spread is significantly
more profitable following high investor sentiment, whereas the long-leg profits are less sensi-
tive to sentiment. We observe similar sentiment effects for our factors. Table 2 reports the
results of regressing each factor as well as its long and short legs on the previous month’s
level of the investor sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006). The slope coefficients
on both the long and short legs are uniformly negative, consistent with sentiment effects,
but the slopes for the short legs are two to three times larger in magnitude. The short-leg
coefficients for the two factors are nearly identical, as are the t-statistics of −2.06 and −2.05.
The long-leg t-statistics, in contrast, are just −0.98 and −1.29.

      The stronger sentiment effects for the short legs are consistent with sentiment-driven
  7
    NYSE breakpoints are also used, for example, by Fama and French (2014) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015a).



                                                 8
mispricing coupled with arbitrage asymmetry, as Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) explain.
Given that many investors are less willing or able to short stocks than to buy them, over-
pricing resulting from high investor sentiment gets corrected less by arbitrage than does
underpricing resulting from low sentiment. The significantly positive t-statistics in Table 2
for the sentiment sensitivity of each long-short difference (i.e., each mispricing factor) con-
firm the greater sentiment effect on the short-leg returns. Overall, the long-short asymmetry
in factor betas (Table 1) and sentiment effects (Table 2) is consistent with a mispricing
interpretation of our factors.

     Sentiment does not exhibit much ability to predict our size factor. In Table 2, the t-
statistic is −1.60 for the slope coefficient when regressing the long-short spread (SMB) on
lagged sentiment, and the t-statistics for the long and short legs (small and large firms) are
−1.72 and −1.17. If sentiment affects prices, then periods of high (low) sentiment are likely
to be followed by especially low (high) returns on overpriced (underpriced) stocks, especially
among smaller stocks, which are likely to be more susceptible to mispricing. Baker and
Wurgler (2006) report evidence consistent with this hypothesis, which implies a negative
relation between lagged sentiment and the return on a spread that is long small stocks and
short large stocks—if mispriced stocks are included, especially in the small-stock leg. The
lack of a significant relation between our SMB factor and sentiment suggests some success
in our attempt to avoid mispriced stocks when constructing the factor. In contrast, for
example, sentiment does exhibit a significant ability to predict the familiar SMB factor
from the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993). The slope coefficient is nearly 50%
greater in magnitude (−0.32 versus −0.22) and has a t-statistic of −2.31. In fact, the t-
statistic for the difference in slopes of −0.10 is −1.68, which is significant at the 5% level for
the one-tailed test implied by the alternative hypothesis that our SMB factor is less affected
by mispricing.



3.      Comparing Factor Models

Fama and French (2014) explore the ability of the five-factor model of Fama and French
(2015) to accommodate various return anomalies. Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015b) compare
that model to the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a) by investigating the two
models’ abilities to explain a range of anomalies. We evaluate our four-factor model relative
to both of those models, also including the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993) in




                                                9
the comparison as a familiar benchmark.8 In subsection 3.1, we compare the models’ relative
abilities to explain a range of individual anomalies, both the set of 12 anomalies examined
in Table 1 as well as the substantially wider set of 73 anomalies analyzed by Hou, Xue,
and Zhang (2015a, 2015b). Subsection 3.2 then reports pairwise model comparisons that
evaluate each model’s ability to explain factors present in another. Results of robustness
investigations are summarized in subsectin 3.3 (with details reported in Appendix B).


3.1.       Comparing models’ abilities to explain anomalies

Table 3 reports alphas from the various factor models for each of the 12 anomalies in Table
1. For convenience, we denote the factor models as follows:

           FF-3: three-factor model of Fama and French (1993)

           FF-5: five-factor model of Fama and French (2015)

             q-4: four-factor “q-factor” model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a)

            M-4: four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced here

For each anomaly, we construct the difference between the value-weighted monthly return on
stocks ranked in the bottom decile and the return on those in the top decile. (The highest
rank corresponds to the lowest three-factor Fama-French (1993) alpha.) We then use each
long-short return as the dependent variable in 12 regressions of the form
                                                      X
                                                      K
                                        Ri,t = αi +         βi,j Fj,t + ui,t ,              (2)
                                                      j=1

where the Fj,t’s are the K factors in a given model. Panel A reports the estimated αi ’s for
each model. Also reported (first column) are the averages of the Ri,t ’s. Panel B reports the
corresponding t-statistics.

      The alternative models—FF-3, FF-5, and q-4—exhibit at best only modest ability to ac-
commodate the anomalies. Consistent with having been identified as anomalies with respect
to the FF-3 model, the first 11 produce FF-3 alphas that are significant both economically
and statistically. The monthly alphas range from 0.32% (asset growth) to 1.59% (momen-
tum), and the t-statistics range from 2.83 to 5.70. Model FF-5 lowers all but one of the
FF-3 alphas for the first 11 anomalies, but only the alpha for asset growth—essentially the
investment factor in FF-5—drops to insignificance (0.06%, t-statistic: 0.58). Ten alphas
  8
      We are grateful to all of these authors for providing time series of their factors.


                                                        10
remain economically and statistically significant, ranging from 0.32% (net stock issues) to
1.35% (momentum), with the t-statistics ranging from 2.29 to 4.12. Model q-4 does a some-
what better job than FF-5. Asset growth—also essentially the investment factor in q-4—is
similarly accommodated, while the alphas on three additional anomalies—distress, momen-
tum, and return on assets—drop to levels insignificant from at least a statistical perspective
(t-statistics ranging from 0.72 to 1.40). At the same time, though, seven anomalies have
both economically and statistically significant q-4 alphas ranging from 0.32% (investment to
assets) to 0.65% (accruals), with t-statistics ranging from 2.50 to 4.30.

    Model M-4, true to its intent, does the best job of accommodating the anomalies. Of the
nine positive M-4 alphas, all but one are lower than any of the corresponding alphas for the
other models. The sole exception is return on assets, for which model q-4 produces a smaller
alpha (0.10% versus 0.27%)—unsurprising given that model q-4 includes a profitability fac-
tor. Only two of the M-4 t-statistics exceed 2.0 (a third has a t-statistic of 1.90). The alphas
for asset growth and distress flip to negative values in model M-4 (with t-statistics of −1.96
and −1.03).

    Table 4 compares the models on several measures that summarize abilities to accom-
modate the set of anomaly long-short spreads: average absolute alpha, average absolute
t-statistic of alpha, the number of anomalies for which the model produces the lowest ab-
solute alpha among the four models being compared, and the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken
(1989) “GRS” test of whether all alphas equal zero.9 Panel A reports these measures for
the set of 12 anomalies examined above. Because two of the anomaly series start at later
dates than the others, as noted earlier, we compute two versions of the GRS test. The
first, denoted GRS10 , uses the ten anomalies with full-length histories. The second, GRS12 ,
uses all of the anomalies for the shorter sample period with complete data on all 12. The
relative performance of the models is consistent across all of the summary measures. For
each measure, we see M-4 performs best, followed in decreasing order of performance by q-4,
FF-5, and FF-3. (The values in the first column correspond to a zero-factor model, with
alphas equal to average excess returns.) The average absolute alpha of 0.18% for M-4 is
   9
     For T time-series observations on the N long-short spreads and the K factors, define the multivariate
regression R = XΘ + U, where R and U are T × N , X is T × (K + 1) and Θ is (K + 1) × N . The first
column of X contains ones, and the remaining K columns contain the factors. The least-squares estimator is
Θ̂ = (X 0 X)−1 X 0 R, where the first row of Θ̂, transposed to a column vector, is the N × 1 vector α̂. Compute
                                                               1
the unbiased residual covariance-matrix estimator, Σ̂ = T −K−1     (R − X Θ̂)0 (R − X Θ̂), and let ω1,1 denote the
1,1 element of (X 0 X)−1 . Then
                                                T − N − K 0 −1
                                        F =                  α̂ Σ̂ α̂/ω1,1
                                              N (T − K − 1)
has an F distribution with degrees of freedom N and T − N − K.


                                                       11
about half of the next best value of 0.34%, achieved by q-4, and slightly more than a third
of the 0.45% value for FF-5. The average absolute t-statistics follow a similar pattern, with
M-4 having an average of only 1.29, compared to values of 2.34 and 2.93 for q-4 and FF-5.
For nine of the anomalies, model M-4 achieves the lowest absolute alpha, compared to two
anomalies for model q-4, one for FF-5, and none for FF-3. The GRS tests, if judged by the
p-values, deliver perhaps the sharpest differences between M-4 and the other models. For
example, for M-4 the GRS10 test produces a p-value of 0.05. In other words, at a significance
level of 5% or less, the test does not reject the hypothesis that all ten full-sample anomalies
are accommodated by this four-factor model. In contrast, the corresponding p-value is only
0.00000001 for q-4 and just 0.0000000007 for FF-5. For the GRS12 test the M-4 p-value is
0.03, but the p-values for q-4 and FF-5 are just 0.000008 and 0.000006.

   We also examine a substantially larger set of anomalies. Panels B and C of Table 4 report
the same measures as Panel A but for the 73 anomalies examined by Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015a, 2015b). Those authors construct two sets of long-short returns for each anomaly.
The first set, analyzed in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), uses NYSE deciles as the breakpoints
for allocating stocks in forming value-weighted portfolios. The second set, constructed in
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015b), excludes stocks with market capitalizations below the NYSE
20th percentile and then uses deciles of the remaining NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ universe to
form equally weighted portfolios.10

    Panel B of Table 4 reports results for the first set of long-short spreads for the 73 anoma-
lies. Here again we compute two GRS tests, one with the 51 anomalies whose data begin by
January 1967, and another with the 72 anomalies with data beginning by February 1986.11
The relative performance of the three models is the same as for the smaller set of anomalies
analyzed in Panel A: model M-4 performs best, followed in order by q-4, FF-5, and FF-3.
While the margin between M-4 and q-4 narrows somewhat, M-4 again has a smaller absolute
alpha (0.18 versus 0.20) and a smaller absolute t-statistic (0.99 versus 1.15), and M-4 pro-
duces lower absolute alphas for nearly twice as many anomalies (37 versus 19). Model M-4
again does better on the GRS test as well. For the test with the set of full-sample anomalies,
GRS51 delivers p-value for model M-4 of 0.10, failing to reject the hypothesis that all 51
anomalies are accommodated by the model. In contrast, the corresponding q-4 p-value is
0.003.
  10
    We are grateful to the authors for generously providing us with both sets of these data.
  11
    The reason for using only 72 anomalies instead of 73 is that the data for one anomaly, corporate
governance (G), are available only from September 1990 through December 2006, so we exclude it to avoid
substantially shortening the sample period for the GRS tests.




                                                  12
   Panel C of Table 4 reports results using the second set of 73 long-short spreads. Models
q-4 and M-4 are closer here, but model M-4 again produces the lowest average absolute alpha
(0.22 versus 0.23) and average absolute t-statistic (1.38 versus 1.44), and it achieves a lower
absolute alpha on more anomalies (32 versus 23). The GRS statistics are very close, with
each of models q-4 and M-4 doing slightly better on one of the two. Both models again enjoy
substantial margins over FF-5 and FF-3.

   Given that model q-4 is the closest competitor to model M-4 in Table 4, we also consider
a modified challenge. Specifically, we reduce the set of 73 anomalies by excluding those
most highly correlated with the factors in these two models. For each of four factors—those
in models q-4 and M-4 other than the market and size factors—the five anomalies whose
long-short returns are most highly correlated with the factor are eliminated. This procedure
could eliminate up to 20 anomalies, but somewhat fewer are actually eliminated due to some
overlap across factors. (The anomalies eliminated are detailed in Appendix A.)

   When using the first set of 73 long-short returns analyzed in Panel B of Table 4, 16
anomalies are eliminated, and the results using the remaining 57 are reported in Panel A of
Table 5. For the second set of long-short returns analyzed in Panel C of Table 4, 19 anomalies
are eliminated, and Panel B of Table 5 presents results for the remaining 54 anomalies. The
results in Table 5 deliver essentially the same message as those in Table 4, though the margin
of M-4 over q-4 increases a bit. In Panel A of Table 5, as compared to Panel B of Table 4,
the gap widens for the average absolute t-statistic. In addition, M-4 produces p-values for
the GRS statistic of 0.13 and 0.01, whereas those for q-4 are less than 0.01.

   For the second set of 73 anomalies, in Panel B of Table 5, as compared to Panel C of
Table 4, the gaps for the average absolute alpha and t-statistic widen slightly, while the
GRS statistics for q-4 and M-4 are again close, with the latter slightly better on the set
of 40 anomalies with longer histories and the former slightly better on the set of 53 with
shorter histories. In the head-to-head comparison of q-4 and M-4 shown in the last row, M-4
produces the smallest alpha for 33 of the 54 anomalies, compared to 21 for q-4. As before,
the margin of M-4 over q-4 is generally smaller than the margin of q-4 over FF-5 and FF-3.

   Two additional four-factor models are used in a number of studies. The model of Carhart
(1997), MOM-4, adds a momentum factor to FF-3, while the model of Pástor and Stambaugh
(2003), LIQ-4, adds a liquidity factor. Table 6 reports the results of including these additional
four-factor models in the same comparisons summarized in Table 4. (The sample period be-
gins a year later, in January 1968, which is the initial month for the Pástor-Stambaugh liq-
uidity factor.) Including a liquidity factor barely improves, at best, the three-factor model’s

                                               13
ability to explain anomalies. In Panel A, using 12 anomalies, the average |α|, average |t|,
and GRS10 statistic for LIQ-4 are slightly lower than those for FF-3, but the GRS12 statistic
is higher. In Panels B and C, the results are similarly mixed. This outcome is perhaps
unsurprising, as LIQ-4 is the only model of the six considered here whose additional factor is
not formed by ranking on a characteristic producing a return anomaly in an earlier study.12
The improvement over FF-3 produced by MOM-4 is greater than what LIQ-4 produces, but
the ability to explain anomalies falls short of that for M-4, q-4, and, generally, FF-5.


3.2.     Comparing models’ abilities to explain each other’s factors

We next investigate whether the factors unique to one model produce non-zero alphas with
respect to another model. That is, we explore the extent to which one model can price the
factors of the other. Panel A of Table 7 reports the alphas and corresponding t-statistics for
(i) the FF-5 factors HML (book-to-market), RMW (profitability), and CMA (investment),
(ii) the q-4 factors I/A (investment) and ROE (profitability), and (iii) the M-4 factors
UMO1 and UMO2 . For each of these three sets, Panel B reports the GRS statistic and
p-value testing whether all of the alphas with respect to an alternative model jointly equal
zero.

   Both models q-4 and M-4 appear to price fairly well the three FF-5 factors—HML,
RMW , and CMA. Those factor produce M-4 alphas of 0.11 or less in absolute magnitude,
with t-statistics of 1.35 or less in magnitude. The GRS p-value equals 0.58 for the test of
whether all three M-4 alphas for HML, RMW , and CMA equal zero. The q-4 model does
even better with the FF-5 factors, producing alphas less than 0.04% in magnitude and a
GRS p-value of 0.87. This latter result seems not so surprising, given that q-4 contains just
different versions of the profitability and investment factors in FF-5.

   The FF-5 model fails to price the factors of model M-4 and, somewhat suprisingly, even
the factors of model q-4. The FF-5 alphas for the two q-4 factors (I/A and ROE) are 0.12%
and 0.45%, with t-statistics of 3.48 and 5.53; the GRS p-value for the joint test is less than
10−8 . The FF-5 alphas for the two M-4 factors are even larger, 0.33% and 0.64%, with
t-statistics of 4.93 and 4.17; the GRS p-value for the joint test is less than 10−10 . Overall,
the FF-5 model fares least well in the comparisons reported in Table 7.
  12
    The Pástor-Stambaugh (2003) factor is constructed by ranking stocks on their betas with respect to a
market-wide liquidity measure. Such betas were previously unexamined in the literature, and as Pástor and
Stambaugh explain, they are quite distinct, both conceptually and empirically, from measures of individual
stock liquidity. The latter have also been related to average returns (e.g., Amihud and Mendelson (1989)).


                                                   14
   The comparison of models q-4 and M-4 in Table 7 provides a more even match in which
M-4 finishes modestly ahead. Model M-4 is unable to price the ROE factor of model q-4; the
alpha estimate is 0.36% with a t-statistic of 4.00. This significant alpha for the profitability
factor of model q-4 seems consistent with the fact that the ROA profitability anomaly is one
of the few anomalies in Table 3 not well accommodated by model M-4. The other q-4 factor
seems not to present a big problem for M-4, as the alpha estimate for I/A is only 0.09%
with a t-statistic of 1.57. In contrast, neither factor of model M-4 is priced by model q-4.
The alpha estimates are 0.36% and 0.35%, with t-statistics of 4.54 and 2.24. The GRS tests
confirm that neither q-4 nor M-4 can price both factors of the other model, as the p-values
are small. At the same time, the rejection is more extreme for model q-4, given its GRS
statistic is 72% larger (and the degrees of freedom are the same in both tests).

   In sum, model FF-5 accommodates neither the factors of model q-4 nor those of model
M-4. In contrast, both of those models appear to price the FF-5 factors, in that the latter
factors do not have significant alphas with respect to either model. Models q-4 and M-4 are
more evenly matched, as each fails to price all of the other’s factors. Model M-4 appears to
have the edge, though, in that it accommodates one of the two factors in model q-4 fairly
well, whereas the latter model fails to price either of the factors in model M-4.


3.3.    Robustness

As discussed earlier, a number of the methodological choices we make when constructing
our factors deviate somewhat from conventions that originate with Fama and French (1993)
and are adopted in later studies such as Fama and French (2015) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015a). None of these choices are crucial to our model’s relative performance in explaining
anomalies and the other models’ factors. For example, because we believe that the extremes
of our mispricing measure best identify mispricing, we use breakpoints of 20% and 80%
rather than the conventional 30% and 70%. If we recompute Tables 4, 5, and 7 using 30%
and 70%, however, our conclusions remain unchanged. Model M-4 maintains its edge over
model q-4 and continues to outperform model FF-5 by a substantial margin. The same holds
true if we apply the 20% and 80% breakpoints to just the NYSE universe, instead of to the
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ universe that covers a broader range of the mispricing scores. The
results in Tables 4, 5, and 7 are also not affected much by replacing our SMB, which uses
only stocks in the middle category of the mispricing-score rankings, with the more standard
version that averages returns across all three categories. If we make all of the above changes
simultaneously, again the model comparisons do not change materially. Appendix B reports

                                              15
all of these results.

   In cases where annual data are used to construct factors in model FF-3 of Fama and
French (1993), model FF-5 of Fama and French (2015), and model q-4 of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), the authors of those studies require a gap after the end of the fiscal year of at
least 6 months and potentially up to 18 months. When using annual data, we instead require
a gap of at least 4 months, following precedent in the accounting literature (e.g., Hirshleifer,
Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004). Thus, one potential source of performance differences between
our model, M-4, and models FF-5 and q-4 is this difference in timing used to contruct factors.
To explore this possibility, we reconstruct the factors SMB and HML in model FF-3, SMB,
HML, RMW , and CMA in model FF-5, and I/A in model q-4, which rely on annual data,
by imposing the minimum gap of 4 months for information from annual statements, while
using immediate prior-month values of market capitalization. Again our key results—Tables
4, 5, and 7—are not very sensitive to modifying models FF-5 and q-4 in that fashion.
Appendix B reports these results as well.

     We also investigate the stability of our results by splitting our overall 47-year period
into two subperiods: 1967–1990 (24 years) and 1991–2013 (23 years). First, each of the 11
anomalies we use to construct the factors produces positive long-short FF-3 alphas in both
subperiods. In the earlier subperiod, the t-statistics for the long-short alphas range from
1.5 to 5.4 across the 11 anomalies and average 3.4. In the later subperiod, the t-statistics
range from 1.2 to 5.0 and again average 3.4. Second, in each subperiod, the assignment of
anomalies to the two clusters is identical to that of the overall period. Finally, the superiority
of model M-4, as indicated by the results Table 4, as well as the superiority of model M-3, as
indicated by Table 8, is supported consistently across both subperiods. Appendix B reports
the results of these model comparisons in each subperiod.



4.      An Alternative Three-Factor Model

It is not surprising that FF-3, the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), does
not accommodate anomalies as well as the models with four or five factors. One could
argue that a fairer comparison would be FF-3 versus an alternative three-factor model. We
construct the latter, denoted as M-3, by replacing the two mispricing factors in M-3 with
a single mispricing factor. We construct this single factor in a manner similar to the two
factors it replaces. The main difference is that, instead of separating the 11 anomalies into
two groups, we simply average each stock’s rankings across all 11 anomalies. We then use

                                               16
this mispricing measure, along with firm size, to construct a size factor and a mispricing
factor, applying a 2 × 3 sorting procedure similar to that used by Fama and French (1993)
to construct SMB and HML, with the deviations explained earlier. That is, SMB is
constructed using only stocks in the middle mispricing category, as opposed to averaging
across all three categories. Also, the mispricing-measure breakpoints are the 20th and 80th
percentiles of NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ, rather than the 30th and 70th percentiles of the
NYSE. None of the results are sensitive to these deviations, however.

     Table 8 compares models FF-3 and M-3 using the same measures reported in Table 4.
Model M-3, with the single mispricing factor, dominates FF-3 on all of the measures. In
Panel A, model FF-3’s average |α| is more than twice as large as that of model M-3 (67 versus
28 bps), and the FF-3 value of GRS12 is also more than twice as large. Model M-3 produces
a smaller |α| for 11 of the 12 anomalies. For the wider range of 73 anomalies analyzed in
Panels B and C, M-3 also dominates FF-3 by a substantial margins on all measures. When
using value-weighted portfolios formed on NYSE breakpoints, model M-3 produces the lower
absolute alpha for 55 of the 73 anomalies (Panel B). With equally weighted portfolios formed
using NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ breakpoints while excluding microcaps, model M-4 produces
the smaller alpha for 58 of the anomalies (Panel C). It appears that replacing book-to-market
with a composite mispricing measure delivers a three-factor model with substantially greater
ability to accommodate a wide range of anomalies.



5.      Arbitrage Risk and the Factor Models

Idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) represents risk for arbitrageurs seeking to exploit mispricing
(e.g., Pontiff (2006)). IVOL also presents a return anomaly, in that stocks with high (low)
IVOL have negative (positive) alphas with respect to the CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and
Lintner (1965) as well as the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993). (See, for
example, Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006).) Some of the models with additional
factors appear to explain this IVOL anomaly, but as we show below, such results prove
illusory when recognizing that IVOL represents arbitrage risk.

     As explained by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015), since higher IVOL implies greater
arbitrage risk, mispricing should get corrected less among stocks with high IVOL. Among
overpriced stocks, the relation between IVOL and alpha should therefore be negative, as
arbitrage eliminates less overpricing in high-IVOL stocks. Among underpriced stocks, the
relation between IVOL and alpha should be positive, as less underpricing is eliminated

                                             17
in high-IVOL stocks. With arbitrage asymmetry, however, the negative relation among
overpriced stocks should be stronger, resulting in the overall negative relation between alpha
and IVOL—the IVOL anomaly. Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) report results consistent
with these predictions. Panel A of Table 9 essentially repeats their analysis with just a
slightly longer sample period. As in that study, stocks are sorted independently with respect
to IVOL and a mispricing measure that averages the rankings for the 11 anomalies.13 We
obtain similar results. The last row of Panel A displays the familiar negative relation between
IVOL and FF-3 alpha, and the negative IVOL effect among overpriced stocks is stronger
than the positive relation among underpriced stocks.

    Panel B of Table 9 repeats the analysis, using the same mispricing and IVOL rankings
as in Panel A, but with alphas computed with respect to FF-5. The negative IVOL-alpha
relation among the overpriced stocks is stronger than the positive relation among the under-
priced stocks. Thus the overall IVOL-alpha relation in the bottom row of the panel is again
negative, though it is substantially weaker than in Panel A. In the latter case the difference
between the highest and lowest IVOL portfolio alphas is −81 bps per month (t-statistic:
−6.04), as compared to the corresponding value in Panel B of −33 bps (t-statistic: −2.69).

    Panels C and D of Table 9 repeat the same analysis for models q-4 and M-4. Both
of these models appear to explain the IVOL anomaly, given the results in the last row of
each panel. For model q-4, the difference between the highest and lowest IVOL portfolio
alphas is −23 bps per month, about one-third smaller than that for FF-5, and the t-statistic
of −1.58 is insignificant at conventional levels. For model M-4, reported in Panel D, the
highest-versus-lowest IVOL difference is −12 bps, and the t-statistic is just −0.79. We can
see, however, that these results in the last row of each panel obscure important IVOL effects.
For both models, the relation between IVOL and alpha is strongly negative (positive) among
the overpriced (underpriced) stocks. The insignificance of the overall IVOL-alpha relation
simply reflects a lower degree of asymmetry in the strength of the IVOL effects in the
overpriced and underpriced segments.

   In short, some of the factor models appear to explain the IVOL anomaly produced by
the one-way sort on IVOL shown in the last row of each panel in Table 9. None of the factor
models can accommodate the cross-sectional role played by IVOL, as we see from the results
for the 25 portfolios reported in the other rows. The latter results are consistent with the
presence of mispricing and the importance of arbitrage risk. The seeming ability of some of
  13
    We compute individual stock IVOL, following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), as the standard
deviation of the most recent month’s daily benchmark-adjusted returns. The latter returns are computed as
the residuals in a regression of each stock’s daily return on the three factors in model FF-3.


                                                   18
the factor models to explain the IVOL anomaly stems simply from a failure to distinguish
the opposing directions in which IVOL enters, depending on whether stocks are overpriced
or underpriced. The apparent strength of the IVOL anomaly declines monotonically when
proceeding through models FF-3, FF-5, q-4, and M-4, with the alpha spread between the
high- and low-IVOL portfolios (last rows of each panel in Table 9) taking values in bps of
−81, −33, −23, and −12. We can also see, however, that this decline in the strength of
the IVOL anomaly simply reflects corresponding reductions in the asymmetry of the IVOL
effects among overpriced and underpriced stocks.



6.    Conclusions

Popular factors are generally constructed by ranking stocks on characteristics that initially
gain the finance profession’s attention by producing return anomalies. We also construct
factors based on documented anomalies, but with a key difference. Rather than have each
factor correspond to a single anomaly, as is typical, we construct factors by combining
stocks’ rankings with respect to 11 prominent anomalies. Specifically, we form two factors
by averaging rankings within two clusters of anomalies whose long-short profits exhibit the
greatest co-movement. We denote the resulting long-short return spreads as “mispricing”
factors, motivated by evidence that anomalies in part reflect mispricing and possess common
sentiment effects. Both of the mispricing factors exhibit a significant relation to lagged
investor sentiment.

    We combine the two mispricing factors with market and size factors to produce a four-
factor model. We find that this four-factor model’s ability to accommodate a wide range of
anomalies exceeds that of both the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a) and
the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015). Also, if our two new factors are replaced by
a single factor that simply averages rankings across our entire set of anomalies, rather than
within clusters, the resulting three-factor model substantially outperforms the three-factor
model of Fama and French (1993).

   The typical approach to constructing a size factor using a two-way sort is to average
across the categories of the other sorting variable, which in our case is a mispricing measure.
We instead construct the size factor using stocks in neither extreme of a mispricing measure,
in order to be less susceptible to asymmetric degrees of overpricing versus underpricing. The
resulting size factor reveals a substantially larger small-firm premium than usual estimates.



                                              19
   Although mispricing factors can reflect common elements of mispricing, such as market-
wide sentiment effects, a parsimonious factor model is unlikely to fully explain expected
returns when mispricing is present. For example, factor models have difficulty accommodat-
ing the role idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) plays as risk that deters price-correcting arbitrage.
In fact, the well known IVOL anomaly of Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) appears to
be explained by some of the factor models we consider. Such success is misleading, however.
Alphas with respect to these factor models exhibit opposite and offsetting relations to IVOL,
depending on whether the mispricing that the models fail to capture—the alphas—reflect
relative underpricing or overpricing. In this sense, while parsimonious factor models are
appealing and useful, there are limits to their abilities to explain expected returns. Nev-
ertheless, among such models, those with mispricing factors appear to have greater ability
than prominent alternatives.




                                               20
                                                Table 1
                            Factor Loadings and Alphas of Anomaly Strategies
                                   Under the Mispricing-Factor Model
      The table reports factor loadings and monthly alphas (in percent) for the long-short spread, long-leg, and
      short-leg corresponding to 12 anomalies. The long leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest
      decile of the anomaly measure, and the short leg contains the stocks in the highest decile, where a high
      value of the measure is associated with lower return. The breakpoints are based on NYSE deciles, but all
      NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks with share prices of at least $5 are included. Data for the distress anomaly
      begin in October 1974, and data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten
      anomalies begin at the start of the sample period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564
      months). All t-statistics are based on the heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of White (1980).

Anomaly                        α     βM KT      βSM B    βU M O1   βU M O2       tα    tM KT    tSM B    tU M O1      tU M O2
                                               Panel A: Long-Short Spreads
First Cluster (used to construct mispricing     factor U M O1 )
 Net stock issues            0.06     0.02        -0.14    0.63       0.22      0.70     0.86    -3.64     17.21        8.85
 Composite equity issues 0.07        -0.07        -0.06    0.85       0.05      0.70    -2.23    -1.22     18.12        1.72
 Accruals                    0.31     0.00        -0.28    0.38       0.02      2.08     0.12    -5.23      6.09        0.48
 Net operating assets        0.22     0.11        -0.05    0.46      -0.01      1.70     2.72    -0.73      8.54       -0.28
 Asset growth               -0.22     0.04         0.33    0.94      -0.02     -1.96     1.31     7.42     15.99       -0.54
 Investment-to-assets        0.06     0.03         0.25    0.64      -0.09      0.54     1.12     5.40     11.83       -2.61
 Average                     0.08     0.02         0.01    0.65       0.03      0.63     0.65     0.33     12.96        1.27
Second Cluster (used to construct mispricing factor U M O2 )
 Distress                  -0.16    -0.29   -0.35      0.31          1.17      -1.03    -7.13    -3.89      3.96       24.10
 O-score                    0.35    -0.15   -0.73     -0.09          0.23       2.42    -3.86   -14.43     -1.39        5.02
 Momentum                   0.12     0.12    0.16      0.25          1.21       0.47     1.78     1.44      1.71       12.15
 Gross profitability        0.11    -0.14   -0.05     -0.32          0.66       0.92    -4.45    -1.29     -6.08       18.04
 Return on assets           0.27    -0.02   -0.38      0.06          0.66       1.90    -0.41    -5.49      0.95       13.21
 Average                    0.14    -0.10   -0.27      0.04          0.79       0.94    -2.81    -4.73     -0.17       14.50
Book-to-market               -0.17      0.09      0.54     0.89    -0.35       -1.10     2.50     9.21     12.70       -7.52
                                                   Panel B: Long Legs
First Cluster (used to construct mispricing factor U M O1 )
 Net stock issues           -0.06    1.04     -0.03     0.31          0.06     -1.39    83.49    -1.22     14.29        4.18
 Composite equity issues -0.01       0.98      0.05     0.48         -0.06     -0.18    33.81     0.98     11.13       -2.31
 Accruals                    0.19    1.05      0.02    -0.22          0.08      1.74    34.37     0.44     -4.64        2.37
 Net operating assets        0.13    1.08      0.03     0.09         -0.08      1.44    44.02     0.86      2.49       -2.92
 Asset growth               -0.15    1.11      0.35     0.34         -0.01     -1.58    43.33    11.25      6.99       -0.18
 Investment-to-assets       -0.01    1.07      0.35     0.17          0.02     -0.13    50.21    10.80      5.52        0.83
 Average                     0.02    1.06      0.13     0.20          0.00     -0.02    48.21     3.85      5.96        0.33
Second Cluster (used to construct mispricing factor U M O2 )
 Distress                  -0.22     0.98    0.11      0.04          0.39      -2.32    37.65     1.79      0.78       12.27
 O-score                    0.18     0.94   -0.12     -0.32          0.14       2.04    43.07    -3.38     -6.62        4.26
 Momentum                   0.10     1.15    0.38     -0.18          0.46       0.77    31.69     6.59     -2.40        9.48
 Gross profitability        0.05     0.97   -0.01     -0.01          0.24       0.52    36.95    -0.28     -0.29        7.14
 Return on assets           0.14     1.01   -0.06     -0.25          0.27       1.92    53.19    -2.03     -7.25       10.94
 Average                    0.05     1.01    0.06     -0.14          0.30       0.59    40.51     0.54     -3.16        8.82
Book-to-market               -0.10      1.09      0.38     0.54      -0.17     -0.91    38.00     8.42     10.38       -4.95


                                                           21
                                         Table 1 (Continued)
                           Factor Loadings and Alphas of Anomaly Strategies
                                  Under the Mispricing-Factor Model

Anomaly                      α      βM KT   βSM B    βU M O1   βU M O2    tα     tM KT   tSM B   tU M O1   tU M O2
                                              Panel C: Short Legs
First Cluster (used to construct mispricing factor U M O1 )
 Net stock issues           -0.13    1.02     0.11     -0.32     -0.16   -1.52   46.95    3.62    -8.82     -6.62
 Composite equity issues -0.09       1.05     0.11     -0.37     -0.11   -1.26   58.06    3.80   -11.80     -5.11
 Accruals                   -0.11    1.04     0.30     -0.61      0.06   -1.35   47.35    8.75   -16.11      2.43
 Net operating assets       -0.09    0.97     0.08     -0.37     -0.07   -1.20   43.72    2.34   -11.45     -2.80
 Asset growth                0.07    1.07     0.02     -0.60      0.01    1.05   55.02    0.60   -20.20      0.77
 Investment-to-assets       -0.07    1.04     0.10     -0.47      0.11   -0.75   41.33    2.90    -9.14      3.21
 Average                    -0.07    1.03     0.12     -0.46     -0.03   -0.84   48.74    3.67   -12.92     -1.35
Second Cluster (used to construct mispricing factor U M O2 )
 Distress                  -0.06     1.28    0.46     -0.27      -0.78   -0.52   39.36    8.75    -4.67    -23.10
 O-score                   -0.17     1.09    0.62     -0.23      -0.10   -1.80   40.74   13.34    -5.14     -3.05
 Momentum                  -0.02     1.03    0.21     -0.43      -0.75   -0.14   24.38    3.04    -4.91    -12.39
 Gross profitability       -0.06     1.10    0.04      0.31      -0.42   -0.56   38.35    1.25     5.94    -13.00
 Return on assets          -0.13     1.03    0.32     -0.32      -0.39   -0.99   28.53    4.69    -5.06     -8.69
 Average                   -0.09     1.11    0.33     -0.19      -0.49   -0.80   34.27    6.21    -2.77    -12.05
Book-to-market               0.07    1.00    -0.16     -0.35     0.18    0.92    51.01   -6.31   -11.45      7.87




                                                       22
                                              Table 2
                                Investor Sentiment and the Factors

The table reports estimates of b in the regression

                                           Rt     =   a + bSt−1 + ut ,

where Rt is the excess return in month t on either the long leg, the short leg, or the long-short difference
for each of the factors, M KT , SM B, U M O1 and U M O2 , and St−1 is the previous month’s level of the
investor-sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006). All t-statistics are based on the heteroskedasticity-
consistent standard errors of White (1980). The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013
(564 months).


                                  Long Leg              Short Leg        Long−Short
             Factor               b̂    t-stat.         b̂     t-stat.    b̂     t-stat.
             M KT                 -        -             -        -      -0.32   -1.37
             SM B               -0.49    -1.72        -0.27    -1.17     -0.22   -1.60
             U M O1             -0.22    -0.98        -0.66    -2.06     0.44     2.81
             U M O2             -0.31    -1.29        -0.67    -2.05     0.36     2.02




                                                      23
                                           Table 3
                          Anomaly Alphas Under Different Factor Models

For long-short returns corresponding to 12 anomalies, the table reports information about alphas computed under
four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor
model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted
q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported are the
average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). In constructing the long-short spreads,
the long leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest decile of the anomaly measure, and the short leg
contains the stocks in the highest decile, where a high value of the measure is associated with lower return. The
breakpoints are based on NYSE deciles, but all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks with share prices of at least $5
are included. Panel A reports the monthly alphas (in percent); Panel B reports their heteroskedasticity-consistent
t-statistics based on White (1980).

                    Anomaly                       Unadjusted      FF-3    FF-5       q-4    M-4
                                            Panel A: Alphas
                    Net stock issues                 0.56 0.66             0.32     0.37    0.06
                    Composite equity issues          0.58 0.54             0.34     0.51    0.07
                    Accruals                         0.43 0.51             0.56     0.65    0.31
                    Net operating assets             0.53 0.53             0.50     0.43    0.22
                    Asset growth                     0.52 0.32             0.06     0.08   -0.22
                    Investment-to-assets             0.53 0.42             0.35     0.32    0.06
                    Distress                         0.44 1.21             0.62     0.20   -0.16
                    O-score                          0.05 0.49             0.45     0.47    0.35
                    Momentum                         1.26 1.59             1.35     0.48    0.12
                    Gross profitability              0.28 0.69             0.35     0.39    0.11
                    Return on assets                 0.58 0.91             0.43     0.10    0.27
                    Book-to-market                   0.43 -0.20           -0.14    -0.03   -0.17
                                           Panel B: t-statistics
                    Net stock issues                 4.77 6.60             3.42     3.54    0.71
                    Composite equity issues          3.88 4.93             2.94     4.10    0.70
                    Accruals                         2.95 3.61             3.94     4.30    2.08
                    Net operating assets             4.32 4.10             3.63     3.03    1.70
                    Asset growth                     3.69 2.83             0.58     0.72   -1.96
                    Investment-to-assets             4.28 3.48             3.04     2.72    0.54
                    Distress                         1.54 5.03             2.29     0.78   -1.03
                    O-score                          0.30 4.28             3.92     3.89    2.42
                    Momentum                         4.58 5.70             4.12     1.40    0.47
                    Gross profitability              1.79 5.22             2.78     2.50    0.92
                    Return on assets                 3.18 5.52             3.13     0.85    1.90
                    Book-to-market                   2.39 -1.99           -1.33    -0.19   -1.10




                                                         24
                                        Table 4
                 Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies

The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce alpha under four different
factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama
and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the
four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on
the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). For each model, the table reports
the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test
of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the model produces the smallest
absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are
reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin
in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of the sample period, which is from January 1967
through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal
zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in October 1974. Panels B and C also report two
versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are available by January 1967, while GRS72 uses
those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February 1986.

           Measure                Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5             q-4          M-4
                       Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|              0.52        0.67        0.45        0.34                        0.18
           Average |t|              3.14        4.44        2.93        2.34                        1.29
           GRS10                    6.89       10.10        6.71        5.99                        1.84
           p10                3.4×10−10 1.1×10−15 6.9×10−10       1.2×10−8                          0.05
           GRS12                    6.16        7.71        4.17        3.95                        1.88
           p12                4.5×10 −10
                                         4.2×10  −13
                                                       3.1×10 −6
                                                                  8.3×10−6                          0.03
           Number of min|α|            -           0           1           2                           9

                           Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|                   0.39           0.44         0.30           0.20          0.18
           Average |t|                   2.14           2.74         1.77           1.15          0.99
           GRS51                         2.74           2.60         1.91           1.68          1.28
           p51                       9.3×10−9      6.5×10−8      2.9×10−4       3.2×10−3          0.10
           GRS72                         2.23           2.10         1.79           1.78          1.54
           p72                       2.2×10−6      1.3×10−5      5.3×10−4       5.8×10−4      8.1×10−3
           Number of min|α|                 -              7           10             19            37

               Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
           Average |α|                   0.50          0.53          0.35           0.23          0.22
           Average |t|                   3.02          3.72          2.41           1.44          1.38
           GRS51                         5.85          6.31          5.15           4.19          4.17
           p51                      2.7×10−27     6.2×10−30     4.3×10−23      2.3×10−17     3.1×10−17
           GRS72                         2.95          3.25          2.64           2.41          2.68
           p72                      1.4×10−10     3.0×10−12      1.1×10−8       2.3×10−7      6.2×10−9
           Number of min|α|                 -             7            11             23            32




                                                        25
                                        Table 5
              Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies Less
                     Correlated with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4

The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce alpha under four different
factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama
and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the
four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on
the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). For each model, the table reports
the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test
of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the model produces the smallest
absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. Panels A and B correspond to Panels B and C of
Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each of four factors—those in models q-4 and M-4 other than
the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the 73) whose long-short returns are most highly correlated
with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 57 anomalies in Panel A and 54 in Panel B. The sample
period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). Two versions of the GRS test are reported:
GRS41 in Panel A (or GRS40 in Panel B), uses the 41 (or 40) anomalies whose data are available by January
1967, while GRS56 in Panel A (or GRS53 in Panel B) uses the remaining anomalies whose data are available by
February 1986.


    Measure                               Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5             q-4           M-4
                            Panel A: 57 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.37           0.39          0.27           0.19             0.17
    Average   |t|                               2.14           2.60          1.71           1.15             0.97
    GRS41                                       3.01           2.81          1.95           1.63             1.26
    p41                                     6.7×10−9       6.1×10−8      5.8×10−4       9.3×10−3             0.13
    GRS56                                       2.29           2.16          1.73           1.64             1.53
    p56                                     5.5×10−6       2.5×10−5      2.3×10−3       5.2×10−3             0.01
    Number    of min|α|                            -              4             7             15               31
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -              -             -             21               36

                Panel B: 54 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.45           0.46          0.32            0.25           0.23
    Average   |t|                               2.94           3.53          2.41            1.61           1.47
    GRS40                                       6.38           7.03          5.78            4.69           4.55
    p40                                    7.3×10−26      5.0×10−29     8.3×10−23       2.9×10−17     1.6×10−16
    GRS53                                       3.36           4.07          3.12            2.82           3.03
    p53                                    3.6×10−11      1.0×10−14     6.7×10−10      2.0E×10−8       1.8×10−9
    Number    of min|α|                            -              6             9              16             23
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -              -             -              21             33




                                                        26
                                           Table 6
                               Comparing Additional Factor Models

The table reports summary statistics for alphas computed under six different factor models: the three-factor
model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the four-factor momentum model of Carhart (1997), denoted
MOM-4; the four-factor liquidity-risk model of Pástor and Stambaugh (2003), denoted LIQ-4; the five-factor
model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a),
denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. The table
reports each model’s average absolute monthly (percent) alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and
associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies
for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In
Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and
data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of
the sample period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether
the ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the
sample in October 1974. Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies
whose data are available by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are
available by February 1986.
                               FF-3        MOM-4           LIQ-4           FF-5            q-4           M-4

                   Panel A: 12 Anomalies (value-weighted, NYSE deciles)
  Average |α|            0.67        0.46         0.66       0.45        0.34                            0.18
  Average |t|            4.40        3.52         4.34       2.84        2.31                            1.29
  GRS10                  9.67        7.21         9.34       6.23        5.56                            1.62
  p10               6.5×10 −15
                                9.9×10 −11
                                            2.4×10 −14
                                                         4.8×10 −9
                                                                     6.6×10−8                            0.10
  GRS12                  7.71        6.09         7.77       4.17        3.95                            1.88
  p12               4.2×10 −13  6.2×10 −10  3.2×10 −13   3.1×10 −6   8.3×10−6                            0.03
  Number of min|α|           0           0           0           1          2                               9

                         Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
  Average |α|                 0.44           0.30          0.44           0.29          0.20           0.18
  Average |t|                 2.69           1.92          2.72           1.74          1.13           1.00
  GRS51                       2.60           2.11          2.64           1.95          1.72           1.36
  p51                     6.7×10−8       2.7×10−5      3.9×10−8       1.8×10−4      2.0×10−3           0.05
  GRS72                       2.10           1.96          2.15           1.79          1.78           1.54
  p72                     1.3×10−5       7.0×10−5      6.8×10−6       5.3×10−4      5.8×10−4       8.1×10−3
  Number of min|α|               4              6             5              5            21             32

             Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
  Average |α|                 0.52           0.35          0.52           0.34          0.23           0.22
  Average |t|                 3.63           2.52          3.68           2.37          1.41           1.38
  GRS51                       6.11           5.46          6.09           4.97          4.12           4.14
  p51                    1.2×10−28      7.5×10−25     1.8×10−28      5.9×10−22     7.1×10−17      5.9×10−17
  GRS72                       3.25           3.06          3.18           2.64          2.41           2.68
  p72                    3.0×10−12      4.1×10−11     7.9×10−12       1.1×10−8     2.3×10−07       6.2×10−9
  Number of min|α|               3              7             4              7            24             28




                                                      27
                                             Table 7
                       Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors

Panel A reports a factor’s estimated monthly alpha (in percent) with respect to each of the other models (with
White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses). Panel B computes the Gibbons-Ross-
Shanken (1989) F -test of whether a given model produces zero alphas for the factors of an alternative model
(with p-values in parentheses). The models considered are the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015),
denoted FF-5, which includes the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4, which includes the factors I/A and ROE; and the four-factor mispricing-factor
model, denoted M-4, which includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The sample period is from January 1967
through December 2013 (564 months).


                                                Alpha computed with respect to model
                Factors                          FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                        Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
                Factors in FF-5
                 HM L                              -                0.04             -0.03
                                                                   (0.43)           (-0.28)
                 RM W                              -                0.04              0.11
                                                                   (0.55)           (1.35)
                 CM A                              -                0.02             -0.03
                                                                   (0.47)           (-0.56)
                Factors in q-4
                 I/A                             0.12                -               0.09
                                                (3.48)                              (1.57)
                 ROE                             0.45                -               0.36
                                                (5.53)                              (4.00)
                Factors in M-4
                 U M O1                          0.33               0.36               -
                                                (4.93)             (4.54)
                 U M O2                          0.64               0.35               -
                                                (4.17)             (2.24)

                                   Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
                HM L, RM W , CM A                  -                0.23             0.65
                                                                   (0.87)           (0.58)

                I/A, ROE                        19.06                -                9.12
                                             (9.8×10−9)                           (1.3×10−4 )

                U M O1 , U M O2                  25.35             15.66               -
                                             (2.9×10−11)        (2.4×10−7 )




                                                       28
                                            Table 8
                               Comparison of Three-Factor Models

The table reports summary statistics for alphas computed under two three-factor models: the model of Fama
and French (1993), denoted model FF-3; and a model that combines a market and size factor with a single
mispricing factor, denoted model M-3. The mispricing factor is constructed using a composite mispricing
measure that averages stocks’ rankings across 11 anomalies. The table reports each model’s average absolute
monthly (percent) alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS”
test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the model produces the
smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In Panel A, two versions of the GRS
test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and data for the return-on-assets
anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of the sample period, which
is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the ten alphas for the
full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in October 1974.
Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are available
by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February 1986.


                                                               FF-3                       M-3
                         Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                    0.67                 0.28
             Average |t|                                    4.44                 1.78
             GRS10                                        10.10                  2.50
             p10                                      1.1×10−15              6.1×10−3
             GRS12                                          7.71                 3.03
             p12                                      4.2×10 −13             4.2×10−4
             Number of min |α|                                 1                   11

                         Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                       0.44                      0.24
             Average |t|                                       2.74                      1.17
             GRS51                                             2.60                      1.46
             p51                                          6.5×10−8                       0.02
             GRS72                                             2.10                      1.67
             p72                                          1.3×10−5                   1.9×10−3
             Number of min |α|                                   18                        55

             Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
             Average |α|                                      0.53                       0.30
             Average |t|                                      3.72                       1.61
             GRS51                                            6.31                       4.09
             p51                                         6.2×10−30                  9.7×10−17
             GRS72                                            3.25                       2.48
             p72                                         3.0×10−12                   8.9×10−8
             Number of min |α|                                  15                         58




                                                    29
                                              Table 9
           Idiosyncratic Volatility Effects in Underpriced versus Overpriced Stocks
This table reports, for each of four models, the monthly percentage alphas on 25 value-weighted portfolios formed
by an independent 5×5 sort on the composite mispricing measure—the average ranking across 11 anomalies—and
IVOL—the previous month’s daily volatility of residuals from the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993).
Panel A reports alphas with respect to the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), model FF-3; Panel
B reports alphas for the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), model FF-5; Panel C reports alphas for
the four-factor model of Hou, Xing, and Zhang (2015a), model q-4; Panel D reports alphas for the four-factor
mispricing-factor model, model M-4. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics based on White (1980) are shown
in parentheses. The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months).

                                 Highest     Next      Next      Next     Lowest    Highest      All
                                  IVOL       20%       20%       20%      IVOL      -Lowest     Stocks

                                             Panel A: FF-3 Alpha
          Most Overpriced          -1.87     -0.92     -0.77     -0.51     -0.23      -1.64     -0.78
          (top 20%)              (-12.04)   (-6.89)   (-5.42)   (-4.13)   (-1.85)    (-8.46)   (-8.46)
          Next 20%                -0.79      -0.39     -0.15     -0.23     -0.09      -0.70     -0.22
                                 (-5.18)    (-3.03)   (-1.51)   (-2.37)   (-1.02)    (-3.86)   (-3.88)
          Next 20%                -0.22      -0.18     -0.01     -0.25     0.06       -0.28     -0.06
                                 (-1.43)    (-1.51)   (-0.09)   (-2.47)   (0.65)     (-1.42)   (-1.28)
          Next 20%                -0.10      0.16      -0.02     0.19      0.15       -0.25      0.14
                                 (-0.58)    (1.35)    (-0.17)   (2.44)    (2.18)     (-1.32)    (3.24)
          Most Underpriced         0.45      0.61      0.50      0.35      0.15       0.30       0.28
          (bottom 20%)            (2.86)    (4.56)    (4.95)     (4.3)    (2.18)     (1.70)     (5.76)

          Most Overpriced -        -2.32     -1.53     -1.26     -0.86     -0.38      -1.94     -1.06
          Most Underpriced       (-10.80)   (-7.98)   (-6.75)   (-5.71)   (-2.51)    (-8.02)   (-8.20)

          All Stocks              -0.72      -0.12     -0.02     0.02      0.10       -0.81
                                 (-6.52)    (-1.61)   (-0.38)   (0.46)    (2.31)     (-6.04)

                                             Panel B: FF-5 Alpha
          Most Overpriced         -1.40      -0.65     -0.55     -0.47     -0.17      -1.23     -0.52
          (top 20%)              (-8.71)    (-4.63)   (-3.85)   (-3.54)   (-1.27)    (-6.15)   (-5.28)
          Next 20%                -0.50      -0.22     -0.08     -0.26     -0.15      -0.35     -0.14
                                 (-3.26)    (-1.69)   (-0.73)   (-2.66)   (-1.59)    (-1.96)   (-2.24)
          Next 20%                 0.09      -0.07     0.01      -0.28     -0.06      0.15      -0.04
                                  (0.56)    (-0.56)   (0.10)    (-2.43)   (-0.71)    (0.78)    (-0.80)
          Next 20%                 0.09      0.20      -0.08     0.06      0.05       0.04       0.06
                                  (0.45)    (1.52)    (-0.81)   (0.79)    (0.61)     (0.21)     (1.46)
          Most Underpriced         0.57      0.61      0.39      0.17      -0.07      0.64       0.12
          (bottom 20%)            (3.44)    (4.03)    (3.75)    (1.99)    (-1.02)    (3.61)     (2.41)

          Most Overpriced -       -1.97      -1.26     -0.94     -0.64     -0.10      -1.87     -0.64
          Most Underpriced       (-8.42)    (-5.55)   (-5.11)   (-4.02)   (-0.61)    (-7.41)   (-4.74)

          All Stocks              -0.36      0.01      -0.01     -0.08     -0.03      -0.33
                                 (-3.55)    (0.19)    (-0.11)   (-1.44)   (-0.70)    (-2.69)


                                                       30
                            Table 9 (continued)
Idiosyncratic Volatility Effects in Underpriced versus Overpriced Stocks



                    Highest   Next      Next      Next      Lowest    Highest    All
                     IVOL     20%       20%       20%       IVOL      -Lowest   Stocks

                               Panel C: q-4 Alpha
Most Overpriced      -1.25     -0.44     -0.55    -0.45      -0.14     -1.11     -0.46
(top 20%)           (-7.57)   (-3.11)   (-3.38)   (-2.8)    (-0.85)   (-4.88)   (-4.14)
Next 20%             -0.37     -0.09     0.03      -0.24     -0.15     -0.22     -0.09
                    (-2.14)   (-0.64)   (0.28)    (-2.19)   (-1.41)   (-1.05)   (-1.39)
Next 20%             0.12      0.01      0.09      -0.35     -0.05     0.16      -0.02
                    (0.67)    (0.07)    (0.65)    (-2.68)   (-0.45)   (0.73)    (-0.46)
Next 20%             0.16      0.20      -0.08     0.01      0.05      0.10      0.06
                    (0.71)    (1.44)    (-0.71)   (0.17)    (0.68)    (0.43)    (1.33)
Most Underpriced     0.47      0.59      0.32      0.07      -0.14     0.61      0.04
(bottom 20%)        (2.43)    (3.56)    (2.93)    (0.84)    (-1.65)   (2.96)    (0.81)

Most Overpriced -    -1.72     -1.03     -0.87     -0.52     0.00      -1.72     -0.50
Most Underpriced    (-6.87)   (-4.33)   (-4.12)   (-2.88)   (0.00)    (-6.51)   (-3.36)

All Stocks           -0.28     0.09      0.01      -0.13     -0.05     -0.23
                    (-2.40)   (1.13)    (0.13)    (-2.00)   (-1.05)   (-1.58)

                               Panel D: M-4 Alpha
Most Overpriced      -0.96     -0.20     -0.16     -0.11     0.08      -1.04     -0.09
(top 20%)           (-6.33)   (-1.61)   (-1.05)   (-0.88)   (0.57)    (-4.40)   (-1.60)
Next 20%             -0.36     0.05      0.17      -0.06     -0.02     -0.34     0.06
                    (-2.08)   (0.33)    (1.80)    (-0.57)   (-0.24)   (-1.64)   (1.07)
Next 20%             0.06      0.02      0.12      -0.25     -0.01     0.08      0.01
                    (0.34)    (0.14)    (1.04)    (-2.03)   (-0.13)   (0.33)    (0.25)
Next 20%             -0.02     0.23      -0.06     0.02      -0.02     0.00      0.02
                    (-0.09)   (1.66)    (-0.55)   (0.24)    (-0.26)   (0.01)    (0.49)
Most Underpriced     0.36      0.28      0.23      0.00      -0.26     0.62      -0.09
(bottom 20%)        (2.08)    (1.93)    (2.16)    (-0.05)   (-3.66)   (3.17)    (-2.50)

Most Overpriced -    -1.32     -0.48     -0.39     -0.10     0.34      -1.66     0.00
Most Underpriced    (-6.99)   (-2.67)   (-2.00)   (-0.75)   (2.16)    (-6.59)   (0.04)

All Stocks           -0.21     0.13      0.08      -0.06     -0.09     -0.12
                    (-1.75)   (1.60)    (1.22)    (-0.91)   (-1.80)   (-0.79)




                                         31
                                   REFERENCES
Ahn, Dong-Hyun, Jennifer Conrad, and Robert F. Dittmar, 2009, Basis assets, Review of
  Financial Studies 22, 5133–5174.
Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, 1989, The effects of beta, bid-ask spread, residual
  risk, and size on stock returns, Journal of Finance 44, 479–486.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section
  of volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 259–299.
Asness, Cliff, Andrea Frazzini, Ronen Israel, Tobias Moskowitz, and Lasse H. Pedersen,
   2015, Size matters, if you control your junk, Working paper, AQR Capital Management,
   University of Chicago, and Copenhagen School of Business.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
   returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645–1680.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks,
   Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal
  of Finance 63, 2899–2939.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
   52, 57–82.
Chan, K.C., Nai-fu Chen, and David A. Hsieh, 1985, An exploratory investigation of the
   firm size effect, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 451–471.
Chen, Long, Robert Novy-Marx, and Lu Zhang, 2010, An alternative three-factor model,
   Working paper, CKGSB, University of Rochester, and Ohio State University.
Chen, Shuping, Mark L. DeFond, and Chul W. Park, 2002, Voluntary disclosure of bal-
   ance sheet information in quarterly earnings announcements, Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 33, 229–251.
Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-
   section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609–1652.
Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sec-
   tional variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1–33.
Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible
   information, Journal of Finance 61, 1605–1643.
DeLong, Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990,
   Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 90, 703–738.
Drechsler, Itamar and Qingyi Freda Drechsler, 2014, The shorting premium and asset pricing
   anomalies, Working paper, New York University and Wharton Research Data Services.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
   and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 2006, Profitability, investment, and average returns,
   Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–518.


                                             32
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 2008, Dissecting anomalies, Journal of Finance 63,
   1653–1678.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 2014, Dissecting anomalies with a five-factor model,
   Working paper, University of Chicago and Dartmouth College.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of
   Financial Economics 16, 1–22.
Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a
   given portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121–1152.
Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, Siew Hong Teoh, and Yinglei Zhang, 2004, Do investors
   overvalue firms with bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38,
   297–331.
Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015a, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach,
   Review of Financial Studies 28, 650–705.
Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015b, A comparison of new factor models, Working
   paper, Ohio State University, University of Cincinnati, and Ohio State University.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
   losers: Implications for market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh 2015, Interpreting factor models, Working
   paper, University of Michigan, University of Michigan, and University of Maryland.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
   extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–1578.
Lintner, John, 1965, Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversification, Journal
   of Finance 20, 587–615.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50,
   23–51.
McLean, R. David, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2015, Does academic research destroy stock return
  predictability?, forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013, The other side of value: The gross profitability premium, Journal
   of Financial Economics 108, 1–28.
Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy,
   Journal of Accounting Research 18, 109–131.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
    Journal of Political Economy 111, 642–685.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 2006, Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of Ac-
   counting and Economics 42, 35–52.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance
   46, 3–27.
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under con-
   ditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–442.


                                             33
Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows
   about future earnings? The Accounting Review 71, 289–315.
Stambaugh, R.F., 1997, Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length. Journal of
   Financial Economics 45, 285–331.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012, The short of it: Investor sentiment
   and anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288–302.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2014, The long of it: Odds that investor
   sentiment spuriously predicts anomaly returns, Journal of Financial Economics 114,
   613–619.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2015, Arbitrage asymmetry and the
   idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
Titman, Sheridan, K. C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock
   returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.
Wang, Huijun, and Jianfeng Yu, 2010, Dissecting the profitability premium, Working paper,
  University of Minnesota.
Ward, Joe H., 1963, Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function, Journal of the
  American Statistical Association 58, 236–244.
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a
  direct test for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.
Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: An empirical inves-
   tigation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767–1795.




                                             34
                                       APPENDIX A

A1. The 11 Anomalies Used to Construct the Mispricing Factors

   Below we detail the construction of the anomaly measures used to construct mispricing
scores and form anomaly portfolios and mispricing factors. The anomaly measures are
computed at the end of each month. We exclude stocks with share prices less than $5,
primarily to avoid micro-structure effects, and we use ordinary common shares (CRSP codes
10 and 11). The anomaly portfolios are constructed using NYSE deciles as breakpoints.
When constructing the mispricing factors, we require that a stock have non-missing values
at the end of month t − 1 for at least three of the (five or six) anomalies in a cluster in order
to be included in that cluster’s factor. Also, in order for an anomaly to be included in the
mispricing measure for its cluster at the end of month t − 1, we require at least 30 stocks to
have non-missing values for that anomaly. The values computed at the end of month t − 1
for each anomaly are constructed as follows:

  1. Net Stock Issues: The stock issuing market has long been viewed as producing an
      anomaly arising from sentiment-driven mispricing: smart managers issue shares when
      sentiment-driven traders push prices to overvalued levels. Ritter (1991) and Loughran
      and Ritter (1995) show that, in post-issue years, equity issuers underperform matching
      nonissuers with similar characteristics. Motivated by this evidence, Fama and French
      (2008) show that net stock issues and subsequent returns are negatively correlated.
      Following Fama and French(2008), we measure net issuance as the annual log change
      in split-adjusted shares outstanding. Split-adjusted share equal shares outstanding
      (Compustat annual item CSHO) times the adjustment factor(Compustat annual item
      ADJEX C). The most recent reporting year used is the one that ends (according to
      item DATADATE) at least four months before the end of month t − 1. Stocks with
      negative net issues are assigned to decile 1 and those with zero net issues are assigned
      to decile 2. The remaining stocks are assigned to the remaining eight deciles using
      NYSE breakpoints.

  2. Composite Equity Issues: Daniel and Titman (2006) find that issuers underperform
      nonissuers using a measure they denote as composite equity issuance, defined as the
      growth in the firm’s total market value of equity minus (i.e., not attributable to)
      the stock’s rate of return. We compute this measure by subtracting the 12-month
      cumulative stock return from the 12-month growth in equity market capitalization.
      We lag the quantity four months, to make its timing more coincident with the above
      measure of net stock issues.

                                               35
3. Accruals: Sloan (1996) shows that firms with high accruals earn abnormally lower
  average returns than firms with low accruals, and he suggests that investors overes-
  timate the persistence of the accrual component of earnings when forming earnings
  expectations. Following Sloan (1996), we measure total accruals as the annual change
  in noncash working capital minus depreciation and amortization expense (Compustat
  annual item DP), divided by average total assets (item AT) for the previous two fiscal
  years. Noncash working capital is computed as the change in current asset (item ACT)
  minus the change in cash and short-term investment (item CHE), minus the change
  in current liabilities (item DLC), plus the change in debt included in current liabilities
  (item LCT), plus the change in income taxes payable (item TXP). The most recent
  reporting year used is the one that ends (according to item DATADATE) at least four
  months before the end of month t − 1.

4. Net Operating Assets: Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) find that net operating
  assets, defined as the difference on the balance sheet between all operating assets and
  all operating liabilities, scaled by total assets, is a strong negative predictor of long-
  run stock returns. The authors suggest that investors with limited attention tend
  to focus on accounting profitability, neglecting information about cash profitability,
  in which case net operating assets (equivalently measured as the cumulative difference
  between operating income and free cash flow) captures such a bias. Following equations
  equations (4), (5), and (6) of that study, we measure net operation assets as operating
  assets minus operating liabilities, divided by lagged total assets (Compustat annual
  item AT). Operating assets equal total assets (item AT) minus cash and short-term
  investment (item CHE). Operating liabilities equal total assets minus debt included
  in current liabilities (item DLC), minus long-term debt (item DLTT), minus common
  equity (item CEQ), minus minority interests (item MIB), minus preferred stocks (item
  PSTK). (The last two items are zero if missing.) The most recent reporting year used
  is the one that ends (according to item DATADATE) at least four months before the
  end of month t − 1.

5. Asset Growth: Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) find that companies that grow their
  total assets more earn lower subsequent returns. They suggest that this phenomenon
  is due to investors’ initial overreaction to changes in future business prospects implied
  by asset expansions. Asset growth is measured as the growth rate of total assets in
  the previous fiscal year. Following that study, we measure asset growth as the most
  recent year-over-growth rate annual growth rate of total assets (Compustat annual
  item AT). The most recent reporting year used is the one that ends (according to item


                                          36
  DATADATE) at least four months before the end of month t − 1.

6. Investment-to-Assets: Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) and Xing (2008) show that higher
  past investment predicts abnormally lower future returns. Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004)
  attribute this anomaly to investors’ initial underreactions to the overinvestment caused
  by managers’ empire-building behavior. Here, investment to assets is measured as the
  annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment, plus the annual change in
  inventories, scaled by lagged book value of assets. Following the above studies, we
  compute investment-to-assets as the changes in gross property, plant, and equipment
  (Compustat annual item PPEGT) plus changes in inventory (item INVT), divided by
  lagged total assets (item AT). The most recent reporting year used is the one that ends
  (according to item DATADATE) at least four months before the end of month t − 1.

7. Distress: Financial distress is often invoked to explain otherwise anomalous patterns
  in the cross-section of stock returns. However, Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008)
  find that firms with high failure probability have lower rather than higher subsequent
  returns. The authors suggest that their finding is a challenge to standard models of
  rational asset pricing. Failure probability is estimated with a dynamic logit model
  that uses several equity market variables, such as stock price, book-to-market, stock
  volatility, size relative to the S&P 500, and cumulative excess return relative to the S&P
  500. Specifically, using the above study’s equations (2) and (3) along with its Table IV
  (12-month column), we compute the distress anomaly measure—failure probability—as

      π = −20.26 NIMTAAVG + 1.42 TLMTA − 7.13 EXRETAVG + 1.41 SIGMA
             −0.045 RSIZE − 2.13 CASHMTA + 0.075 MB − 0.058 PRICE − 9.16,

  where
                                1 − φ3
        NIMTAAVGt−1,t−12 =              (NIMTAt−1,t−3 + · · · + φ9 NIMTAt−10,t−12)
                                1 − φ12
                                 1−φ
        EXRETAVGt−1,t−12      =         (EXRETt−1 + · · · + φ11 EXRETt−12 ),
                                1−φ  12


  and φ = 2−1/3 . NIMTA is net income (Compustat quarterly item NIQ) divided by
  firm scale, where the latter is computed as the sum of total liabilities (item LTQ)
  and market equity capitalization (data from CRSP). EXRETs is the stock’s monthly
  log return in month s minus the log return on the S&P500 index. Missing values for
  NIMTA and EXRET are replaced by those quantities’ cross-sectional means. TLMTA
  equals total liabilities divided by firm scale. SIGMA is the stock’s daily standard
  deviation for the most recent three months, expressed on an annualized basis. At least

                                          37
  five non-zero daily returns are required. RSIZE is the log of the ratio of the stock’s
  market capitalization to that of the S&P500 index. CASHMTA equals cash and short-
  term investment (item CHEQ) divided by firm scale. MB is the market-to-book ratio.
  Following Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008), we increase book equity by 10% of
  the difference between market equity and book equity. If the resulting value of book
  equity is negative, then book equity is set to $1. PRICE is the log of the share price,
  truncated above at $15. All explanatory variables except PRICE are winsorized above
  and below at the 5% level in the cross section. CRSP based variables, EXRETAVG,
  SIGMA, RSIZE and PRICE are for month t − 1. NIQ is for the most recent quarter
  for which the reporting date provided by Compustat (item RDQ) precedes the end of
  month t − 1, whereas the items requiring information from the balance sheet (LTQ,
  CHEQ and MB) are for the prior quarter.

8. O-score: This distress measure, from Ohlson (1980), predicts returns in a manner
  similar to the measure above. It is the probability of bankruptcy estimated in a static
  model using accounting variables. Following Ohlson (1980), we construct it as:

      O = −0.407 SIZE + 6.03 TLTA − 1.43 WCTA + 0.076 CLCA − 1.72 OENEG
         = −2.37 NITA − 1.83 FUTL + 0.285 INTWO − 0.521 CHIN − 1.32,

  where SIZE is the log of total assets (Compustat annual item AT), TLTA is the book
  value of debt (item DLC plus item DLTT) divided by total assets, WCTA is working
  capital (item ACT minus item LCT) divided by total assets, CLCA is current liabilities
  (item LCT) divided by current assets (item ACT), ONEEG is 1 if total liabilities (item
  LT) exceed total assets and is zero otherwise, NITA is net income (item NI) divided by
  total assets, FUTL is funds provided by operations (item PI) divided by total liabilities,
  INTWO is equal to 1 if net income (item NI) is negative for the last 2 years and zero
  otherwise, CHIN is (NIj − NIj−1 )/(|NIj | + |NIj−1 |), in which NIj is the income (item
  NI) for year j, which is the most recent reporting year that ends (according to item
  DATADATE) at least four months before the end of month t − 1.

9. Momentum: The momentum effect, discovered by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993),
   is one of the most robust anomalies in asset pricing. It refers to the phenomenon
  whereby high (low) past recent recent returns forecast high (low) future returns. The
  momentum ranking at the end of month t-1 uses the cumulative returns from month
  t-12 to month t-2. This is the choice of ranking variable used by Carhart (1997) to
  construct the widely used momentum factor.


                                          38
 10. Gross Profitability Premium:     Novy-Marx (2013) shows that sorting on the ratio of
     gross profit to assets creates abnormal benchmark-adjusted returns, with more prof-
     itable firms having higher returns than less profitable ones. He argues that gross profit
     is the cleanest accounting measure of true economic profitability. The farther down the
     income statement one goes, the more polluted profitability measures become, and the
     less related they are to true economic profitability. Following that study, we measure
     gross profitability as total revenue (Compustat annual item REVT) minus the cost of
     goods sold (item COGS), divided by current total assets (item AT). The most recent
     reporting year used is the one that ends (according to item DATADATE) at least four
     months before the end of month t − 1.

 11. Return on Assets: Fama and French (2006) find that more profitable firms have
     higher expected returns than less profitable firms. Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang (2010)
     show that firms with higher past return on assets earn abnormally higher subsequent
     returns. Return on assets is measured as the ratio of quarterly earnings to last quarter’s
     assets. Wang and Yu (2010) find that the anomaly exists primarily among firms with
     high arbitrage costs and high information uncertainty, suggesting that mispricing is a
     culprit. Following Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang (2010), we compute return on assets
     as income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ) divided by the
     previous quarter’s total assets (item ATQ). Income is for most recent quarter for which
     the reporting date provided by Compustat (item RDQ) precedes the end of month t−1,
     and assets are for the prior quarter.


A2. The Larger Set of 73 Anomalies

   We list here the 73 anomalies for which long-short returns were generously provided by the
authors of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a, 2015b). See those studies for detailed explanations
and references. The anomalies are grouped into six categories:
  1. Momentum
     SUE-1: Earnings surprise (1-month holding period)
     SUE-6: Earnings surprise (6-month holding period)
     Abr-1: Cumulative abnormal stock returns around earnings announcements
            (1-month holding period)
     Abr-6: Cumulative abnormal stock returns around earnings announcements
             (6-month holding period)
     RE-1: Revisions in analysts earnings forecasts (1-month holding period)
     RE-6: Revisions in analysts earnings forecasts (6-month holding period)

                                             39
  R6-1: Price momentum (6-month prior returns, 1-month holding period)
  R6-6: Price momentum (6-month prior returns, 6-month holding period)
  R11-1: Price momentum, (11-month prior returns, 1-month holding period)
  I-Mom: Industry momentum
2. Value-versus-growth
  B/M: Book-to-market equity
  A/ME: Market Leverage
  Rev: Reversal
  E/P: Earnings-to-price
  EF/P: Analysts?earnings forecasts-to-price
  CF/P: Cash flow-to-price
  D/P: Dividend yield
  O/P: Payout yield
  NO/P: Net payout yield
  SG: Sales growth
  LTG: Long-term growth forecasts of analysts
  Dur: Equity duration
3. Investment
  ACI: Abnormal corporate investment
  I/A: Investment-to-assets
  NOA: Net operating assets
  ∆PI/A: Changes in property, plant, and equipment plus changes in inventory
           scaled by assets
  IG: Investment growth
  NSI: Net stock issues
  CEI: Composite issuance
  NXF: Net external financing
  IvG: Inventory growth
  IvC: Inventory changes
  OA: Operating accruals
  TA: Total accruals
  POA: Percent operating accruals
  PTA: Percent total accruals
4. Profitability
   ROE: Return on equity
  ROA: Return on assets

                                        40
  RNA: Return on net operating assets
  PM: Profit margin
  ATO: Asset turnover
  CTO: Capital turnover
  GP/A: Gross profits-to-assets
  F : F -score
  TES: Tax expense surprise
  TI/BI: Taxable income-to-book income
  RS: Revenue surprise
  NEI: Number of consecutive quarters with earnings increases
  FP: Failure probability
  O: O-score
5. Intangibles
   OC/A: Organizational capital-to-assets
  BC/A: Brand capital-to-assets
  Ad/M: Advertisement expense-to-market
  RD/S: R&D-to-sales
  RD/M: R&D-to-market
  RC/A: R&D capital-to-assets
  H/N: Hiring rate
  OL: Operating leverage
  G: Corporate governance
  AccQ: Accrual quality
6. Trading frictions
   ME: Market equity
  Ivol: Idiosyncratic volatility
  Tvol: Total volatility
  Svol: Systematic volatility
  MDR: Maximum daily return
  β: Market beta
  D-β: Dimsons beta
  S-Rev: Short-term reversal
  Disp: Dispersion of analysts?earnings forecasts
  Turn: Share turnover
  1/P: 1/share price
  Dvol: Dollar trading volume

                                        41
     Illiq: Illiquidity as absolute return-to-volume

A3. Anomalies Eliminated in Producing Table 5
   We eliminate the five anomalies from the above set of 73 that are most highly correlated
with each factor other than the market and size factors, in both models q-4 and M-4. The
two relevant factors in model q-4 are investment (I/A) and profitability (ROE), while in
model M-4 they are the mispricing factors, UMO1 and UMO2 . In Panel A of Table 5, the
anomalies that each factor eliminates are as follows:
I/A: CEI, H/N, I/A, LTG, SG
ROE: Disp, FP, 1/P, ROA, ROE
UMO1 : CEI, LTG, NO/P, O/P, Turn
UMO2 : FP, R11-1, R6-1, R6-6, ROA
In Panel B of Table 5, the anomalies eliminated:
I/A: A/ME, B/M, H/N, I/A, SG
ROE: Disp, FP, NEI, ROA, ROE
UMO1 : CEI, LTG, NO/P, NXF, O/P
UMO2 : FP, 1/P, R11-1, R6-1, R6-6




                                             42
                                       APPENDIX B


   This appendix contains the robusteness results discussed in subsection 3.3. Tables B1
through B15 recompute Tables 4, 5, and 7 with the following modifications to the original
procedure:

  1. Reconstruct the M-4 factors using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and 70%
     instead of 20% and 80% (Tables B1, B5, and B9).

  2. Reconstruct the M-4 factors using mispricing-measure breakpoints for the NYSE in-
     stead of NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ (Tables B2, B6, and B10).

  3. Reconstruct the M-4 SMB factor by averaging across the three mispricing categories
     instead of using only stocks in the middle category (Table B3, B7, and B11).

  4. Incorporate all of the above simultaneously (Tables B4, B8, and B12).

  5. Reconstruct annual-data factors in models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 with a minimum gap
     of 4 months after the end of the fiscal year instead of a gap of 6 to 18 months (Tables
     B13–B15).

Tables B16 through B19 recompute Tables 4 and 8 in each of two subperiods: 1967–1990
(24 years) and 1991–2013 (23 years).




                                            43
                                        Table B1
                Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies,
                   Factors Constructed Using 30% and 70% Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 4 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and
70% instead of 20% and 80%. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce
alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the
five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also
reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors).
For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and
associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for
which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In Panel
A, two versions of the GRS test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and data for
the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of the sample
period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the ten alphas
for the full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in October
1974. Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are available
by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February 1986.
          Measure                Unadjusted           FF-3          FF-5            q-4          M-4
                      Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
          Average |α|              0.52        0.67        0.45        0.34                      0.16
          Average |t|              3.14        4.44        2.93        2.34                      1.18
          GRS10                    6.89       10.10        6.71        5.99                      1.84
          p10                3.4×10 −10
                                        1.1×10  −15
                                                     6.9×10 −10
                                                                 1.2×10−8                        0.05
          GRS12                    6.16        7.71        4.17        3.95                      1.73
          p12                4.5×10−10 4.2×10−13      3.1×10−6   8.3×10−6                        0.06
          Number of min|α|            -           0           1           2                         9

                          Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
          Average |α|                  0.39           0.44         0.30          0.20          0.18
          Average |t|                  2.14           2.74         1.77          1.15          0.99
          GRS51                        2.74           2.60         1.91          1.68          1.34
          p51                      9.3×10−9      6.5×10−8      2.9×10−4      3.2×10−3          0.06
          GRS72                        2.23           2.10         1.79          1.78          1.60
          p72                      2.2×10−6      1.3×10−5      5.3×10−4      5.8×10−4      4.1×10−3
          Number of min|α|                -             10           10            23            30

              Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
          Average |α|                  0.50          0.53          0.35          0.23          0.21
          Average |t|                  3.02          3.72          2.41          1.44          1.30
          GRS51                        5.85          6.31          5.15          4.19          4.11
          p51                     2.7×10−27     6.2×10−30     4.3×10−23     2.3×10−17     6.7×10−17
          GRS72                        2.95          3.25          2.64          2.41          2.45
          p72                     1.4×10−10     3.0×10−12      1.1×10−8      2.3×10−7      1.3×10−7
          Number of min|α|                -             7            13            23            30




                                                      44
                                         Table B2
                 Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies,
                       Factors Constructed Using NYSE Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 4 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints for the NYSE
instead of NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies
produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted
FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4.
Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no
factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic
and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies
for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In
Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and
data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of
the sample period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the
ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in
October 1974. Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are
available by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February
1986.
           Measure                 Unadjusted            FF-3           FF-5            q-4           M-4
                       Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|              0.52        0.67        0.45        0.34                          0.15
           Average |t|              3.14        4.44        2.93        2.34                          1.13
           GRS10                    6.89       10.10        6.71        5.99                          1.80
           p10                3.4×10−10 1.1×10−15 6.9×10−10       1.2×10−8                            0.06
           GRS12                    6.16        7.71        4.17        3.95                          1.81
           p12                4.5×10 −10
                                         4.2×10  −13
                                                       3.1×10 −6
                                                                  8.3×10−6                            0.04
           Number of min|α|            -           0           1           2                             9

                            Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|                   0.39            0.44          0.30          0.20           0.18
           Average |t|                   2.14            2.74          1.77          1.15           0.98
           GRS51                         2.74            2.60          1.91          1.68           1.24
           p51                       9.3×10−9       6.5×10−8       2.9×10−4      3.2×10−3           0.13
           GRS72                         2.23            2.10          1.79          1.78           1.55
           p72                       2.2×10−6       1.3×10−5       5.3×10−4      5.8×10−4       7.3×10−3
           Number of min|α|                 -              10            11            20             32

               Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
           Average |α|                   0.50           0.53          0.35           0.23           0.21
           Average |t|                   3.02           3.72          2.41           1.44           1.32
           GRS51                         5.85           6.31          5.15           4.19           4.06
           p51                      2.7×10−27      6.2×10−30     4.3×10−23      2.3×10−17      1.4×10−16
           GRS72                         2.95           3.25          2.64           2.41           2.59
           p72                      1.4×10−10      3.0×10−12      1.1×10−8       2.3×10−7       2.2×10−8
           Number of min|α|                 -              7            10             25             31




                                                         45
                                       Table B3
                Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies,
                SM B Constructed by Averaging Across Mispricing Categories
This table recomputes Table 4 with the SM B factor constructed by averaging across the three mispricing cate-
gories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. The table reports measures that summarize the degree
to which anomalies produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French
(1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study,
denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model
with no factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the
F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of
anomalies for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the
table. In Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974,
and data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start
of the sample period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether
the ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample
in October 1974. Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose
data are available by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by
February 1986.
          Measure                 Unadjusted           FF-3          FF-5            q-4           M-4
                      Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
          Average |α|              0.52        0.67        0.45        0.34                       0.17
          Average |t|              3.14        4.44        2.93        2.34                       1.23
          GRS10                    6.89       10.10        6.71        5.99                       1.76
          p10                3.4×10−10 1.1×10−15 6.9×10−10       1.2×10−8                         0.06
          GRS12                    6.16        7.71        4.17        3.95                       1.71
          p12                4.5×10−10 4.2×10−13      3.1×10−6   8.3×10−6                         0.06
          Number of min|α|            -           0           1           2                          9

                           Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
          Average |α|                   0.39           0.44         0.30          0.20           0.19
          Average |t|                   2.14           2.74         1.77          1.15           1.06
          GRS51                         2.74           2.60         1.91          1.68           1.35
          p51                       9.3×10−9      6.5×10−8      2.9×10−4      3.2×10−3           0.06
          GRS72                         2.23           2.10         1.79          1.78           1.61
          p72                       2.2×10−6      1.3×10−5      5.3×10−4      5.8×10−4       3.9×10−3
          Number of min|α|                 -              9           12            24             28

               Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
          Average |α|                   0.50          0.53          0.35          0.23           0.21
          Average |t|                   3.02          3.72          2.41          1.44           1.34
          GRS51                         5.85          6.31          5.15          4.19           4.04
          p51                      2.7×10−27     6.2×10−30     4.3×10−23     2.3×10−17      1.8×10−16
          GRS72                         2.95          3.25          2.64          2.41           2.38
          p72                      1.4×10−10     3.0×10−12      1.1×10−8      2.3×10−7       3.2×10−7
          Number of min|α|                 -             8            13            21             31




                                                       46
                                          Table B4
                 Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies,
                 Factors Constructed Using All Modifications in Tables B1–B3
This table recomputes Table 4 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and
70% for the NYSE instead of 20% and 80% for NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. Also, the SM B factor is constructed
by averaging across the three mispricing categories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. The
table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce alpha under four different factor
models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and
French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-
factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on the
average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). For each model, the table reports
the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test
of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the model produces the smallest
absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are
reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin
in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of the sample period, which is from January 1967
through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal
zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in October 1974. Panels B and C also report two
versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are available by January 1967, while GRS72 use
those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February 1986.
           Measure                Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5             q-4          M-4
                       Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|              0.52        0.67        0.45        0.34                        0.16
           Average |t|              3.14        4.44        2.93        2.34                        1.22
           GRS10                    6.89       10.10        6.71        5.99                        2.26
           p10                3.4×10 −10 1.1×10  −15  6.9×10 −10  1.2×10−8                          0.01
           GRS12                    6.16        7.71        4.17        3.95                        2.14
           p12                4.5×10−10 4.2×10−13      3.1×10−6   8.3×10−6                          0.01
           Number of min|α|            -           0           1           1                          10

                           Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|                   0.39           0.44         0.30           0.20          0.18
           Average |t|                   2.14           2.74         1.77           1.15          1.02
           GRS51                         2.74           2.60         1.91           1.68          1.34
           p51                       9.3×10−9      6.5×10−8      2.9×10−4       3.2×10−3          0.07
           GRS72                         2.23           2.10         1.79           1.78          1.59
           p72                       2.2×10−6      1.3×10−5      5.3×10−4       5.8×10−4      4.8×10−3
           Number of min|α|                 -             10            9             21            33

               Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
           Average |α|                   0.50          0.53          0.35           0.23          0.22
           Average |t|                   3.02          3.72          2.41           1.44          1.38
           GRS51                         5.85          6.31          5.15           4.19          4.29
           p51                      2.7×10−27     6.2×10−30     4.3×10−23      2.3×10−17     6.2×10−18
           GRS72                         2.95          3.25          2.64           2.41          2.47
           p72                      1.4×10−10     3.0×10−12      1.1×10−8       2.3×10−7      1.0×10−7
           Number of min|α|                 -             5            13             26            29



                                                        47
                                            Table B5
                    Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                       Less Correlated with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4,
                       Factors Constructed Using 30% and 70% Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 5 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and 70%
instead of 20% and 80%. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce alpha
under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-
factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a),
denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported
are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). For each
model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated
p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the
model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. Panels A and B
correspond to Panels B and C of Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each of four factors—those
in models q-4 and M-4 other than the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the 73) whose long-short
returns are most highly correlated with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 56 anomalies in Panel A
and 54 in Panel B. The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). Two versions
of the GRS test are reported: GRS41 in Panel A (or GRS40 in Panel B) uses the 41 (or 40) anomalies whose
data are available by January 1967, while GRS55 in Panel A (or GRS53 in Panel B) uses the remaining anomalies
whose data are available by February 1986.


    Measure                              Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5            q-4          M-4
                           Panel A: 56 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.37          0.38          0.26          0.20          0.18
    Average   |t|                               2.13          2.57          1.69          1.17          1.00
    GRS41                                       3.01          2.81          1.95          1.63          1.35
    p41                                     6.7×10−9      6.1×10−8      5.8×10−4      9.3×10−3          0.08
    GRS55                                       2.28          2.17          1.75          1.66          1.58
    p55                                     7.2×10−6      2.5×10−5      2.0×10−3      4.5×10−3      9.8×10−3
    Number    of min|α|                            -             7             7            19            23
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -             -             -            27            29

               Panel B: 54 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.45          0.46          0.32          0.25          0.22
    Average   |t|                               2.94          3.53          2.41          1.61          1.42
    GRS40                                       6.38          7.03          5.78          4.69          4.54
    p40                                    7.3×10−26     5.0×10−29     8.3×10−23     2.9×10−17     1.8×10−16
    GRS53                                       3.36          4.07          3.12          2.82          2.87
    p53                                    3.6×10−11     1.0×10−14     6.7×10−10      2.0×10−8      1.2×10−8
    Number    of min|α|                            -             6            11            16            21
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -             -             -            21            33




                                                       48
                                            Table B6
                    Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                       Less Correlated with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4,
                          Factors Constructed Using NYSE Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 5 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints for the NYSE
instead of NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies
produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted
FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4.
Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no
factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic
and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies
for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. Panels
A and B correspond to Panels B and C of Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each of four
factors—those in models q-4 and M-4 other than the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the 73)
whose long-short returns are most highly correlated with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 56
anomalies in Panel A and 54 in Panel B. The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564
months). Two versions of the GRS test are reported: GRS40 uses the 40 anomalies whose data are available
by January 1967, while GRS55 in Panel A (or GRS53 in Panel B) uses the remaining anomalies whose data are
available by February 1986.


    Measure                                Unadjusted            FF-3           FF-5            q-4           M-4
                            Panel A: 56 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                                0.36           0.38          0.26           0.20             0.17
    Average   |t|                                2.13           2.58          1.70           1.17             0.95
    GRS40                                        3.08           2.89          2.00           1.66             1.15
    p40                                      3.9×10−9       3.6×10−8      4.0×10−4       8.0×10−3             0.25
    GRS55                                        2.28           2.14          1.70           1.61             1.42
    p55                                      7.3×10−6       3.3×10−5      3.3×10−3       7.1×10−3             0.04
    Number    of min|α|                             -              7             8             15               26
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4                -              -             -             22               34

                Panel B: 54 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                                0.45           0.46          0.32           0.25           0.22
    Average   |t|                                2.94           3.53          2.41           1.61           1.42
    GRS40                                        6.38           7.03          5.78           4.69           4.40
    p40                                     7.3×10−26      5.0×10−29     8.3×10−23      2.9×10−17      8.8×10−16
    GRS53                                        3.36           4.07          3.12           2.82           3.00
    p53                                     3.6×10−11      1.0×10−14     6.7×10−10       2.0×10−8       2.5×10−9
    Number    of min|α|                             -              6             8             18             22
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4                -              -             -             25             29




                                                         49
                                              Table B7
                    Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                     Less Correlated with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4, SM B
                      Constructed by Averaging Across Mispricing Categories
This table recomputes Table 5 with the SM B factor constructed by averaging across the three mispricing cate-
gories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. The table reports measures that summarize the degree
to which anomalies produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French
(1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study,
denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model
with no factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the
F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of
anomalies for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the
table. Panels A and B correspond to Panels B and C of Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each
of four factors—those in models q-4 and M-4 other than the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the
73) whose long-short returns are most highly correlated with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 57
anomalies in Panel A and 54 in Panel B. The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564
months). Two versions of the GRS test are reported: GRS41 in Panel A (or GRS40 in Panel B) uses the 41 (or
40) anomalies whose data are available by January 1967, while GRS56 in Panel A (or GRS53 in Panel B) uses
the remaining anomalies whose data are available by February 1986.


    Measure                              Unadjusted           FF-3          FF-5            q-4          M-4
                           Panel A: 57 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                              0.37          0.39          0.27          0.19          0.18
    Average   |t|                              2.14          2.60          1.71          1.15          1.05
    GRS41                                      3.01          2.81          1.95          1.63          1.36
    p41                                    6.7×10−9      6.1×10−8      5.8×10−4      9.3×10−3          0.07
    GRS56                                      2.29          2.16          1.73          1.64          1.59
    p56                                    5.5×10−6      2.5×10−5      2.3×10−3      5.2×10−3      8.3×10−3
    Number    of min|α|                           -             6             9            20            22
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4              -             -             -            27            30

               Panel B: 54 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                              0.45          0.46          0.32          0.25          0.23
    Average   |t|                              2.94          3.53          2.41          1.61          1.47
    GRS40                                      6.38          7.03          5.78          4.69          4.55
    p40                                   7.3×10−26     5.0×10−29     8.3×10−23     2.9×10−17     1.6×10−16
    GRS53                                      3.36          4.07          3.12          2.82          3.03
    p53                                   3.6×10−11     1.0×10−14     6.7×10−10      2.0×10−8      1.8×10−9
    Number    of min|α|                           -             6             9            16            23
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4              -             -             -            21            33




                                                       50
                                             Table B8
                    Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                    Less Correlated with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4, Factors
                       Constructed Using All Modifications in Tables B5–B7
This table recomputes Table 5 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and
70% for the NYSE instead of 20% and 80% for NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. Also, the SM B factor is constructed
by averaging across the three mispricing categories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. The
table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies produce alpha under four different factor
models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and
French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-
factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4. Also reported are measures based on the
average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no factors). For each model, the table reports
the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic and associated p-value for the “GRS” test
of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies for which the model produces the smallest
absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. Panels A and B correspond to Panels B and C of
Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each of four factors—those in models q-4 and M-4 other than
the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the 73) whose long-short returns are most highly correlated
with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 56 anomalies in Panel A and 55 in Panel B. The sample
period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). Two versions of the GRS test are reported:
GRS41 in Panel A (or GRS40 in Panel B) uses the 41 (or 40) anomalies whose data are available by January
1967, while GRS55 in Panel A (or GRS54 in Panel B) uses the remaining anomalies whose data are available by
February 1986.


    Measure                               Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5             q-4          M-4
                            Panel A: 56 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.37           0.38          0.26           0.20            0.18
    Average   |t|                               2.13           2.57          1.69           1.17            1.03
    GRS41                                       3.01           2.81          1.95           1.63            1.34
    p41                                     6.7×10−9       6.1×10−8      5.8×10−4       9.3×10−3            0.08
    GRS55                                       2.28           2.17          1.75           1.66            1.58
    p55                                     7.2×10−6       2.5×10−5      2.0×10−3       4.5×10−3            0.01
    Number    of min|α|                            -              7             6             17              26
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -              -             -             27              29

               Panel B: 55 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                               0.45           0.47          0.32           0.25          0.23
    Average   |t|                               2.96           3.57          2.42           1.61          1.49
    GRS40                                       6.38           7.03          5.78           4.69          4.69
    p40                                    7.3×10−26      5.0×10−29     8.3×10−23      2.9×10−17     3.1×10−17
    GRS54                                       3.33           3.99          3.07           2.78          2.88
    p54                                    3.8×10−11      1.9×10−14     9.5×10−10       2.6×10−8      8.1×10−9
    Number    of min|α|                            -              4            10             18            23
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4               -              -             -             25            30




                                                        51
                                           Table B9
                   Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors, Factors
                        Constructed Using 30% and 70% Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 7 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and
70% instead of 20% and 80%. Panel A reports a factor’s estimated monthly alpha (in percent) with respect to
each of the other models (with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses). Panel B
computes the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken (1989) F -test of whether a given model produces zero alphas for the factors
of an alternative model(with p-values in parentheses). The models considered are the five-factor model of Fama
and French (2015), denoted FF-5, which includes the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A; the four-factor model
of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4, which includes the factors I/A and ROE; and the four-factor
mispricing-factor model, denoted M-4, which includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The sample period is from
January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months).


                                                Alpha computed with respect to model
                 Factors                         FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                        Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
                 Factors in FF-5
                  HM L                              -               0.04              0.05
                                                                   (0.43)           (0.50)
                   RM W                             -               0.04              0.11
                                                                   (0.55)           (1.26)
                   CM A                             -               0.02             -0.02
                                                                   (0.47)           (-0.43)
                 Factors in q-4
                  I/A                             0.12                -              0.09
                                                 (3.48)                             (1.57)
                   ROE                            0.45                -              0.36
                                                 (5.53)                             (4.00)
                 Factors in M-4
                  U M O1                          0.22              0.22               -
                                                 (4.23)            (3.55)
                   U M O2                         0.48              0.26               -
                                                 (4.15)            (2.15)

                                    Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
                 HM L, RM W , CM A                  -               0.23             0.53
                                                                   (0.87)           (0.66)

                 I/A, ROE                        19.06                -               6.67
                                              (9.8×10−9)                          (1.4×10−3 )

                 U M O1 , U M O2                  22.25            11.39               -
                                              (5.1×10−10)       (1.4×10−5 )




                                                        52
                                             Table B10
                        Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors,
                         Factors Constructed Using NYSE Breakpoints
This table recomputes Table 7 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints for the NYSE
instead of NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. Panel A reports a factor’s estimated monthly alpha (in percent) with respect
to each of the other models (with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses). Panel B
computes the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken (1989) F -test of whether a given model produces zero alphas for the factors
of an alternative model(with p-values in parentheses). The models considered are the five-factor model of Fama
and French (2015), denoted FF-5, which includes the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A; the four-factor model
of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4, which includes the factors I/A and ROE; and the four-factor
mispricing-factor model, denoted M-4, which includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The sample period is from
January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months).


                                                  Alpha computed with respect to model
                 Factors                           FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                          Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
                 Factors in FF-5
                  HM L                               -                0.04              0.03
                                                                     (0.43)           (0.29)
                   RM W                              -                0.04              0.13
                                                                     (0.55)           (1.50)
                   CM A                              -                0.02             -0.04
                                                                     (0.47)           (-0.63)
                 Factors in q-4
                  I/A                              0.12                 -               0.09
                                                  (3.48)                               (1.57)
                   ROE                             0.45                 -               0.36
                                                  (5.53)                               (4.00)
                 Factors in M-4
                  U M O1                           0.29               0.31                -
                                                  (4.72)             (4.38)
                   U M O2                          0.60               0.33                -
                                                  (4.46)             (2.26)

                                     Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
                 HM L, RM W , CM A                   -                0.23              0.70
                                                                     (0.87)            (0.55)

                 I/A, ROE                         19.06                 -               7.56
                                               (9.8×10−9)                           (5.7×10−4 )

                 U M O1 , U M O2                   26.84             16.02                -
                                               (7.5×10−12)        (1.7×10−7 )




                                                         53
                                            Table B11
                     Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors, SM B
                     Constructed by Averaging Across Mispricing Categories
This table recomputes Table 7 with the SM B factor constructed by averaging across the three mispricing cate-
gories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. Panel A reports a factor’s estimated monthly alpha
(in percent) with respect to each of the other models (with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics
in parentheses). Panel B computes the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken (1989) F -test of whether a given model produces
zero alphas for the factors of an alternative model(with p-values in parentheses). The models considered are the
five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5, which includes the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A;
the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4, which includes the factors I/A and ROE;
and the four-factor mispricing-factor model, denoted M-4, which includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The
sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months).


                                                  Alpha computed with respect to model
                  Factors                          FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                          Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
                  Factors in FF-5
                   HM L                               -               0.04              -0.02
                                                                     (0.43)            (-0.19)
                   RM W                               -               0.04               0.10
                                                                     (0.55)            (1.16)
                   CM A                               -               0.02              -0.02
                                                                     (0.47)            (-0.40)
                  Factors in q-4
                   I/A                              0.12                -               0.09
                                                   (3.48)                              (1.57)
                   ROE                              0.45                -               0.36
                                                   (5.53)                              (4.00)
                  Factors in M-4
                   U M O1                           0.33              0.36                -
                                                   (4.93)            (4.54)
                   U M O2                           0.64              0.35                -
                                                   (4.17)            (2.24)

                                      Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
                  HM L, RM W , CM A                   -               0.23              0.49
                                                                     (0.87)            (0.69)

                  I/A, ROE                         19.06                -               8.89
                                                (9.8×10−9)                          (1.6×10−4 )

                  U M O1 , U M O2                  25.35             15.66                -
                                               (2.9×10−11)        (2.4×10−7 )




                                                          54
                                           Table B12
                   Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors, Factors
                    Constructed Using All Modifications in Tables B9–B11
This table recomputes Table 7 with the factors constructed using mispricing-measure breakpoints of 30% and
70% for the NYSE instead of 20% and 80% for NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ. Also, the SM B factor is constructed
by averaging across the three mispricing categories instead of using only stocks in the middle category. Panel
A reports a factor’s estimated monthly alpha (in percent) with respect to each of the other models (with White
(1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses). Panel B computes the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken
(1989) F -test of whether a given model produces zero alphas for the factors of an alternative model(with p-values
in parentheses). The models considered are the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5, which
includes the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted
q-4, which includes the factors I/A and ROE; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model, denoted M-4, which
includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564
months).


                                                  Alpha computed with respect to model
                 Factors                           FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                         Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
                 Factors in FF-5
                  HM L                               -                0.04              0.09
                                                                     (0.43)           (1.02)
                   RM W                              -                0.04              0.13
                                                                     (0.55)           (1.47)
                   CM A                              -                0.02             -0.02
                                                                     (0.47)           (-0.30)
                 Factors in q-4
                  I/A                              0.12                 -               0.09
                                                  (3.48)                               (1.57)
                   ROE                             0.45                 -               0.36
                                                  (5.53)                               (4.00)
                 Factors in M-4
                  U M O1                           0.19               0.19                -
                                                  (3.90)             (3.32)
                   U M O2                          0.49               0.28                -
                                                  (4.65)             (2.48)

                                     Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
                 HM L, RM W , CM A                   -                0.23              0.91
                                                                     (0.87)            (0.44)

                 I/A, ROE                         19.06                 -               7.79
                                               (9.8×10−9)                           (4.6×10−4 )

                 U M O1 , U M O2                   23.74             12.12                -
                                               (1.3×10−10)        (7.1×10−6 )




                                                         55
                                      Table B13
   Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies, Annual-Data Factors
     for Models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 Reconstructed with Minimum Four-Month Gap
This table recomputes Table 4 after reconstructing factors in models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 that use annual data.
A minimum gap of 4 months after the end of the fiscal year (instead of a gap of 6 to 18 months) is required
before using an annual variable in the factor construction, while using immediate prior-month values of market
capitalization. We apply this change to SM B and HM L in model FF-3, to SM B, HM L, RM W , and CM A in
model FF-5, and to I/A in model q-4. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies
produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted
FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4.
Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no
factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic
and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies
for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. In
Panel A, two versions of the GRS test are reported. Data for the distress anomaly begin in October 1974, and
data for the return-on-assets anomaly begin in November 1971. The other ten anomalies begin at the start of
the sample period, which is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564 months). GRS10 tests whether the
ten alphas for the full-sample anomalies equal zero, while GRS12 uses all 12 anomalies and begins the sample in
October 1974. Panels B and C also report two versions of the GRS test: GRS51 uses 51 anomalies whose data are
available by January 1967, while GRS72 use those anomalies plus 21 others whose data are available by February
1986.
           Measure                 Unadjusted            FF-3           FF-5            q-4           M-4
                       Panel A: 12 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|              0.52        0.68        0.45        0.30                          0.18
           Average |t|              3.14        4.55        2.85        2.17                          1.29
           GRS10                    6.89       11.47        7.59        5.83                          1.84
           p10                3.4×10 −10
                                         5.5×10  −10
                                                      2.2×10 −11
                                                                  2.2×10−8                            0.05
           GRS12                    6.16        8.38        4.56        3.73                          1.88
           p12                4.5×10 −10
                                         2.2×10  −14
                                                       5.8×10 −7
                                                                  2.1×10−5                            0.03
           Number of min|α|            -           0           1           3                             8

                            Panel B: 73 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|                   0.39            0.44          0.32          0.21           0.18
           Average |t|                   2.14            2.73          1.90          1.20           0.99
           GRS51                         2.74            2.66          2.10          1.75           1.28
           p51                       9.3×10−9       3.0×10−8       3.3×10−5      1.6×10−3           0.10
           GRS72                         2.23            2.14          1.67          1.83           1.54
           p72                       2.2×10−6       7.2×10−6       2.0×10−3      3.3×10−4       8.1×10−3
           Number of min|α|                 -               8             6            22             37

               Panel C: 73 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
           Average |α|                   0.50           0.53          0.38           0.24           0.22
           Average |t|                   3.02           3.76          2.66           1.45           1.38
           GRS51                         5.85           6.43          5.43           4.28           4.17
           p51                      2.7×10−27      1.2×10−30     8.9×10−25      6.5×10−18      3.1×10−17
           GRS72                         2.95           3.41          2.75           2.46           2.68
           p72                      1.4×10−10      3.3×10−13      2.6×10−9       1.1×10−7       6.2×10−9
           Number of min|α|                 -              7             6             27             33

                                                         56
                                       Table B14
       Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies Less Correlated
          with Factors in Models q-4 and M-4, Annual-Data Factors for Models
          FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 Reconstructed with Minimum Four-Month Gap
This table recomputes Table 5 after reconstructing factors in models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 that use annual data.
A minimum gap of 4 months after the end of the fiscal year (instead of a gap of 6 to 18 months) is required
before using an annual variable in the factor construction, while using immediate prior-month values of market
capitalization. We apply this change to SM B and HM L in model FF-3, to SM B, HM L, RM W , and CM A in
model FF-5, and to I/A in model q-4. The table reports measures that summarize the degree to which anomalies
produce alpha under four different factor models: the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), denoted
FF-3; the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and
Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model introduced in this study, denoted M-4.
Also reported are measures based on the average unadjusted return spreads (the alphas in a model with no
factors). For each model, the table reports the average absolute alpha, average absolute t-statistic, the F -statistic
and associated p-value for the “GRS” test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the number of anomalies
for which the model produces the smallest absolute alpha among the models being compared in the table. Panels
A and B correspond to Panels B and C of Table 4, except the set of anomalies is reduced: For each of four
factors—those in models q-4 and M-4 other than the market and size factors—the five anomalies (of the 73)
whose long-short returns are most highly correlated with the factor are eliminated. This procedure leaves 57
anomalies in Panel A and 54 in Panel B. The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013 (564
months). Two versions of the GRS test are reported: GRS41 in Panel A (or GRS40 in Panel B) uses the 41 (or
40) anomalies whose data are available by January 1967, while GRS56 in Panel A (or GRS53 in Panel B) uses
the remaining anomalies whose data are available by February 1986.


    Measure                                Unadjusted            FF-3           FF-5            q-4           M-4
                            Panel A: 57 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
    Average   |α|                                0.37           0.39          0.28           0.21             0.17
    Average   |t|                                2.14           2.56          1.83           1.23             0.97
    GRS41                                        3.01           2.87          2.15           1.71             1.26
    p41                                      6.7×10−9       3.2×10−8      7.7×10−5       4.7×10−3             0.13
    GRS56                                        2.29           2.22          1.67           1.68             1.53
    p56                                      5.5×10−6       1.2×10−5      4.0×10−3       3.5×10−3             0.01
    Number    of min|α|                             -              6             4             17               30
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4                -              -             -             22               35

                Panel B: 54 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
    Average   |α|                                0.45           0.47          0.34           0.26           0.23
    Average   |t|                                2.94           3.54          2.63           1.62           1.47
    GRS40                                        6.38           7.19          6.25           4.80           4.55
    p40                                     7.3×10−26      8.7×10−30     3.9×10−25      7.8×10−18      1.6×10−16
    GRS54                                        3.36           4.29          3.31           2.85           3.03
    p54                                     3.6×10−11      7.8×10−16     6.9×10−11       1.4×10−8       1.8×10−9
    Number    of min|α|                             -              6             4             21             23
    Number    of min|α|, q-4 vs. M-4                -              -             -             24             30




                                                         57
                                      Table B15
      Models’ Abilities to Explain Each Other’s Factors, Annual-Data Factors for
      Models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 Reconstructed with Minimum Four-Month Gap
This table recomputes Table 7 after reconstructing factors in models FF-3, FF-5, and q-4 that use annual
data. A minimum gap of 4 months after the end of the fiscal year (instead of a gap of 6 to 18 months) is
required before using an annual variable in the factor construction, while using immediate prior-month values
of market capitalization. We apply this change to SM B and HM L in model FF-3, to SM B, HM L, RM W ,
and CM A in model FF-5, and to I/A in model q-4. Because the FF-5 factor CM A then becomes identical
to the q-4 factor I/A, we omit the comparisons involving those factors. Panel A reports a factor’s estimated
monthly alpha (in percent) with respect to each of the other models (with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-
consistent t-statistics in parentheses). Panel B computes the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken (1989) F -test of whether
a given model produces zero alphas for the factors of an alternative model(with p-values in parentheses).
The models considered are the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), denoted FF-5, which includes
the factors HM L, RM W , and CM A; the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015a), denoted q-4,
which includes the factors I/A and ROE; and the four-factor mispricing-factor model, denoted M-4, which
includes the factors U M O1 and U M O2 . The sample period is from January 1967 through December 2013
(564 months).


                                               Alpha computed with respect to model
               Factors                          FF-5           q-4             M-4
                                       Panel A: Alpha (t-statistic)
               Factors in FF-5
                HM L                               -               -0.01            -0.07
                                                                  (-0.10)          (-0.69)
                 RM W                              -                0.10             0.15
                                                                  (1.07)           (1.61)
                 CM A                              -                  -             -0.08
                                                                                   (-1.38)
               Factors in q-4
                I/A                                -                 -              -0.08
                                                                                   (-1.38)
                 ROE                             0.49                -               0.36
                                                (5.92)                             (4.00)
               Factors in M-4
                U M O1                           0.32              0.33                -
                                                (5.53)            (4.67)
                 U M O2                          0.64              0.24                -
                                                (4.18)            (1.55)

                                   Panel B: GRS F -statistic (p-value)
               HM L, RM W , CM A                   -                 -               1.45
                                                                                    (0.23)

               I/A, ROE                            -                 -               8.29
                                                                                 (2.8×10−4 )

               U M O1 , U M O2                   28.84            16.88                -
                                             (1.2×10−12)       (7.7×10−8 )

                                                       58
                                       Table B16
                 Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                                Subperiod 1: 1967–1990
This table recomputes Table 4 for the first subperiod. An anomaly is included in the subperiod analysis if it
satisfies the following three conditions: (i) the available data for the anomaly cover the entire sample period from
1967 to 2013, (ii) the estimated FF-3 long-short alpha for the anomaly has the same sign in the early and late
subperiods, and (iii) the FF-3 alpha is significant at the one-sided 10% significance level in both subperiods.


           Measure                Unadjusted            FF-3          FF-5             q-4          M-4
                       Panel A: 10 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|              0.59        0.57        0.44        0.34                        0.08
           Average |t|              2.81        3.17        2.97        1.90                        0.44
           GRS10                    5.45        6.04        2.94        2.28                        0.32
           p10                2.2×10  −7
                                          2.7×10  −8
                                                       1.6×10 −3
                                                                        0.01                        0.98
           Number of min|α|            -           0           2           0                           8

                           Panel B: 29 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
           Average |α|                   0.53          0.66          0.36           0.28          0.31
           Average |t|                   2.38          3.52          2.19           1.48          1.46
           GRS29                         4.56          5.06          3.70           2.52          2.41
           p29                      1.0×10−11     2.4×10−13      8.4×10−9       6.7×10−5      1.5×10−4
           Number of min|α|                 -             0             8             10            11

               Panel C: 38 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
           Average |α|                   0.67          0.67          0.36           0.37          0.30
           Average |t|                   3.47          4.39          2.62           2.17          1.68
           GRS38                         9.23          9.16          7.28           5.48          5.85
           p38                      5.6×10−30     1.3×10−29     1.8×10−23      4.1×10−17     1.8×10−18
           Number of min|α|                 -             0            11             10            17




                                                        59
                                       Table B17
                 Summary Measures of Models’ Abilities to Explain Anomalies
                                Subsample 2: 1991–2013
This table recomputes Table 4 for the first subperiod. An anomaly is included in the subperiod analysis if it
satisfies the following three conditions: (i) the available data for the anomaly cover the entire sample period from
1967 to 2013, (ii) the estimated FF-3 long-short alpha for the anomaly has the same sign in the early and late
subperiods, and (iii) the FF-3 alpha is significant at the one-sided 10% significance level in both subperiods.


            Measure                 Unadjusted            FF-3         FF-5           q-4          M-4
                        Panel A: 10 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
            Average |α|               0.46        0.60        0.44      0.38                       0.20
            Average |t|               2.01        2.94        2.97      1.94                       1.08
            GRS10                     3.54        5.38        2.99      3.44                       1.43
            p10                  2.1×10 −4
                                            3.0×10  −7
                                                         1.4×10 −3
                                                                   3.0×10−4                        0.17
            Number of min|α|             -           0           0          1                         9

                           Panel B: 29 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
            Average |α|                    0.35          0.60           0.36         0.22          0.24
            Average |t|                    1.40          2.57           2.19         0.91          0.91
            GRS29                          2.09          2.24           1.47         1.62          1.28
            p29                       1.4×10−3       5.0×10−4           0.06         0.03          0.16
            Number of min|α|                  -             1              5           11            12

               Panel C: 38 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
            Average |α|                    0.48          0.64         0.36         0.20          0.19
            Average |t|                    1.85          2.98         2.62         0.96          0.80
            GRS38                          3.34          3.97         2.91         2.94          2.66
            p38                       8.4×10−9      3.2×10−11     4.6×10−7     3.4×10−7      3.9×10−6
            Number of min|α|                  -             0            6           13            19




                                                        60
                                           Table B18
                                Comparison of Three-Factor Models
                                    Subsample 1: 1967–1990
This table recomputes Table 8 for the first subperiod. An anomaly is included in the subperiod analysis if it
satisfies the following three conditions: (i) the available data for the anomaly cover the entire sample period
from 1967 to 2013, (ii) the estimated FF-3 long-short alpha for the anomaly has the same sign in the early
and late subperiods, and (iii) the FF-3 alpha is significant at the one-sided 10% significance level in both
subperiods.


                                                                 FF-3                        M-3
                         Panel A: 10 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                    0.57                             0.15
             Average |t|                                    3.17                             0.72
             GRS10                                          6.04                             0.58
             p10                                       2.7×10−8                              0.83
             Number of min |α|                                 0                               10

                         Panel B: 29 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                        0.66                       0.29
             Average |t|                                        3.52                       1.35
             GRS29                                              5.06                       2.56
             p29                                           2.4×10−13                   4.7×10−5
             Number of min |α|                                     3                         26

             Panel C: 38 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
             Average |α|                                        0.67                       0.37
             Average |t|                                        4.39                       1.90
             GRS38                                              9.16                       5.88
             p38                                           1.3×10−29                  1.3×10−18
             Number of min |α|                                     5                         33




                                                      61
                                           Table B19
                                Comparison of Three-Factor Models
                                    Subsample 2: 1991–2013
This table recomputes Table 8 for the first subperiod. An anomaly is included in the subperiod analysis if it
satisfies the following three conditions: (i) the available data for the anomaly cover the entire sample period
from 1967 to 2013, (ii) the estimated FF-3 long-short alpha for the anomaly has the same sign in the early
and late subperiods, and (iii) the FF-3 alpha is significant at the one-sided 10% significance level in both
subperiods.


                                                                 FF-3                        M-3
                         Panel A: 10 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                    0.60                             0.30
             Average |t|                                    2.94                             1.24
             GRS10                                          5.38                             1.53
             p10                                       3.0×10−7                              0.13
             Number of min |α|                                 1                                9

                         Panel B: 29 Anomalies, value-weighted, NYSE deciles
             Average |α|                                         0.60                        0.35
             Average |t|                                         2.57                        1.12
             GRS29                                               2.24                        1.44
             p29                                            5.0×10−4                         0.07
             Number of min |α|                                      5                          24

             Panel C: 38 Anomalies, equally weighted, NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ deciles
             Average |α|                                        0.64                       0.32
             Average |t|                                        2.98                       1.13
             GRS38                                              3.97                       2.51
             p38                                           3.2×10−11                   1.4×10−5
             Number of min |α|                                     4                         34




                                                      62
