                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INFLATION STABILIZATION WITH
                      INCOMES POLICY SUPPORT:
                  A REVIEW OF THE EXPERIENCE IN
                  ARGENTINA, BRAZIL AND ISRAEL




                        Rudiger Dornbusch
                     Mario Henrique Simonsen




                     Working Paper No. 2153




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 1987




Paper prepared for the the Group of Thirty, New York, October 2-3,
1986. We are indebted to Stanley Fischer for helpful discussions
and suggestions. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2153
                                                  February 1987


       Inflation Stabilization with Incomes Policy Support:
   A Review of the Experience in Argentina, Brazil and Israel



                                   ABSTRACT


        In 1985—86 Argentina, Brazil and Israel initiated programs of
stabilization after episodes of high and sharply accelerating inflation.
Among the key features of each stabilization program were the use of wage—
price controls, a fixed exchange rate and fiscal correction as well as a
significant expansion in the nominal quantity of money. The combination of
fiscal correction and incomes policy has come to be known as "heterodox"
stabilization policy, thus opposing it to the conventional IMF programs
which emphasize tight monetary and fiscal policies as the exclusive
instrument of stabilization.
        The stabilization programs in Argentina and Israel have now been
in force for over a year and the more recent one in Brazil for half a
year. There is accordingly enough evidence to make a first judgment on the
success and the limitations of these new schemes. At the same time it is
worthwhile spelling out some of the special features of stabilization and
the resulting intellectual case for heterodox programs.
        The paper focusses on the conceptual issues related to the use of
incomes policy in the context of stabilization when inertia is a central
feature. The analysis includes the relation betweeen deficits and
inflation, inertial inflation and the basics of monetary reform. We also
review the actual stabilization experience in Argentina, Brazil and
Israel. The paper concludes with a discussion of the political dimension
of stabilization, showing the extraordinary political popularity of the
new programs.


Rudiger Dornbusch                             Mario Henrique Simonsen
Massachusetts Institute of                    EPGE Fundacao Getulio Vargas
Technologyand National Bureau of              Praia de Botafogo 190
Economic Research                             Rio de Janeiro,R.J. 22.252
E52—357 MIT Cambridge,Ma. 02139               (21) 551—2849
(617) 661—7882
1
                                      2




          In 1985—86 Argentina, Brazil and Israel initiated programs of

stabilization after episodes of high and sharply accelerating inflation.

Among   the   key features of each stabilization program were the use of wage—

price controls, a fixed exchange rate and fiscal correction as well as a

significant expansion in the nominal quantity of money. The combination of

fiscal correction and incomes policy has come to be known as "heterodox"

stabilization policy, thus opposing it to the conventional IMF programs

which emphasize tight monetary and fiscal policies as the exclusive

instrument of stabilization.

         The stabilization programs in Argentina and Israel have now been

in force for over a year and the more recent one in Brazil for half a

year. There is accordingly enough evidence to make a first judgment on the

success and the limitations of these new schemes. At the same time it is

worthwhile spelling out some of the special features of stabilization and

the resulting intellectual case for heterodox programs. We leave little

doubt that the concept of these new programs is entirely correct——a

longstanding disdain for controls by the economics profession

notwithstanding. But we also emphasize that the temptation to forget about

fundamentals is extraordinarily large and ultimately fatal to

stabilization.

          A main point of our paper is to isolate the precise role these

programs can expect to play. Our point is that they provide an immensely

valuable breathing spell in which price stability without deep recession,

and as a result very strong political support for the program and the
                                  3


policy maker, yield a platform from which to make the inevitable

adjustments in the budget which are the ultimate pillars of stabilization.

We note that mistaking the breathing spell for success, and failure to use

the political support at its height for the difficult task of fiscal

correction, will mean that soon the program must slip. And when it does

slip it does so irrecoverably. The focus then is on how these programs,

unlike traditional programs, do provide an immediate, temporary and very

favorable opportunity for basic policy reform. Even if they do not provide

a magic relief from the necessity of fiscal correction they surely

represent a significant opportunity to try and achieve policy reform where

before, in innumerable cases, that proved impossible or was overly delayed

because of the perception of immense political costs associated with the

large unemnployinent and slow disinflation.

        Table 1 gives an idea of the possible and impossible approaches to

inflation stabilization. The table highlights two dimensions of policy:

whether or not the program includes fiscal correction or austerity and

whether the program has an incomes policy (wage, price and exchange rate

freezing together with remonetization to be explained below). The standard

program in the lower leftband box is the IMF approach which consists of

fiscal austerity but does not make incomes policy a key instrument. It is

true that the IMF favors wage restraint, but price controls are not

typically, or ever, an item on the conditionality list. The alternative is

shown in the upper lefthand box where the heterodox programs are located.

They combine an incomes policy with fiscal -austerity.
                                   4


               Table   1 Orthodox, Reterodox and "Nodox" Stabilization


                                          FISCAL AUSTERITY

                                    Yes                      No


                       Yes        Austral/Cruzado            Poets

        INCOMES
        POLICY
                       No              IMF                   Magicians




        The remaining two boxes are essential to understand what the

temptations are in the course of stabilization and where they lead. The

most common is to attempt stabilization by controls only, without paying

attention to the sine qua non of fiscal correction. This box is crowded

with many thousand years of failed experiments from Emperor Diocletean to

the modern day experiments of the Peronists in 1973—4, of Richard Nixon,

or of Israel in early 1985. Inevitably these programs come to an end after

a more or less brief period of effectiveness. They fail when shortages

become a sufficient political headache. There may be an additional phase

in which magicians get a shot, without controls and without austerity, but

that is typically the final phase before the patient, often too late, is

rushed to the IMF. 1




'This is not the place to offer an elaborate explanation or defense of
IMF programs, but it certainly must be observed that countries do not
go to the IMF for inflation treatment, but tatber to gain access to
balance of payments financing. The fact that money and inflation are
so central to 11ff programs stems from the close association between
public sector dissaving, financing and the external dissaving. But the
link is not completely tight so that it is possible for a country to
satisfy the external targets and yet fail on the domestic targets.
This fact has led many oberserves to argue that the IMF should
exclusively to external targets. An entirely different criticism
                                  5



        An important point in Table 1 concerns monetary policy. The

heterodox program includes significant monetization as part of

stabilization, but recognizes the need for fiscal austerity. By contrast

the orthodox IMF program emphasizes monetary and fiscal restraint.

        There is another dimension along which programs might be

distinguished in four—way classification. Programs might be orthodox or

heterodox and they can involve gradualism or shock treatment. In this

distinction the present programs are classified as "beterodox shocks". An

example of a heterodox-gradualist program would be the Brazilian Campos—

Bulboes stabilization of the 1960s. An orthodox—gradualist program might

be the case of Chile. It is more difficult to remember an orthodox—shock

example, perhaps because of a lack of survivors to recount the episode.

        The paper is organized as follows: In the first three sections we

review conceptual issues related to the use of incomes policy in the

context of stabilization when inertia is a central feature. The discussion

includes the relation betweeen deficits and inflation, inertial inflation

and the basics of monetary reform. In the following three sections we

review the actual stabilization experience in Argentina, Brazil and

Israel. The paper concludes with a discussion of the political dimension



focusses on an unwillingness of the IMF to require coordinated
programs of wage, price, and exchange rate programs. The IMF certainly
insists on exchange rate programs and even wage programs, as in
Brazil's case in the early 1980s. The point of this paper is that
there should also be a price freeze. Failure to include the price
freeze means that the program lacks coherence and can only succeed by
making unemployment high enough to be the coordinating device that a
freeze would otherwise provide.
                                  6


of stabilization, showing the extraordinary political popularity of the

new programs.



1. INCOMES POLICY AND STABILIZATION

        In this section we review the analytical case for wage—price—

exchange rate controls as an essential complement to the fiscal

stabilization that, as already noted, is the sine qua non of successful

anti—inflation policy.

        That aggregate demand discipline is a necessary condition for

sustained price stability has long been known by economists and by well

advised policy makers. Yet it may not be sufficient to stop inflation, or

at least it may fail to work under conditions of tolerable unemployment.

This is demonstrated by the failure of a number of 11ff-supported programs

that ignored the problem posed by inflationary inertia. As as result IMF

programs often lead to dismal stagflation and ultimately to a resumption

of expansion and little success at definitely reducing inflation. Not

surprisingly, countries like Argentina, Israel and Brazil recently decided

to focus on the supply side of inflation, attempting to stabilize prices

by combining incomes policy with "monetary reforms".

        Whether these experiments will ultimately yield success stories

depends on a number of factors, including importantly aggregate demand

management. The overriding lesson from the ongoing experiments certainly

include the need for sound respect for fiscal discipline and the need to

recognize that a good dose of initial overkill may be an inevitable

ingredient for subsequent success.
       One interesting issue is that such experiments were inspired on a

sound game theoretical approach to inflation. It can be argued, as we do

below, that an incomes policy is necessary to coordinate individual

behavior in a way not recognized by oversimplified versions of a rational

expectations economy. The central question is to understand what causes

inertial inflation and how incomes policy can break the dependenece of the

inflation rate on its past behavior.



Inertial Inflation: The starting point for the discussion is the

recognition that a large part of any prevailing inflation is essentially

inertial. This observation applies equally to the United States, Europe or

Latin Anerica. Inertial inflation means that inflation today is

approximately equal to what it was yesterday. Let p be the current

inflation, p. last years inflation and "gap" denote the economy's

cyclical position. The actual rate of inflation would then be:



(1)    p = p-i     +aGap+e


where e denotes current period supply shocks. The essential point of

modern inflation theory is the recognition that inflation is linked to the

past through a variety of channels. It is not only "too much money chasing

too few goods", which is the second term, or supply shocks like oil or

agricultural price increases, but also the sheer fact that inflation

                                          -    -
yesterday means inflation today.
                                  8


        The reason for this persistence or inertia is primarily formal or

informal indexation interacting with staggered wage setting. This may take

the form of a legally imposed wage rule according to which wage

adjustments today are based on the inflation over the past year or the

past six months.2 It may also be that much more informal wage bargaining

may lead to the same result. Other than through wage indexation the same

mechanism also works via expectations. In setting their prices firms will

have to estimate their own cost increases and the price increases of

competing firms. The best guess is that, cyclical and supply shock factors

aside, inflation today will be approximately what it was yesterday.

        Because everybody believes that inflation will in fact be

approximately what is was yesterday the public acts on these expectations

and will therefore set their prices accordingly and will not hesitate to

give wage concessions matching these inflation expectations. It is much

easier to give wage increases in line with expected inflation than go

through the risk of a strike. If everybody acts in this manner then in

fact the expected inflation turns out to be the actual inflation; and if

yesterday's inflation is the benchmark, then today's inflation will come

out to be much the same as it was in the past.

        Cyclical factors and supply shocks, including the need to

depreciate exchange rates to cope with the debt crisis are the chief

reasons why inflation has exploded in many countries. The inertial part of



2We look at indexation in more detail below in discussing the
Brazilian background to stabilization. In that context the shortening
of the indexation period from one year to six-months and in the end
three—months was a main source of the acceleration of inflation.
                                  9


inflation, other things equal, would tend to make for very stable

inflation, at some particular level. But the extra elements can cause

inflation to move, and often to move sharply. The cyclical factor is quite

obvious in that it is simply demand inflation or cooling down of inflation

due to slack in activity and employment. But it is worthwhile to recognize

an asymmetry. There is no upper limit for firms' price increases in

response to excess demand, but in reverse the argument does not apply.

Stopping inflation of say 400 percent by slack is very difficult. Even as

restrictive policy cuts nominal spending, firms are forced in the labor

market to make wage concessions based on past inflation. Their cost

increases thus might be of the order of 400 percent and it is quite

inconceivable that simply by reducing profit margins they would be able to

reduce inflation significantly.

        In the same way a cut in wage settlements below the prevailing

rate of inflation will not make much of a difference to high inflation.

Giving wage increases of 360 instead of 400 percent would mean a very

large cut in the real wage (8 percent!) but a very minor reduction in

inflation.

        The idea of fighting inflation by slack thus applies only to an

economy where wage reductions of 2 or 3 percent or cuts in profit margins

of that order mean cutting inflation in half. When inflation is very high

and very inertial then demand policies have a hard time making a rapid and

large impact. Because a rapid and large impact is the only way that is

politically acceptable, governments in high inflation countries see little

hope but to try and stem further inflation deterioration, but do not see

room for actually ending inflation.
                                  10



        The new stabilization programs recognize this problem in a way

that IMF programs do not. They recognize the need for an incomes policy as

a means of suspending the inertial forces, thus shifting the economy

instantly from a high inflation state to a low one. This incomes policy

should be understood in two ways. One is political. To stop inflation

someone must start offering either cuts in profit margins or in real wages

in order to introduce disinflation. The initial disinflation can then be

passed along through indexation into a gradual path of further

disinflation. Realistically, there will be no volunteers for such an

approach. Everybody would like to jump to a low inflation state together,

but nobody will jump unless the others also do. That means everybody wants

to see the fact of zero inflation before they themselves will set their

own price or wage increases at zero. But if everybody adopts a "wait and

see" attitude then, of course, inflation will continue. An attempt to

restrict demand would translate almost entirely into reduced employment

and practically not at all into lower inflation. The dismal performance of

the economy and th lack of success at inflation fighting would make any

such campaign short—lived.



Game Theory and Incomes Policy: The scenario tnus described puts inflation

fighting squarely in the area of game theory. When economic agents

interact strategically in the fashion described above coordination becomes

essential to achieve good results. A system of wage—price—exchange rate

controls is the coordinating device that establishes the facts that the

economy left to itself cannot establish quickly except at extreme costs.
                                  11


It might be argued that if the government does undertake to produce the

right kind of monetary and fiscal policy, then the public cannot escape

the conclusion that, in fact, inflation has been left dead in its tracks.

Unable to escape that conclusion, everybody will act on it and hence

inflation will be dead.3

        But there are two separate and crucial slips in this argument. One

concerns the government's inability to credibly precominit to future

policies. The other, which is more novel, concerns the problem of

coordination in a world of price setters. We review these in turn.

        The government cannot commit itself definitely, credibly and

beyond doubt. The institutional setting for such a precominitment does not

exist (one thinks of constitutional amendments, the gold standard and what

not). Because the government cannot lock away beyond doubt its policies,

the public always recognizes that there is some possibility that policy

vii]. not change to a non—inflationary stance. Specifically, if the

average agent does not quite believe that policy will change, then they

all will behave somewhat defensively, charging some wage and price

increases which then force the government to suspend the policy. The

expectation that this is indeed the policy persuades the average agent to

disbelieve the possibility of an instant end to inflation.



3How do we know that the economy cannot? That,too, is an issue in game
theory. Schelling (1982) has written extensively on how to make
threats stick. Ideas involve poison—pill strategies. Governments
instinctively shy away from poison—pill strategies of no—return. As a
result the public does not believe the fierce anti—inflation rhetoric
and therefore the government in turn cannot afford to implement it.
The late William Feilner (1976) developed these themes with great
authority. See,too, Anti—inflation.. (1982)
                                 12


       These ideas can be interpreted in a game theoretic perspective

assigning the government a double task: to assure credibility of the

aggregate demand policy consistent with disinflation and to coordinate the

expectations and actions of individual wage and price setters. Assume that

after a prolonged inflation, the Central Bank announces that it will stop

printing money and that the Treasury announces that the budget deficit

will be eliminated as a result of increased taxes or expenditure cuts.

Even if the general perception is that nominal GNP will be stabilized

immediately, prudent price setters should not take the lead in stopping

sectoral price increases, as long as they consider the possibility of

further price increases in other sectors.4 In a non—cooperative or non—

coordinated game with many players each individual player has little

information on other players' pay—offs. As a result there is no reason to

believe that all players will hit the zero inflation—full employment

equilibrium in the first move of wage and price setting. The uncertainty

about the behavior of other players persuades the individual price setter

to adopt a very cautious pricing policy.5 Mow many moves it takes or how

long it takes for the economy to reach the equiibrium is an open question,

depending in part on the learning mechanism used by individual agents.



4The situation is essentially equivalent to the analysis of wage
setting in the General Theory (See Keynes(1936, chapts. 2 and 19).
Workers in each industry resist money wage cuts because they cannot be
assured that similar wage cuts will be enforced in other industries.
5See Simonsen (1986a,b) for a game theoretic formulation where it is
shown how players using inaxmin pricing lead to an equilibrium
different from the Nash equilibrium assumed in full information
rational expectations models.
                                  13


        The convergence speed may be painfully slow after a prolonged

period of high inflation. The more prolonged the period of learning, the

higher is the unemployment rate that results from excessive prices

confronted with a given nominal income target sustained by the

stabilization policy. The higher and the more persistent is unemployment

the more agents will be inclined to believe that the authorities

determination may falter. Accordingly, rather than speeding up their price

responses, they may persist even longer in their overly prudent disbelief.

        The foregoing discussion provides the rationale for an incomes

policy: governments should play the role of the Walrasian auctioneer,

speeding up the location of a zero—inflaton full employment equilibrium.

From this point of view, incomes policy may be necessary to make economic

agents behave in line with rational expectations models. It should be

stressed that the central function of controls is not to constrain

individual decision—making, but to tell each agent how other actors will

play, clearing potential externalities in an imperfect information game.

This role for controls, incidentally, dismisses a traditional argument

against incomes policy, namely that governments are not better equipped

than the private sector to discover the equilibrium. In fact, the central

problem is not to identify the equilibrium but to orchestrate the

simultaneous playing of wage and price setters to reach the equilibrium.

        A more fundamental contention is that the temporary success of an

incomes policy may lead policy makers to forget that price stabiity can

only be sustained with aggregate demand discipline. The temptation is to

misread the price stability and produce a boom. The misleading signals are
                                   14


a true risk as is known from uncountable examples in history. Yet the

converse is also true. Trying to fight a big inflation from the demand

side only may lead to such dismal stagflation that policy—makers may

conclude that life with inflation is less uncomfortable than life with an

11ff—supported program. Worse yet, they often reach that conclusion only

after a prolonged period of recession.

        Of course, the chances of hitting instantly a zero—inflation, zero

unemployment, zero shortage equilibrium via an incomes policy are remote.

Wage—price controls will almost inevitably lead to some shortages unless

there is a generalized recession that cuts demand. The central question is

what is worse in terms of social welfare, a few product shortages that may

eventually be overcome by imports or a generalized shortage of jobs. From

this point of view, objections to an incomes policy should not be balanced

against the extreme costs of recession and unemployment. This is

especially the case when the problem is to fight a big inflation with

strong inertial roots. One reason to prefer an incomes policy is that it

can be managed with appropriate flexibility, across sectors and across

time, moving gradually from price freezes to price administration.

        The case for a coordinating role for an incomes policy because of

information externalities arises only when macroeconomic noise and

uncertainty are large relative to the inicroeconomic uncertainties in each

individual market. This explains why, in a second stage of the

stabilization program, wage—price controls should be removed gradually, at

successive sectoral steps and not in the one—shot manner. The one—shot

approach would simply bring back the uncertainty of individual players as
                                    15


to what every other players will do. As a result at the stage of

liberalization there would be defensively large price increases which

might well wreck the inflation stabilization.



Incomes Policy Matching: We conclude this section by noting that the

various instruments of an incomes policy: exchange rates; wages; public

sector prices and the nominal money stock, must be carefully matched.

Failure to align these policy instruments can easily lead to dramatically

poor performance.

        The clearest example of a poorly aligned policy might be the

Chilean stabilization of the late 1970s. The budget had been moved to

balance and, indeed to a surplus. Money was under tight control and

inflation was gradually declining, although very slowly. To speed up

disinflation the government opted to stop the exchange rate depreciation

that bad previously been used to avoid loss of competitiveness in the face

of continuing inflation. But the government failed to recognize that wage

indexation, geared to the past inflation, implied cost increases for firms

without providing offsetting relief on prices. The exchange rate rate soon

became grossly overvalued, leading ultimately to the worst kind of

speculation and financial instability.'

           The need for a matching of instruments applies also to the money

stock. As we will discuss in the next section successful disinflation

requires determined (though careful and limited) monetization of the

economy.



'See Dornbusch (1986a).
                                  16


2.THE BUDGET AND INFLATION

        The common perception is that inflation is caused by budget

deficits. We draw attention here to two important channels that run in

the other direction: Budget deficits are high because of inflation. This

more unusual direction is important in assessing public finance in

inflationary episodes and to develop a judgment about the fiscal policy

changes required in implementing stablilization.

        The first reason inflation makes for deficits is often called the

Oliveira—Tanzi effect.7 The fact of inflation, combined with lags in tax

collection, implies that the real value of tax collection arriving in the

hands of the government is lower the higher the rate of inflation. If

last years income taxes were to be paid only this year with 100 percent

inflation and without indexation of tax liabilities the government would

find itself with only half of the real value of taxes it would receive

without inflation or without lags or with exact indexation.

        Of course, in any high inflation episode the lags in tax

collection are sharply reduced and some form of indexation will make an

appearance, but it turns out to be entirely impossible to make the entire

tax collection fully inflation proof. Moreover, if inflation rates reach

20 or 30 percent per month, not to speak of the 20,000 percent in a

hyperinflation situation, even very short lags have a major effect on the

real value of tax collection. This effect is reinforced in that the



71t is named after studies by Oliveira (1967) and Tanzi (1977). Keynes
(1928) and other commentators on the inflation experience of the l920s
already highlighted this effect. See Bresciani—Turroni (1928),
Graham (1928) and Dornbusch (1985). On tax indexation in Brazil,
prior to the inflation explosion, see Simonsen (1984).
                                  17


public gains an active interest in postponing tax payments because of the

large reduction in real payments that can be achieved in this manner.

        The actual relevance of the Oliveira—Tanzi effect depends on the

tax structure. The more it is based on withholding taxes and excise

taxes, and the more rapidly these are turned over to the government, the

smaller the impact of inflation. Conversely, the larger the share of

income taxes, the less frequently these are collected and the less they

are collected at the source, the more dramatic the impact.

        An overnight stabilization of inflation thus has an immediate,

of ten dramatic effect on the real value of tax collection. Without even

changing the tax laws the fact of price stability implies that the

government receives an increase in the real value of tax collection. The

magnitude of this effect was of the order of 1—2 percent of GDP in the

various recent cases.

        The interaction of the deficit and inflation brings with it

another important point. Suppose the deficit is financed by printing

money. In an inflationary situation there may well be more than one

equilibrium inflation rate. There will be low inflation equilibrium, with

a small deficit (because inflation is low) and a high inflation one with a

larger deficit. The details are given in the appendix, but this point is

critically important because it suggests that exactly the same tax

structure may be consistent with very different inflation performances.

It makes the possibility of shifting the economy from high to low

                                           -
inflation more than an academic issue.8



 0n this point see especially Bruno and Fischer (1986).
                                         18


        The second interaction between inflation and the deficit stems

from the inflation component of debt service. Part of government outlays

will be the service of the internal and external debt. Let i be the

nominal interest rate, r the real rate and p the rate of inflation. Let B

be the nominal stock of debt outstanding. Debt service then is equal to

the nominal interest rate times the stock of debt, iB. For a given real

interest rate more inflation means higher nominal interest rates and hence

a higher level of outlays and of the deficit in the budget. This point is

made immediately obvious by writing debt service as follows:



        debt service =   iB   = (r+p)B




where we have used the definition of the nominal interest rate as equal to

the real rate plus the rate of inflation. This link between inflation and

nominal debt service has led to the recognition that two different

measures of the deficit must be distinguished: the actual deficit and the

inflation—adjusted or perational deficit. The former calculates the

deficit taking full debt service as the measure of debt service while the

latter only includes real interest payments, rB, and excludes the

inflationary component of interest, pB. The rational for the distinction

is that corresponding to the inflation component of interest payments is

the inflationary erosion of the principal. To measure the increase in the

real value of government indebtedness the inflationary erosion of the debt

should be subtracted from the addition to the stock of government

liabilities outstanding. That is done by calculating the inflation—
                                 19


adjusted or operational deficit defined as the actual deficit less the

inflation rate times the stock of government debt outstanding. This

concept of the deficit is also equivalent to calculating the noninterest

deficit plus real interest payments on the debt.9

        The importance of inflation adjustments in the budget is apparent

when we think of a government with a debt-income ratio of, say, 20 percent

of GNP and an inflation rate of 200 percent. The inflationary component of

debt service is equal to 40 percent of GNP. The actual deficit therefore

vastly overstates the increase in the government's real indebtedness.

        This argument applies not only to the internal debt but also to

the foreign debt. The deficit contribution of external debt, in local

currency, is equal to the interest rate, say Libor plus 2 percent, plus

the rate of exchange depreciation times the ratio of external debt to

income. If inflation is high so will be depreciation and hence the

inflationary component of the service of the external debt. If inflation

were brought to zero, through whatever means, the budget deficit would be

reduced correspondingly.



Money Illusion: If the public has no money illusion then in the presence

of inflation its extra saving will be just enough to absorb the

inflationary component of debt service. How otherwise would it be possible

to finance budget deficits of 25 percent of GDP? There is, indeed, a

serious theoretical flaw in using unadjusted budget figures to measure



'The calculation of inflation adjusted deficits is common in
industrial countries,too. See Eisner (1986) for an extensive
treatment.
                                      20


supply—demand gaps. As   long   as an increase in the budget deficit is

matched by an equal increase in voluntary private savings, aggregate

demand will not be affected at all. The assumption of deficits gearing

voluntary savings to finance them looks rather strange, as far as the

adjusted budget is concerned. Yet, it becomes highly plausible when the

problem is to finance the inflation adjustment of the public sector debt.

In the case of the foreign debt this looks plainly obvious.

        American creditors never increased their spending or their

purchase of Brazilian goods just because Brazil was devaluing the exchange

rate almost daily, in line with the domestic inflation rate, before the

Cruzado Plan. The fact that they owned an increasing nominal amount of

cruzeiros was not confounded with a wealth increase since their claims did

not appreciate in dollars or in terms of purchasing power over Brazilian

goods. In a word, the cruzeiro adjustment of the Brazilian public sector

foreign debt was fully financed by external creditors. Banks were

reluctant to increase their dollar exposure to the country, but were not

reluctant to have this exposure translated into more and more cruzeiros.

        If the public has no money illusion, the same principle applies to

the domestic public sector debt. Bond holders will understand that the

inflation adjustment of their credits should not lead to additional

consumption. Here again, inflation automatically creates the nominal

savings needed to finance the inflation adjustment of the government debt.

       Of course, the no money illusion assumption can be questioned,

especially in the absence of formally indexed public sector bonds. Even

in a widespread indexed economy widows and retired workers might use part
                                 21


of the inflation adjustment of their saving accounts to finance

consumption. Yet, two essential points should be stressed. First, money

illusion is not likely to be a major problem, otherwise it would be

impossible to finance deficits of 25% of G.D.P. Second, even if money

illusion is important enough to prevent the inflation adjustment of the

public sector domestic debt from being financed entirely by voluntary

savings, it brings us back to the Olivera—Tanzi effect. Once again, there

is a circular causation between aggregate demand and inflation. Stopping

inflation will lead to an automatic reduction in aggregate demand.

        These distinctions between adjusted and unadjusted deficits are an

important part in understanding the rational of the new stabilization

programs. If a government perceives that most of the deficit represents

the inflationary component of debt service, with the noninterest budget in

sufficient surplus to pay the real interest on the debt, than

stabilization becomes more plausible. All that is needed is to find a way

to jump from high inflation to no inflation. Failure to understand the

role of the inflation adjustment could make it seen that an extraordinary

deficit reduction through spending cuts or tax increases is required

before stabilization can be considered. In this sense the famous IMF

dictum, "a deficit is a deficit, is a deficit!" is a poor starting point

for analyzing the fiscal fundamentals required for a successful

stabilization.
                                  22




3. MONETARY REFORM AND MONETIZATION

        The recent stabilization programs in Israel, Argentina and Brazil

had as an important and highly visible component a monetary reform. We

review here briefly the essential features of such a reform. They are

mainly two. The first, which is crucial, is to shift contracts from those

appropriate to an inflationary economy to those appropriate in a zero—

inflation environment. The second is the introduction of a new monetary

unit, the main purpose of which, other than cutting zeros, is to increase

confidence and consolidate expectations.



Contracts: In an inflationary environment with large uncertainty contracts

will have a very short maturity. Long—term capital markets will dry up.

But even so contracts will be for a month or even six months. These

contracts will specify nominal interest rates or implicit prices that are

a reflection of the inflationary expectations prevailing at the time the

contracts are concluded. For example with an inflation rate of 10 percent

per month a one month loan contract will carry interest rates of at least

10 percent per month. Rent contracts entered into at any tine will involve

nominal payments over say six month that reflect the assumption of

increasing prices. Wage contracts will be indexed in a formal or informal

manner so that when they come up for renegotiation they are adjusted for

past or for future inflation. A major problem for inflation stabilization

is to recognize the presence of these contracts and institutions which are

in force at the tine of stabilization. If the economy was to move from one
                                  23


day to the next from high inflation to zero inflation, outstanding

contracts and institutions would give rise to major problems.

        It is immediately obvious that debtors can service loan contracts

involving very high nominal interest rates only if in fact the inflation

expected at the time of contract actually materializes. A six month loan

concluded with an inflation expectation of 10 percent per month would

carry a 77 percent interest rate for six months. If inflation disappears

the nominal interest rate of 77 percent becomes the real interest rate and

hence the debt service burden would be extraordinarily large. An

adjustment in all loan contracts is required to avoid a massive and

unintended redistribution from debtors to creditors and the attendant risk

of pervasive bankruptcy and financial instability.

        For wage contracts the problem is perhaps even more complicated.

Suppose, as is realistically the case, that wages are readjusted every

three or six months. Every time a contract comes up for renewal the money

wage over the next three months is adjusted upward for the inflation which

atually occurred over the past three months. With such a pattern of wage

contracting an instant end to inflation is nearly impossible. Just as the

government seeks to impose zero inflation some wage contract is coming up

for renewal and workers will ask to be compensated f or past inflation. The

wage increase in turn creates cost increases and hence, inevitably,

inflationary pressure.                  Accordingly, the transition to

zero inflation needs to be accompanied by some restructuring of wage

contracting to avoid this inertia effect. At the time of stabilization

some wage earners will just have received their adjustment and hence will
                                 24


find themselves in the high real wage position of their three month cycle

while others will be almost at the bottom. Freezing wages in this

situation would be perceived as extraordinarily inequitable and hence

would serve as an impediment to stabilization.

        Monetary reform is the broad term that characterizes the rewriting

of contracts and the reform of institutions to make them compatible with

the zero inflation target. In the case of wages, monetary reform requires

that those who had recent increases and hence have high real wages must

see their wages rolled back while those who are in the low real wage phase

need upward adjustments. This reform could, in principle, be achieved by

money wage adjustments in the old currency. The confusion of a new money

may, though, help achieve the transition in a simplified manner. Note,

too, that a new money provides an important instrument to avoid legal

complications, uncertainty and challenges to the restructuring of

contracts. Similarly for contracts involving future nominal payments a new

money is a means of aligning the real value of payments with the

expectations implicit at the tine contracts were concluded. A tablita that

converts the old money into the new according to a set time table of

depreciation is the practical means of achieving this end.

        Often monetary reform also encompasses a capital levy on the

public in the form of a write—down of monetary assets. Interestingly, in

none of the recent stabilizations has this been attempted. This fact is

all the more noteworthy in that, unlike in the 1920s, government debts

remained very large and hence made the idea of budget balancing via a

capital levy particularly interesting.
                                     25




Monetization: Monetary reform also often includes a change in the monetary

institutions. Along with the change in the monetary unit the change in the

institutional arrangements is meant to dramatize the end of inflationary

finance.

           The traditional way to signal new rules of the game is to announce

the independence of the central bank and an end of automatic financing of

the budget by the printing press. But it is important here to read the

fine print. In the 1920s the stabilizations did, indeed, involve

institutional changes and limitations on the access of the government to

the printing press, but that did not in fact imply an end to money

creation for two reasons. One was that in some cases the transition was

characterized by a large, once and for all issue of money. In Germany's

case in 1923 the ceiling was set at 500% of the existing money stock.1°

But beyond this once and for all fiduciary issue there was also the

possibility of the money stock increasing in the course of domestic

private credit expansion or the monetization of reserve inflows. The

experience from the classical stabilizations was one of extremely large

increases in nominal money,——several hundred percent——consistent with

price stabiliztion.

           The explanation for this large, non—inflationary money creation is

quite obvious. During the high inflation period the cost of holding non—

interest bearing money becomes extremely high. As a result, real balances

decline, or the velocity of circulation increases. This is the famous



10See Sargent (1982), Dornbusch (1985b)and Dornbusch and Fischer(1986)
                                  26


"flight from money". The financial system accommodates the flight from

money by creating highly liquid interest—bearing or indexed liabilities--

the "overnights" which practically serve as money. Surely, one could not

pay for a taxi ride with an indexed bond, but one can transfer funds any

day from an indexed cash reserve account to a checking account by a simple

telephone call to the bank before 10 a.m. In fact, living without Ml was a

fashionable and profitable exercise. The fact that Ml did survive at all,

though at an extremely reduced level, can only be explained by

transactions costs and learning lags.

        In the course of stabilization the reverse occurs. The

disapppearance of inflation raises the demand for Ml or transactions real

balances. Unless deflation increases the real money supply, it is

necessary to increase the nominal money supply through one means or

another to avoid extravagantly high nominal and real interest rates. A

non—inflationary expansion in the money stock is needed to meet the

additional demand for money, the well—known reliquification or velocity

problem. Ni should expand to replace other finmancial assets.

        The problem is to fine—tune this expansion and to identify which

aggregates must expand. Failure to expand Ni, or too gradual an increase,

means that the economy will slide into a recession because of a liquidity

crunch. But too rapid or too large an expansion leads to a loss of

credibility and reignition of inflation. The best solution might well be

to set growth targets for total financial assets held by the public,

allowing Ml to expand as long as other financial assets decline. Thus the

government should accommodate the shift in the composition of the
                                  27



financial portfolio without, however, expanding the size of the total

liquid asset portion. What are the implications of such a policy for broad

monetary aggregates, for example 114? Here one would expect rough

consistency (relative to GNP) unless there is a significant shift from

dollar assets to domestic currency securities.



Financial Institutions: A major issue in the sudden end to a high

inflation is the fate of financial institutions and specifically that of

commercial banks and financial intermediaries. During inflation the public

seeks to avoid holding money because of the depreciation of the purchasing

power of money in terms of goods. The higher the rate of inflation the

larger the implicit tax on money and hence the larger the resources people

are willing to devote to avoiding this tax. The natural consequence is the

emergence of an industry that makes it possible to live with a minimum of

real balances or, equivalently, to speed up the circulation of money.

        Commercial banks and other financial intermediaries are the

natural agents in promoting the inoneyless economy. They will surround

potential customers with branches and attempt to attract deposits by

paying some interest, thus helping their customers to avoid a complete

loss of the purchasing power of their monetary assets. The proceeds of

deposits in turn are re—lent at the high nominal interest rates

commensurate with the prevailing rate of inflation. Differentials between

deposit and lending rates leave ample room for the costs associated with

an expansion of the banking system. The commmon observation, then, is that

during inflation bank branches and bank employment mushroom.
                                  28


        When stabilization occurs inflation disappears and so does the

absolute size of the deposit—loan rate spread. There is then an

extraordinary profit squeeze which forces banks to close down branches and

cut employment in a violent fashion. The effect is totally predictable and

it is very serious not only from point of view of labor relations but even

more importantly from the perspective of financial stability. A successful

monetary reform must take into account the fact that the financial

industry is dramatically hurt by the end of inflation. Without mergers,

employment cuts and a shift to fee for service banking, the banking

system is likely to collapse in the immediate aftermath of the stabilization.'1

        We turn next to an analysis of the country experiences.



11There is a difference in the required adjustments depending on the
presence or absence of fees. In a system without fees the banking
system needs to achieve larger reductions in costs and hence in
employment than under a fee—based banking service.
                                  29


4. ARGENTINA: TEE AUSTRAL PLAN

        Argentina's extraordinary acroeconomjc history reflects an

interplay of adverse shocks, domestic and external, economic and

political. But the basic difficulties are two: the unions are inside the

country and the money is outside; the unions are British and public

finance is Italian.

        In June 1985 Argentina implemented the Austral Plan, the first of

the new stabilization programs to combine incomes policy with fiscal

austerity. In Figure 1 the recent inflation history of Argentina is shown

as the quarterly average of the monthly rate of inflation of consumer

prices. Prior to stabilization inflation had been increasing over the past

five years from less than 100 percent toward the end of the destructive

stabilization attempt under Martinez de Boz to nearly 1000 percent and

sharply rising in the spring of 1985. In May 1985 the inflation rate, at

an annual rate, exceeded 2500 percent!



History: Table 2 gives details on the inflation rate, real wages and the

real exchange rate, industrial production and the budget deficit.
                                         29a




                                    Figure 1
                             INFLATION IN ARGENTINA
                               (Percent per Month)




30


25



20



15



10



     5




         1_,SI lc?9   1980    j   1981   I     19.C2   I
                                                           1983   I   19.84   1   1966   I
                                   30



Table 2 Argentina: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

                                1981      1982    1983   1984      1985:1

Inflation (% per year)           105       165    343    627         918

Budget Deficit (% of GNP)**                        12      11        12.5

Real Wage*                        87       80     100     120        134

Real Exchange Rate*              151      108     100     112        107

Industrial Production*           94        91      100    103         97


Note: * All indices 1983=100. **Conso]jdated cash deficit of the public
sector, including operations of the Central Bank.
Source: Carta Economica and Coyuntura Economica and Morgan Guaranty


          There is no natural beginning to the recent inflation bout. The

last large inflation had occurred toward the end of the Peronist

administration in mid—1975. At its peak that inflation reached 35 to 40

percent per month.'2 In the period 1976 to 1981 the military government

achieved a reduction of inflation to an annual rate of less than 100

percent, but that reduction was bought at the price of a huge

overvaluation of the exchange rate which ultimately precipitated massive

capital flight and accumulation of external debt.'3 Successors to finance

minister Martinez de Noz failed to contain inflation at around 100

percent, being handicapped by the preceding debt accuumation, the

Malvinas war and the accompanying credit rationing in world markets as

veil as a terms of trade deterioration.



125ee DiTella (1983), de Pablo (1980) and Arnaudo (1979) on the
Peronist inflation and the failed attempt to stabilize it with
controls.
'30n the Martinez de Boz debacle see Corbo and de Mello(1985), Diaz—
Alejandro(1981), Dornbusch (1982, 1986a, 1986c) and Fernandez and
Rodriguez (1982).
                                  31


        A notable event in the inflation history was the deliberate

attempt to eliminate the real value of internal debts, public and private,

in June-July 1982 by the Dagnino Pastore-Cavallo team. For the remainder

of the military government, until fall 1983, a holding action contained

inflation below 40 percent while achieving some recovery of economic

activity. Budget performance throughout was very poor, a large part of the

deficit representing losses on exchange rate guarantees granted by the

Central Bank in the aftermath of the Martinez de Hoz overvaluation.



Stabilization: The Alfonsin government came into power in January 1984.

Initially the government attempted to cope with the problem of inflation

by gradualist policies under repeated IMF programs. But not much was

achieved, in great part because large real wage increases caused cost and

budget performance to deteriorate, forcing repeated major devaluations.

The steady worsening of inflation, even in the face of half—hearted

attempts at gradualist stabilization, ultimately forced the government to

explore a different direction.

        The shift in policies, in spring 1985, was triggered by two facts.

The first was that the economy was well on the way to hyperinflation. At

monthly rates the inflation had risen from only 18 percent at the tine of

election to the 25—30 percent range. The second was that the government

faced elections in fall 1985 and hence could afford neither a German—style

hyperinflation nor an IMF—style depression at that time.

        Perhaps because the German hyperinf.lation possibility was so

actively on the minds of the economic team, the idea of monetary reform as
                                  32


a comprehensive framework for stabilization moved to the center. Because

the team had a basically structuralist persuasion, an incomes policy was

thought an indispensable part of the stabilization.14 At the same time the

economic team had become distinctly more orthodox since the replacement of

economics minister Grinspun by Juan Sourouille, recognizing that any

attempt at stabilization without budget consolidation and correction of

relative prices would inevitably fail.

        The loss of confidence in gradualist policy, and an unwillingness

to accept IMF austerity per Se, led to the conception of the Austral Plan

of June 1985. The plan struck a balance between the fundamentals——

monetary and fiscal austerity——and pragmatism (or good theory) residing in

the adoption of wage—price--exchange rate controls as the central feature

of the disinflation program. The key features of the plan were the

following:1

    (a) Upon adopting of the program, the government increased public

sector prices, depreciated the exchange rate, imposed import duties and

export tariffs. These measures were designed to improve the budget and to

align key relative prices prior to the freeze.

    (b) A wage—price freeze and a fixed exchange rate on the U.S. dollar

until further notice. The wage freeze involved a sharp cut in the real

wage since there was to be no catch—up provision for the increases in

public sector prices and in the exchange rate.



14There are many precedents for the use of -an incomes policy in
Argentine stabilization. One of them occurred in the context of the
Peronist inflation of the 1970s, another one as recently as 1982 under
Alenann.
15The most comprehensive treatment of the Austral Plan may be found in
Heymann (1986). Seetoo, the collection of essays in diTella arid
Dornbusch (1986).
                                 33


    (c) A time table (tablita) was announced to adjust outstanding

contracts for the immediate and unanticipated end of inflation.

    (d) A new monetaçy unit was introduced——the Austral. The old money was

allowed to continue in use and circulate at par.

    (e) The program was accepted by the IMF and served as a basis of debt

rescheduling with new money financing a significant part of arrears and

current debt service.''



One Year Later: Where has the Austral Plan taken the Argentine economy

over the past year? Table 3 shows the quarterly and most recent data.


Table 3 One Year of the Austral Plan

                                        1985:1     1985:11 1986:1 1986:June

Inflation (% per month)
    CPI                                   26.2       2.5*   3.8      4.5
    WPI                                   28.5       0.8*   2.1      4.6

Nominal Interest Rate (% per month)       27.7       6.9    6.0      5.7

Money Growth (% per month)
    Ml                                    23.4       8.5*   4.5      5.4
    M4                                    24.3       79*    6.4      6.4

Budget Deficit (% of GDP)**               12.5       4.1    4.1

Real Wage                                 134         95    97       98

Real Exchange Rate                        107         93    88       87*

Industrial Production                      97         99    111      121

Note: All indices 1983=100, *August_December, **jncludjng losses of the
central bank. The interest rate is the active money market rate.tMay
Sources: Carta Econonica and Morgan Guaranty


''Paul Voicker is said to have played a significant role in achieving
IMF and bank acceptance of the plan. He subsequently visited Argentina
in the fall of 1985.
                                   34




         The first point to note is that inflation has been cut

dramatically, but that it has not disappeared. On the contrary, by mid-

1986 it was already at the rate of more than 100 percent per year and

rising.17 The second point is that economic activity, as measured by

industrial production has picked up sharply and is back to the previous

peak levels of 1979—80, before the Martinez de Hoz experiment crashed. The

Austral plan thus has two faces. While it has been less than total

success at inflation eradication, it has achieved its results under

conditions of sharp recovery. There is no comparable experience under an

IMP program. In our judgment, the Argentine experience makes quite

forcefully the case for programs that combine fiscal consolidation with an

incomes policy. We return to the insufficent use of fiscal restraint

below.

         A year certainly is not enough to judge the full course of the

program, but it is far beyond an initial phase. Even if the program at

present has all the appearances of melting, it is not generally expected

that it will collapse outright or that anything like the previous

inflation experience is likely. On the contrary, the black market premium

continues to be moderate. For the pessimist, the Austral Plan thus has at

least given Argentina a temporary respite from a 2000 plus percent

inflation. For the optimist, it has given a breathing spell to consolidate

public finances and restore conditions of growth under moderate (if high

by the standards of industrial countries) inflation. Whether moderate

inflation is sustainable is, of course, an open question.



171n july 1986 the inflation rate was already 6.8 percent per month.
                                  35


        It is obvious what went right. There was a significant correction

in the budget. Part of this correction took the form of a reduced domestic

currency cost of debt service, while much of the correction came from a

sharp increase in the real value of tax collection. This increase reflects

the end to the inflationary erosion of revenues and the introduction of

new taxes and a scheme of forced saving.

        Even with these corrections the deficit remains, however, very

large. In fact, there is some question about various government contingent

liabilities which do not find a place in the flow measure of the deficit,

but which do represent a potentially very serious threat to fiscal

stability. At the same time there remain several points of concern with

respect to taxation. For those few sectors or households that actually pay

taxes, rates are probably too high. At the same time some taxes, for

example export retentions on agricultural products, are directly

distortionary and have as their only rationale the ease of collection.

Thus although some fiscal consolidation is taking place, public finance

remains a disaster area.

        Until April 1986 the government maintained a fixed exchange rate

on the U.S. dollar. Since then a policy of mini—devaluations has been

followed to avoid a deterioration of external competitivenesss. The

ability to hold the real exchange rate relatively constant despite

domestic inflation is explained by the large depreciation of the U.S.

dollar in the world currency markets. A fixed peg of the Mistral to the

depreciating dollar meant that there was an automatic partial offset

against the real appreciation caused by domestic wage and price inflation.
                                  36



The dollar depreciation thus helped carry the fixed exchange rate policy

for a few months.

        The government at no time committed itself to a zero inflation

target. Here is an important difference with Brazil. In Argentina the

government promised fiscal stabilization and no budget based money

creation, while in Brazil the promise was for "inf].acao zero". The

Argentine government was wise not to make a zero inflation commitment. The

economy is basically closed and there is little competition so that

oligopolistic firms and extraordinarily agressive unions interact in

sectoral games of raising their relative income shares. Because of the

political force of the unions the government cannot avoid sanctioning most

of the wage increases and, for employment reasons, most of price increases

as well. The Argentine program, after instantly shifting to zero inflation

for a brief moment, moved immediately into a second phase of administered

inflation. An economy run with significantly more slack would perhaps have

avoided the inflationary pressure but that might have made for muàh worse

politics.

        There is an interesting question as to where the expansion came

from. One might perhaps most obviously point to the large and sustained

rates of money growth, but several factors point in the opposite

direction. A contraction rather than expansion should have occurred when

one looks at the deficit which declined, real wages which fell and real

interest rates which were extraordinarily high——70 or 80 percent per year

on an inflation—adjusted basis in the second half of 1985. Among   the
plausible explanations for the expansion, the first is the restoration of
                                  37


credit. In the period of intense inflation credit was unavailable for

consumers and hence consumer durable sales slumped. With the end of

extreme inflation consumer credit reappeared, though at extraordinary real

rates, and that helped promote demand and production.

        The second explanation relates to real wages. The depreciation and

public sector price increases on the eve of the reform reduced real wages.

At the sane time, however, the purchasing power of incomes may have been

to some extent increased by the fact that inflation cane to a halt. When

inflation slows, the part of income not spent toward the beginning of the

month more nearly preserves its purchasing power. Thus, the halt in

inflation is equivalent to a shift in real income toward labor which in

turn has a high spending propensity.18

        The third explanation concerns the budget. During the high

inflation the deficit was financed by an inflation tax. The fiscal

correction has shifted the correction from money holders to those who pay

outright taxes (agriculture and large firms, for example). This

redistribution, once again may have been a source of increased purchasing

power for groups that have high spending propensities. But even with these

factors in mind the expansion in demand and output may not be fully

explained.



19An estimate by Carta Economica (3uly 1986) of the purchasing power
of wages reports that the average level in the second half of 1985 was
five percent below the first semester and that by June 1986 the
purchasing power already exceeded the level of mid—1986. The
difference between these estimates and the-real wage data in Table 3
highlight the important, and relatively uninvestigated issue, of
finding good economic measures of incomes during extreme inflation.
                                  38




What Next? At the present stage of the stabilization program two major

issues emerge quite clearly. The first is whether the government can

achieve further budget correction and thus provide assurance that

inflation can remain moderate. Nobody expects zero inflation, but the

active issue is whether inflation can be kept near 100 percent. Of course,

there is the question of whether triple digit inflation can be stable. But

that is more a question of the shocks than of the current problems of

fiscal consolidation.

         The second problem is the poor growth performance viewed in a

trend perspective. Per capita output today is more than 10 percent lower

than it was fifteen years ago, and what is worse, the decline in per

capita output is bound to accelerate. Net investment has been zero or

negative for several years in a row and there is no prospect of a change.

These facts bring out the link between stabilization and growth.

Stabilization and recovery involve primarily the demand side. But at some

stage in the recovery considerations of growth and the supply side must

enter.

         The budget correction is not only essential to contain excess

demand and inflationary pressure, but also to promote investment. The link

between the budget and investment occurs through two channels. The first

is through credibility effects. If the private sector anticipates deficits

and hence worsening of inflation, they will expect that the government

will use tight money to make up for the lack of fiscal consolidation.

Tight money presents the firm with the risk of being caught in an
                                  39


investment with a high cost of debt service and with no customers. Hence

firms are reluctant to invest, using price increases and overtime to

respond to demand rather than durable expansion in capacity and

employment.

        The other link between the budget and investment comes from the

side of resource constraints. In a fully employed economy, as Argentina is

today, resources for investment can only come from reduced consumption,

from reduced government spending or from increased net imports. To cut

government spending is the poujadist—popular option, but it has proved

politically impossible at least in the short term. Reduced consumption

can, indeed, be achieved by a fiscal tightening. This is the correct

option in a country where only 4 percent of total tax collection comes

from income taxes. Finally resources can come from abroad. That would pose

the problem of increased external borrowing, perhaps in the form of forced

lending by the creditor banks or reduced spreads. It also brings the need

for liberalizing restrictions on imports so that potential investors

actually have access to foreign goods. Increased foreign borrowing should

certainly be part of an investment campaign in that it bridges the short—

run political problems and provides a disinflationary impact.

        It is doubtful that the investment and growth problem can be

solved by the budget alone. The budget at best can help provide a

favorable background for other forces to promote investment. The most

favorable sign at this time is the perspective of an Argentina—Brazil

common market. Such a development would throw weight to the productive

forces of the economy and might well be the decisive event to bring back
                                  40


growth. With a return of growth public finance problems and distributive

quarrels might well retreat to the background.



5. BRAZIL: TEE CRUZADO PLAN



        On February 28, 1986, President Sarney announced a major monetary

reform, the Cruzado Plan. Twenty-two years after the Bulhoes—Campos

stabilization of 1964—67 Brazil had once again come to face the political

and economic difficulties of inflation largely running out of control. A

highly interventionist and technically sophisticated program of

stabilization was once again used to stop inflation without tears. We

first review the background to the inflation acceleration and then proceed

to an analysis of the plan and its current performance.



The Bulhoes—Campos Reforms: In the late fifties and early sixties annual

inflation rates escalated from 17 percent per year in 1958 to 92 percent

in 1964, first as a consequence of the Kubitschek expansionary policies,

then as a result of the populist engagements of the Goulart

administration. Between 1964 and 1967, the Bulhoes—Campos reforms, backed

by military President Castello Branco, successfully brought down the

inflation rate to 24 percent a year and restored both external equilibrium

and Brazil's access to foreign credit markets. The side—effects on output

were not only tolerable but short—lived, since the 5 percent industrial

recession of 1965 was followed by a 9 percent industrial recovery already

in 1966. Moreover, the road was paved for a seven-year period of high

growth and declining inflation.
                                  41


        The reforms were a skillful mix of a budget deficit cut, incomes

policies, exchange rate devaluation and capital markets indexation. By

cutting government consumption and subsidies and by raising taxes, the

public sector deficit was reduced from 4% to 1% of GDP. Exchange rate

devaluations replaced the commercial arrears of early 1964 with a

comfortable reserve position in 1965 and 1966. Indexed capital market

instruments encouraged private savings and restored the mortgage market,

virtually killed in the early sixties by the 12% a year usury ceiling on

nominal interest rates. Tax indexation, besides stimulating private

savings by no longer taxing inflation adjustments, was also helpful in

reducing tax evasion (in 1963, when the inflation rate was running at 80%

a year, the penalty on tax arrears was no more than 32% a year).

        The incomes policy part of the plan, which played a major role in

fighting inflation, and which became one of the sources of inspiration of

the cruzado plan, actually meant wage deindexation. The central idea,

described in Figure 2, was that in a staggered wage setting two concepts

must be distinguished, the real wage peak V0 and the real wage average V..

Under this policy, the peak corresponds to the worker's purchasing power im-

mediately after each nominal salary increase, but should not serve as a ref-

erence value, since it is quickly eroded by inflation. The average real wage

is actually what the economy can afford to pay the labor force and what
should be maintained by income policies, except for productivity

adjustments. Since the average/peak ratio is a decreasing function of the

inflation rate, peaks should be properly lowered whenever the inflation

rate is expected to decline. This means that, with decreasing inflation
                  4 l.a




       Figure 2
     Real Wages and Inflation




w
 0
                     0
                                VI
                                  rn
                                      42



rates,   nominal   wages should be adjusted less than proportionally to past

cost of living increases.

          From a technical standpoint the Buihoes—Campos wage formula

provided a setting for economy—wide expectations formation. It became an

income policy tool because the wage adjustment interval was fixed at

twelve months and because both the productivity adjustment and the

expected rate of inflation were decreed by the government, leaving no room

for collective bargaining.

          Except for market adjustments in individual wage negotiations

(which were never prohibited by the government), the Bulboes—Canpos wage

rule would actually squeeze the real wages whenever future inflation rates

were underestimated by the government. The problem was felt in 1965,

1966, and 1967, when the cost of living increased 45.5, 41.2 and 24.1

percent, respectively, compared to prospective inflation rates of 25, 10,

and 15%. The outcome, a 24.8% real wage decline in manufacturing industry

between 1964 and 1968, nay be partly explained by the weakened position of

the labor unions under the military regine.

          A more consistent view, however, is that a substantial decline in

real wages was inevitable, given the policy objectives of increasing

indirect taxes, real rents and real public utility rates, cutting

subsidies, and promoting a strong exchange rate devaluation. It could be

the result of prolonged stagflation, it could be achieved by higher

inflation rates, but still it was inevitable. The Buihoes—Campos wage

formula helped to reconcile this inevitable real wage cut with declining

inflation rates and low output losses.
          42a




I-

                Figure 3

       Real Irage Adjustmenta




Real
gage
                                0




                                    e
                                   43




Widespread Indexation: Imaginative as they might have been, the Bulhoes—

Ca.mpos reforms involved a major asymmetry that could not last for long.

Most incomes and financial assets were indexed, but not wages and the

exchange rate. The almost inevitable extension came on stage in 1968. In

the case of the exchange rate, a crawling-peg adjusted the dollar/cruzeiro

rate at small and irregular time intervals according to a basic guideline

consisting of the inflation rate differential between Brazil and the

United States. In the case of wages a complicated formula was enacted to

offset the effects of unanticipated inflation in the Bulhoes—Campos wage

rule. In practice it meant that nominal wages were to be adjusted every

twelve months in proportion to the cumulative increase in the cost of

living plus a productivity gain. This indexation rule was backward—

looking one which instead of stabilizing the average purchasing power Ym,

simply   restored every twelve months the real wage peak V0 adjusted for

productivity increases, as in Figure 3.

          Since the average/peak ratio is a decreasing function of the

inflation rate, the new wage rule implied that inflation could only

decline so long as average real wages grew faster than the officially

determined productivity gain. Moreover, since the law determined a floor

rather than a ceiling to changes in labor compensation, it introduced an

asymmetry between inflation acceleration and inflation deceleration. In

fact, markets were free to increase the real wage peak W0, but not to

reduce it, except through labor turnover, the only way to escape the law.

Yet this was a costly device in the case of skilled labor and largely
                                   44


ineffective in the case of non—skilled workers, since the latter were

protected by minimum wage levels adjusted by the same indexation rule.

        In short, backward looking wage indexation introduced highly

adverse short—run inflation—output trade—off s, discouraging quick anti—

inflationary policies and favoring monetary accommodation. The problem

was not perceived until 1973, since during the golden years of the

Brazilian miracle real wages could rise much faster than the officially

determined productivity increases with annual inflation rates gradually

falling from 25% in 1967 to 16% in 1973. Yet the expansionary monetary

policies of 1972 and 1973 combined with the first oil shock to lift the

annual inflation rate to 35% in 1974. Tight monetary policies were then

tried, but it was soon perceived that indexation had anchored the wage—

price spiral. Eventually monetary accommodation was accepted, annual

inflation rates being kept in the 35—40% a year range until 1978.



Escalation: Two imprudent policy steps in late 1979 were to lead to

further excalation of inflation rates. First, the government decided to

control interest rates, accepting high increases in the money supply.

Then a new wage law, besides introducing a number of complications,

reduced the nominal wage adjustment interval from twelve to six months.

As theory could predict, what was previously the annual rate of inflation

became the six month inflation rate. Tight monetary policies implemented

in 1981 and 1982 had to face the adverse trade—of fs created by backward—

looking indexation. The country experienced its first major industrial

recession since 1965, but inflation rates only declined from 110% in 1980

to 95% in 1981 and 100% in 1982.
                                  45


        A dramatic balance of payaents adjustment in response to the debt

shock was imposed in 1983. Key policy changes were a 30% real exchange

rate devaluation and, following 11ff advice, substantial indirect tax

increases and subsidy cuts. This, of course, implied a significant real

wage cut that, under the prevailing indexation rules, could only be

achieved by an acceleration of the inflation rate so as to squeeze the

average/peak ratio to the proper level. In fact, inflation leaped to 210%

a year, tight monetary policies producing only an unprecedented recession.

Figure 4 shows the course of inflation acceleration. Eventually, in mid

1984, the government decided to turn once again to monetary accommodation.




   Table 4 Brazil: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

                                       1982    1983     1984    1985

Inflation                               95        155    221     226

Budget Deficit (% of GD?)
   Actual                                      19.9      21.8    26.2
   Operational                                  3.0       1.6     3.2

GD? Growth                              0.9    —3.2       4.5        8.3

Source: Banco Central do Brasi]. Brazil External Program, May 1986




        In March 1985, the passage of power to a civilian president opened

the way to increased wage demands by labor unions. The government first

tried to reconcile substantial increases in real wages with reduced

inflation rates by tightening price controls and by increasing the real

interest rate on Treasury bills to 21% a year. In August, Dilson Funaro
                                     45a

                                   FIgure 4
                               INFLATION IN BRAZIL
                                (Percnt'per nionth)




15




10




5




     1978 1979   1980   1981     1982      1983 1984   1985   1986
                                  46


replaced Francisco Dornelles as Minister of Finance. Some price controls

were lifted, interest rates were substantially lowered and real wages

continued to increase at unprecedented rates. As a result, by the end of

1985 and in January and February 1986, the inflation rate escalated to

almost 15% a month. President Sarney, under the risk of losing all

political support, decided to react with a bold announcement, the

"heterodox shock".19




The Cruzado Plan: The Cruzado Plan was intended to stop inflation by a

standstill on all indexation. The key measures were the following:

        a) Prices were frozen and the exchange rate was fixed at 13.80

Cz/$US. The public was enlisted to defend vigorously the controls and the

government committed to a zero inflation target.

        b) Wages were converted into cruzados by computing their average

purchasing power in the last six months with an increase of 8% in general,

and with a 15% bonus in the case of the minimum wage; a trigger point

indexation clause was introduced with a threshold of 20%;

        c) The same rule, except for the 8 percent increase, was extended

to rents and mortgage payments;

        d)Cruzeir6 bills and demand deposits were immediately converted

into cruzados, without write—offs, by a cut of three zeros. Conversion

rates for cruzeiro denominated liablilities with future maturities were

set to decline by a daily factor,starting February 28th, of 1.0045 until

maturity.20 This conversion rule did not apply to indexed liabilities.



19The expression "heterodox shock" which now is commonly used to
describe the Brazilian experience is due to Lopes (1986).
20As an example, a promissory note of 1 million cruzeiros maturing
April 30th 1986 is worth 770.73 cruzados, not 1000 cruzados.
                                  47


        The immediate success of the program was overwhelming. Consumers

could compare supermarket prices with the listed official maximum prices

and denounce violators to the police, according them the feeling that

their voices could be heard. The fact that nominal wages were cut in some

cases and adjusted substantially below past inflation in all cases did not

cool off the popular support for the program. A demonstration prepared by

leftist groups against the new wage policy was not able to draw more than

two hundred people.




   Table 5 Brazil: Macroeconomics Under the Cruzado Plan

                                1985:1    1985:11     1986:1   1986:June

Inflation (% per month)*         10.1       11.9       0.5         0.6

Industrial Production            110        128        120

*Cost of Living in Rio de Janeiro **Fjesp Index 1982=100, 1986 data refer
to Jan.—March only.
Source: Conjuntura


        Similarities between the Austra]. and the Cruzado Plan are evident.

Some important differences, however, result from the fact that Brazil

decided to stop inflation long before it reached the Argentine rates of

early 1985. In Argentina there was no synchronization problem as far as

wages were concerned, since inflation had come to the point of leading to

monthly wage adjustments. In Brazil the synchronization problem did

exist, since nominal wages were kept unchanged from three to six months.

The solution, largely inspired on the Bulhoes—Campos reforms, was to

convert wages into cruzados by their average purchasing power in the last
                                  48


six months. Yet, since the Cruzado Plan had to be dressed in a fashion

that would never recall a military uniform, three softeners were

introduced: the 8% real wage bonus, the 15% real minimum wage increase

and the "scala mobile" with a 20% threshold. Whether there was room for

such real wage gains is a questionable issue.

        Second, although the Plan tried to solve the problem of wage

synchronization, it did nothing to meet the staggered—price setting

issues. Prices were frozen at their level of February 27th, when the

relative price structure had no reason to be close to equilibrium. Some

sectoral prices, including milk, automoblies, pharmaceutical products and

electric power were clearly frozen below their equilibrium point. Hence,

the success of the Cruzado Plan was contingent on a short—term replacement

of price freezes by price administration.

        A trump card for the Brazilian authorities was that the Cruzado

Plan was implemented under highly favorable external conditions. In 1984

and 1985 Brazil had already scored trade supluses in the range of 12.5 to

13.0 billion dollars a year, bringing its external current account to

equilibrium in spite of the huge interest payments on the foreign debt.

The Cruzado Plan was implemented when the decline in oil prices, the

decline in international interest rates and the depreciation of the dollar

implied a five billion dollar annual improvement in the Brazilian external

accounts. From this point of view, the Cruzado was far more strongly

backed than the Austral.

        As opposed to the Austral Plan, the- Cruzado was announced as a

pure incomes policy, since it was believed that fiscal adjustment had
                                   49


already been promoted in late 1985 and that the Brazilian inflation of

January and February 1986 was purely inertial. The budget, the Brazilian

authorities might have claimed in early March, was already in equilibrium,

or showing at most a very small deficit, not exceeding 0.5% of GD?.

         Until late May the Cruzado honeymoon was incredibly happy— too

happy to be sustainable, as the authorities should have suspected.

Inflation not only immediately stopped with no recession, but retail sales

expanded by 25% in real terms, real estate prices doubled and stock prices

experienced an unprecedented boom. In the wave of optimism Brazil was

described by the Minister of Finance as a country with Swiss inflation and

twice Japanese growth, and the President decided that the price freeze

that brought him so much popularity should be kept until the memory of

inflation was definitely erased. As for the business community, its few

concerns with low profit margins and with the political management of the

price system were largely superseded by the euphoria arising from higher

sales.

         That this was a situation ripe for deniand inflation to take off

was the lesson ignored by Brazilian policy makers. They did not even react

to some disquieting signals, such as the steep price increases of

commodity futures and the rapid growth of the black market exchange rate

premium. Plainly, demand was overheated, both because of the real wage

increases and because the public sector deficit actually remained at 4.7%

of GDP. Shortages, black markets and lessened quality were visible as of

early June. In late July and early August the government announced a

small scale fiscal package, and decided to liberalize a few imports and to
                                   50


 increase interest rates. Whether this will be enough to bring supply and

 demand to equilibrium is questionable. A more complicated problem is that,

 in order to sustain the historical growth trend, Brazil must raise its

domestic savings rate from 15% to 20% of GDP, and up to now little has

been done to encourage savings.



The Outlook: Whether the cruzado will become a success story or one more

frustrated attempt to fight inflation by its symptoms is still an open

question. A lasting success is contingent on three major steps.

        First, a true fiscal reform is actually needed. The present

budget deficit of 4.7% of GDP is obviously too high compared to private

savings and to the country's capacity to attract foreign capital.

Moreover, the expenditure side contains too little investment and too much

consumption, subsidies and transfers. Government savings, namely revenues

minus current expenditures, varied from 2% to 4% of GD? in the seventies.

Recent estimates indicate that the government is now dissaving 0.6% of

GD?.


        Second, the price freeze is unsustainable. The success of the Cruzado

plan depends on replacing the freeze with price administration. The official

idea is that the freeze should be maintained until inflationary expectations

are definitely abated is self—defeating, since shortages and black markets can

only reignite expectations of price increases.

        Third, the plan will only keep its credibility if a low inflation

target replaces the zero inflation promise. Accordingly, some

indexation mechanisms need to be reintroduced to encourage savings and to
                                   51


develop long term credit markets. To prevent the emergence of indexed

quasi—money, as occurred in the early eighties, indexation intervals

must be fairly large (say, one year). Yet they should realistically

recognize that no magic can erase the memory of inflation in a country

that since the early thirties has never experienced a prolonged period

of price stability.



6. THE ISRAELI EXPERIENCE

          On 3uly 1, 1985 the Israeli government adopted an emergency

program of stabilization. Already in force for more than a year, the

program continues to show a good inflation performance.21 We start with a

review of the background to the stabilizattion, then consider the

stabilization, the experience since, and the current policy issues in

Israel.




Background: The background to the Israeli stabilization of 1985 is given

in Table 6. The 1960s had been a period of extraordinary growth and very

low inflation. Population growth had been high, in part as a result of

substantial immigration. Against this success the decade of the 1970s

represents a sharp drop—off and the 1980s a dramatic deterioration. The

increase in inflation, of course, was an issue but the more serious point

was the slowdown in growth and the sharp change in the growth rate of

population.




21The program is most comprehensively discussed in Bruno (1986).
See,too, Fischer (l985a,b, 1986) and Dornbusch and Fischer (1986).
                                   52



Table 6 Israel: Basic Indicators
             (Average Annual Percentage Rates)

                         1960—70        1970—80    1980—84

Inflation                  6.4             41        178

Real Growth                9.7             5.2        2.0

Population Growth          3.4             2.7        1.4

Source: IMF International Financial Statistics


        Where before the economy provided opportunities through sustained

growth, it now had become bogged down and offered little prospect of a

return to the performance of the 1960s. Where immigration had once been

substantial, now emigration was becoming an issue. Of course, facing the

prospect of a high birthrate among the Arab population along with a

reduced birthrate and a pattern of net emigration among the Jewish

population held out extremely difficult prospects for political life in

Israel. The focus on a resumption of high and sustained growth therefore

became the number one priority. But inflation and a lack of consensus on

priorities kept the economy away from a reasonable performance. Above all

there was an unwillingness to risk a stabilization that might lead to high

unemployment and, of course, no disposition to consider drastic budget

cuts.

         At one level there is certainly neither a puzzle nor a lack of

understanding regarding the basic reason for the Israeli inflation. The

central place of the budget deficit and of indexation of financial assets

and of wages was well—recognized. Table 7 shows the data for the budget.
                                    53




Table 7 Budget Deficit and Financing
        (Period Averages, Percent of GNP)

                          1960—67        1968—80      1981—84     1984

Expenditure:
    Domestic               29.1          50.3       61.5         62.9
    Foreign                 1.9           4.5       —1.2         —4.0

Taxes:                     29.1          39.3       46.4         46.0

Deficit Financingb :        1.9          15.5       13.8         12.9
    Base Money              2.4           2.7        2.4          3.2
    Domestic Debt          —1.9           5.6        6.4          3.9
    Foreign Debt            1.5           6.9        5.1          5.8

Memo:
Defense Spending           10.6          25.4       23.9         24.0

 Net foreign expenditure taking into account unilateral transfers.
bDefjcit financing as measured here corresponds roughly to the inflation—
adjusted or operational deficit.
Source: Fischer(1985a)


         There is an extraordinary shift in the deficit between the 60s and

the 70s. Sharply increased defense spending accounts for much of the

increase in spending and in the deficit, but there are other factors, too.

The most striking fact, of course, is the huge size of the inflation—

adjusted deficit which averaged nearly 15 percent of GNP throughout the

1970s. Particularly noteworthy is the very large share of taxes in GNP.

The ratio in Israel of 46 percent conpares with the average of only 35

percent in the major industrialized countries.

         Perhaps the most striking fact is that the total budget deficit in

the last few years, and specifically in 1984 was not higher than in the

last fifteen years. Monetary poloicy was outright passive: money creation

was geared to financing the deficit. The deficit to be financed by base
                                  54



creation, however, did increase by 0.8 percentage points to 3.2 percent of

GNP. But this in itself might not appear to be a large change nor would it

seem to be an absolutely large rate of money creation. The Israeli

experience therefore calls for an explanation of why inflation should

respond so sharply to seemingly small changes in the pattern of deficit

finance. The transition toward really high inflation night not have been

solely or primarily due to the shift in financing toward money. Other

factors, including the reduced growth in demand for the monetary base and

exchange rate policy also played a role.

        Figure 5 shows the rate of inflation (quarterly averages of the

monthly rate) for the period 1973—85, up to the tine of the monetary

reform. In these data it is apparent that inflation gradually increased

from the level of about 50 percent to somewhat above 100 percent in the

early 1980s. The dramatic escalation only occurs in 1984—85 and thus

cannot be explained by a sudden budget shift. To explain the actual path

of inflation, and specifically the explosion in 1984—85, exchange rate

policy, the interaction between growth and inflation and adjustments in

the financial sector must be taken into account.

        Macroeconomic experiments of different kinds were attempted in the

early 1980s, ranging from Chilean style overvaluation to a last—minute

plan of adopting the US dollar as the national currency.22 In 1981—83,

under finance minister Aridor, the exchange rate was allowed to become



22The options proposed in June 1983 to then- finanace minister Aridor
are reported in Plessrier (1986) . It is interesting to note that the
document recognizes all the issues of the later monetary reform and
many of the details.
                                    54a




                                     Figure 5
                                INFLATION IN ISRAEL
                                 (Percent per Month)




30


                                                              28


20




I   0




    0

        I 982   I.   1983   I             1984     I   1985        1   1986
                                 55


substantially overvalued. The real appreciation in 1981—83 reached more

than 25 percent. The overvaluation policy contained the inflation rate in

a 100-130 percent range because it provided gains in real wages at reduced

rates of wage and hence price inflation. But, of course, the overvaluation

meant that growth slowed down and that a balance of payments crisis was

inevitably building.

        The overvaluation and expectation of an ultimate depreciation

accelerated the substitution toward interest bearing assets, thus reducing

the base for the government's inflation tax. At the same time the reduced

growth rate of real income cut back the growth rate of the demand for the

real monetary base. With unchanged rates of expansion of the base

(measured as a fraction of GNP) as in Table 7 the imbalance translated

into sharply increased inflation. The shift toward an increased

participation of money finance in the total deficit strongly reinforced

this point.23

        The combination of reduced growth of the real demand for the

monetary base because of lower income growth, institutional change in the

form of a shift toward non—monetary assets, an increased share of money

finance and the corrective depreciation at the end of 1983 together

created a major inflation shock. Because of wage indexation in three month

and later even single month intervals there were few lags in the system so



23helnick and Sokoler (1984) show that a reduction in output growth,
and hence in the growth of demand for bighpowered money has an
important effect on inflation. Fischer(1982) shows cross country
evidence on the ratio of highpowered money increases to GNP. By the
standards of his sanpie the change from 1981—83 to 1984 is certainly
very significant.
                                  56


that wages and prices rapidly adjusted to these disturbances. Essentially

the system was without any anchor or friction other than what the

government could negotiate with labor or pay for via overvaluation and

subsidies. Moreover, this lack of an anchor was recognized by the public

and helped speed up everybody's adjustment of wages, prices and

portfolios.



The Eve of the Stabilization: The last stages of the pre—stabilization

period can be seen in Figure 5 which shows monthly rates of inflation. The

overvaluation period came to an end in October 1983 with a large exchange

rate depreciation. Discussion of stabilization had started in 1983 under

Aridor and by 1984 had become wide—spread. The July elections failed to

give either party a majority and as a result led to a National Unity

Government which took until September to form.

        Over the next six months two wage packages were in effect. Their

success is clearly shown by the very low rate of inflation in December

1984 and January 1985. But equally recognizable are the adjustments in-

between packages that led to sharp increases in the inflation rate. There

had also already been a significant budget cut, but even so by mid-1985,

it had become clear that a much more comprehensive and far—reaching

program was required to stop inflation. The program was made more urgent

by persistent losses of foreign exchange reserves.34



24These foreign exchange losses came primarily from capital ourf lows.
The current account had already improved as a result of the preceding
depreciation.
                                  57




The Stabilization Program of July 1985: In June 1985 a commission was

appointed to develop a stabilization plan and in July the program was

announced and implemented by emergency decree. The main features of the

program were the following:25

  (a) A proposed cut in the budget equal to 7.5 percent of GNP (SUS 1.5

billion)

  (b) A 20 percent devaluation of the shekel and establishment of a fixed

exchange rate relative to the dollar. The measure was accompanied by

reductions in import duties and export subsidies.

  (c) Freezing of all wages and prices.26

  (d) Exchange rate linked deposits were maintained (without capital

levy), but their liquidity was reduced by requiring a one year minimum

maturity for new deposits.

  Ce) A time horizon of one year, with a gradual phase—out of controls

over the period.

  (f) A U.S. supplementary aid allocation of SU.S. 1.5 billion

Two important issues in this program were the ability to secure labor's

agreement on the wage freeze and to achieve the proposed budget cuts.

        Agreements with the labor union (the Bistadrut) are a common

feature of Israeli macroeconomics. The labor unions, which own 25 percent

of industry, have on various occasions collaborated by foregoing cost of

living increases. In this instance, too, they helped out. Although



25For a detailed discussion of the measures see Bruno (1986).
26Djfficultjes would arise from an agreement for deferred wage
increases.
                                  58



ostensibly protesting the use of emergency decrees they accepted after a

month a wage package that introduced an initial increase in compensation

in return for giving up the cost of living adjustment and prefixed

increases at several points over the subsequent six months. The net effect

of the wage agreement was to lock in for some time a cut in real wages.

The reintroduction of cost of living adjustments would be subject to a 4

percent threshold.

        The most difficult part of the stabilization was clearly the

commitment to cut the budget. It always seemed impossible to cut the

budget. Every single item seemed beyond the government's ability to cut

and, clearly, the idea of even higher taxes was quite impossible. In this

atmosphere there was wide—spread doubt that a 7.5 percent of GNP cut in

the deficit could be possible. The only places that seemed to offer

themselves for cuts were the vast subsidies on exports and on virtually

everything else. But, of course, further subsidy cuts would mean cuts in

real wages or cuts in export profitability. Further real wage cuts over

and above those implied by the devaluation were difficult to conceive. The

alternative, reductions in export subsidies at constant exchange rates,

seemed unwise since they would involve a loss in competitiveness and a

weakening of the external balance which supported the exchange rate

policy. Cuts in subsidies on basic food and on transport made most sense

in terms of the supply side, but they might also be the most difficult to

bring about politically.

       The government's ability to cut the-budget therefore was clearly

the central issue. Because of the doubt about effective budget cuts there
                                    59


was skepticism regarding the sustainability of the entire program. This

was particularly the case among some of the economists of Tel Aviv

University, who were outside the program committee and therefore could

afford to indulge their skepticism in a most vocal fashion.



The State of the Program in 1986: In August 1986, 13 months after the

inception of the program, all seems well, at least within limits! To the

surprise of the skeptics and the delight of the authors of the program the

success has been quite manifest. Inflation has been very low, the budget

has in fact been cut, the real wage and the real exchange rate have not

gotten vastly out of line. The real wage is now approximately back to its

pre—stabilization level.

        Success on the budget is no doubt the most striking achievement:

Where during the calendar year of 1984 the deficit was 15 percent of GNP

it declined to an annual average of 12 percent in the January—June pre—

stabilization period. For the July—December period, following

stabilization, it amounted to only 4 percent of GNP. The budget

improvement was achieved by cuts in basic food subsidies and transport

subsidies, by an increase in the real value of tax collection and by

special property taxes.

        Table 8 shows some of the macroeconomic data to judge the progress

of the plan. First note the sharp deceleration of inflation: in the seven

months after the program was initiated, cumulative inflation was less than

in the single month   of June 1985. Moreover -the inflation remained
comfortably   low even after seven months. In March the inflation rate
                                         60


  continued low at 1.5 percent, but in April a level of 3 percent was

  anticipated, reflecting in part seasonal factors. There is no issue of

  shortages and certainly no idea that inflation is about to break out in a

  major way as it had at the end of the wage package in early 1985.


Table 8 The Success of the July Program

                 Inflation    Mz          Credit Unemployment    Real    Real
                                                                 Wage    Exchange

June 85               14.9         7.2    16.8     6.6          100     100

July 85               27.8     56.6        0.4                   85      94

August 85—June 86     21.3     60.0        4.5     7.2           88      96
Cumulative*

June 86                1.6     —1.7                7.4          100      97

*The indices (June 1985=100) in the last two columns are period averages
Source: Fischer (1986) and Morgan Guaranty.


          The second point worth recording concerns the behavior of money and

credit aggregates: M2 has expanded strongly, but exchange rate—linked accounts

(Patam accounts, not shown) have declined sharply. This is a typical feature

associated with the return of confidence in the domestic currency. Note

finally that nominal credit has been under a very tight rein: total credit has

expanded by only 6 percent cumulatively over the period and thus, in real

terms, has in fact declined. We will return to this point in discussing

interest rate developments.

          The third point concerns real wages. Real wages declined in the early

part of stabilization and remained significantly below their pre—stabilization

level until earlier this year. By summer 1986 they had, however, increased

back to their pre—stabilization level. This is a central problem of the
                                       61



program, because wages had moved far ahead of productivity with government

subsidies (and hence budget deficits) making up the difference.

           A fourth point worth noting concerns the real exchange rate. The real

exchange rate turned toward increased competitiveness during the

stabilization. The initial devaluation helped bring about a gain in

competitiveness and continuing dollar depreciation since 1985 has helped

maintain the gain even in the face of moderate domestic inflation. Without the

dollar devaluation over the past year it would have been difficult to defend

the fixed dollar exchange rate.

           Table 8 shows that the program did involve a rise in unemployment.

This is an important point because fear about unemploynwent has on many

occasions stopped decisive anti—inflationary measures. But the rise in

unemployment was quite limited. The fact that inflation in July 1986 was down

to 0.0 showed that, unlike in Brazil and Argentina, the fact of incomes policy

need not involve an inevitable repressed and ultimately open of inflation.



Policy Issues

           The two central policy issues for Israel today are to lock in the

disinflation and to embark on a path of strong and sustainable growth. Often

policies for growth involve expansion in demand. That    is   not the case for

Israel. Economic slack is not significant, even after the massive fiscal

adjustment that has taken place. Resources for growth    therefore must come from
the government sector and from reduced private consumption. Further budget
cutting,   and ultimately tax rate cuts are the important priorities this year,

next year and for many years to cone.27



 27See on the growth issue especially the memorandum by Fischer(1986).
                                    62


        Supply side economics received a bad name in the U.S. because it was

primarily a cover for a Keynesian fiscal expansion. But in the case of Israel,

crowding—in of investment through reduced budget deficits and expansion in

productive capacity via increased incentives are entirely plausible. There are

no simple, fast recipes for growth, but it is clear that high tax rates used

to finance an extensive system of subsidies can well be counterproductive.

Before it becomes possible to cut taxes it will be necessary to cut much more

into transfers. Even so it is encouraging to note that Israel has experimented

successfully with reductionms in marginal employment taxes, reducing the wedge

between take-home pay and labor cost to firms.

        In a short—run perspective the government needs to decide on its

exchange rate policy. So far dollar depreciation has helped offset the impact

of continuing, though moderate, inflation. If the dollar stops declining it is

vital that the competitiveness of the traded goods sector not be sacrificed.

Continued competitiveness is essential because the traded goods sector must

serve as a locomotive for the entire economy and because renewed exchange rate

speculation and its financial consequences must be avoided.

        The availability of U.S. additional aid——$1.5 billion in 1985—86 or

the equivalent of 7.5 percent of GNP—— makes the exchange rate issue seemingly

unimportant. But this perception mistakes the fact that for growth and

employment competitiveness of the external sector is essential. At the same

time it is important not to allow an overvaluatjon to occur which will, at

some point, have to be eliminated with highly adverse consequences for

inflation as, for example, in 1983. The government has recognized these issues

by sticking to a fixed exchange rate policy, first on the dollar and more
                                    63


recently on a basket of currencies. The fixed exchange rate commitment can be

taken into wage negotiations. The government here can credibly ask for zero

wage increases in exchange for a fixed exchange rate. The alternative is to

offer indexation of wages and of the exchange rate at the cost of a resumption

of a pattern of 30—40 percent inflation.



7. POLITICS

        A very interesting and important aspect of the new stabilization

programs has been their political impact. They were initiated by governments

already sharply weakened by their failure to stabilize. But, where ordinarily

stabilization is perceived as politically difficult and harmful these new

programs have catapulted the politicians and technicians who initiated them to

near—immortality, at least initially.

        Public opinion surveys for Brazil, Argentina and Israel provide a

ready means of checking on the political success of the stabilization plans.

We therefore review some of that evidence here to reinforce the dramatic

contrast between the food riots that on occasion emerge in the course of IMF

programs and the extraordinarily positive response in these cases.28



Argentina: A public opinion survey (Socmerc) has made available an assessment

over time of the public response to policy and management.29 The data reported

in Table 9 show the fraction of the sample assessing the performance as

positive.



 280ur analysis focusses on Brazil and Argentina, but we understand
 that much the same evidence exists for the case of Israel.
 29SOCMERC is a public opinion survey data base belonging to the
 consulting firm Aftalion*Mora y Arau)o* Noueira.
                                      64




Table 9 Positive Response To The Government
         (Percent of the sample responding positively)

                           1984                  1985                1986
                           Dec.            May    Aug.   Dec.         Apr.
Austral Plan                                      74     68           52

Economic Management        19              10     40     35           19

Government in general      46              35     57     52           36

President Alfonsin         72              64     74     71          64

Source: La Nacion


        The notable point in this table is the immensely positive response to

the Austral Plan and the sharp improvement in government popularity on all

counts between May and August 1985.

        Moreover, the positive response has been quite persistent. Even after

the initial enthusiasm wore off, there was still very substantial support as

is evident in the December 1985 rating. At the end of 1985 a public opinion

poll showed that 35 percent of the sample felt that the Austral Plan had

helped them and that a further 42 percent estimated that it had not affected

them significantly. Only 9 percent felt that they had been strongly hurt. Only

18 percent of the sample felt that the Plan should be abandoned.3°



Brazil: Unfortunately there does not appear to be a continuing public opinion

survey for Brazil that follows as in the case of Argentina the public's

assessment of economic issues. But the evidence from more isolated surveys

does lead to very much the same impression as is conveyed in the case of

Argentina.



  30Reported in La Nacion, january 2,1986.
                                        65



         In immediate "post—shock" surveys 84 percent percent of the

respondents thought the reform was good and only 2 percent felt that it was

bad. In the same survey 66 percent of the public felt they would benefit and

only 8 percent believed they would be hurt.3'

         In a survey asking for a rating of the President on the scale of 0 to

10 the President received a grade of 6.5 in December 1985, prior to the Plan.

By March 1985 his rating rose to a grade of 8.4.32 It is quite apparent that

the President's popularity jumped sky—high, at least in the polls, as a result

of the stabilization plan.

         The public perceives a distinct improvement in their economic

conditions. An ongoing opinion survey reports the following reponses to the

question "Have things become better or worse since the economic shock which

introduced the Cruzado Plan?" and "Is Your Purchasing Power Today Higher,

Equal or Less than before the economic shock?"


      Table 10   Brazil: 1986 Post—Shock Opinion Surveys

                    April       May    June   July

                           Did Things Generally Improve...?

Yes                   56        54      57     46



                   Is Your Purchasing Power Higher Today..?

Higher                47        46      44     44

Source: Foiha de Lao Paulo July 26,1986 p.19


         A survey following the July 1986 follow—up program (the "pacotinho")



 31Folha de Sao Paulo, March Sth,1986.
 32Folha de Sao Paulo, March 15th 1986
                                    66



showed that 59 percent supported the new measures against only 27 percent

expressing a negative opinion. Yet only 35 percent percent of the survey

respondents felt that these new measures would bring them benefits while 49

percent felt they would not.33



Explanations: Why do these new programs bring forth such strong public support

whereas traditional programs are viewed as a political liability? We see two

immediate explanations.

        Perhaps the most important aspect of these new stabilization programs

is that they occur in a context of sharply accelerating and extreme inflation.

It is well—known that the public views inflation as utterly threatening. If

this view is true for the moderate inflation experienced in the industrial

countries, then it is quite likely even more true for the extreme experiences

reviewed here. The strong public reaction observed in this case far exceeds

what economists can explain in terms of the economics of inflation.3 By the

same token, price controls are invariably a popular political move anytime

inflation is perceived as a problem. The move to stop accelerating inflation

by controls thus amounts to a well—known recipe in political economy. Deeper

research going to the psychology of inflation and controls is therefore

certainly warranted.

        A related point is the populism inherent in the new stabilization

programs. The public is enlisted as price controllers and in this way they are

given a direct, personal role. In a Brazilian opinion survey of early March



  33Folha de Sao Paulo, 3uly 26, 1986.
  345ee Fischer and Modigliani
                                    67


1986 as many as 50 percent of the respondents said they were actively helping

to control prices and another 39 percent said they would do so in the future.

Active participation in price controls by the general public is seen as an

excercise of participatory economic democracy.

        It is striking to note that the public is actually willing to accept

the need for sacrifices in order to secure stabilization. A survey in

Argentina found that 46 percent of the respondents were willing to make

personal sacrifices to help the success of the Plan, whereas another 46

percent said they could not reduce their standard of living further. Only 8

percent were unwilling to do so.

        The second argument for popularity lies in the fact that fiscal

stabilization does not involve a reduction in private sector aggregate real

absorption of goods and services. The adjustment basically involves only a

change in the incidence and distribution of taxation. An inflation tax

finances the government during the high inflation period whereas outright

taxation finances basically the same level of real government spending after

stabilization. Since no current account improvement is required as part of the

stabilization, the whole program amounts mostly to a reshuffling within the

country of the burden of financing a given government spending.

        There may also be redistributions between sectors. For example

industries that collect sales taxes (say the tobacco industry in Argentina)

lose out when the float disappears and workers gain from the stability of real

wages. These redistributive features of stabilization differ from the case of

a country where stabilization requires an improvement in the current account

and hence a net reduction in aggregate absorption.



  35Aftalion, Xora y Araujo and Noguera (1985) p.8
                                    68




8.CONCIJUDING REMARKS

        The new stabilization programs in force in Argentina, Israel and

Brazil represent a critically important, viable alternative to traditional,

orthodox, IMF—style programs. They grasp a central economic fact, the need for

coordination rather than sheer slack, as an essential part of stabilization.

From a political point of view they are dramatically successful, at least in

the first stage, and as such they are feasible.

        These new programs represent an important advance in macroeconomic

policy, but even so they do not afford miracles. There is no substitute for a

correction of fiscal disorder, the orthodox part of stabilization. Perhaps

surprisingly, governments seem to be unwilling to use the very strong increase

in their political standing to follow up on the initial stabilization with a

program of enduring, substantial improvement in public finance. This

unwillingness is very shortsighted because any program will ultimately buckle

under as boom and shortages force a return of inflation. There may be no

outright collapse, at least for a long time, but gradually the program tends

to melt away for lack of sustainability, credibility and confidence. As a

result political support inevitably falls off and with the loss of support

fall the chances of achieving important changes in public finance. The chance

of turning from stabilization to growth thus is missed.

        In Argentina, Brazil and Israel a return to sustainable, long—term

growth is a serious issue. Investment has fallen off significantly and the

supply potential has expanded little. The important changes in public finance

required to promote long—term financial stability have not taken place in
                                     69


Argentina, are not in sight in Brazil and may not happen in Israel. The lesson

for any other country, for example Mexico, is to recognize that the incomes

policy approach to stabilization does not dispense with orthodoxy. But that it

does provide an extraordinary political opportunity in the form of a brief

breating spell and momentum of popular support which can be exploited for the

hard task of basic policy reform.



Appendix I. Inflation and the Budget

        Figure A—I shows on the axes the inflation rate and the budget deficit

measure as a share of GD?. The dashed schedule shows the Oliveira—Tanzi

effect. As inflation increases the deficit rises because of the inflationary

erosion, via lags in collection, of the real value of tax collection. The

solid schedule is the Laffer curve for the inflation tax. At very low

inflation rates real balances are high, but because of low inflation the

inflation tax revenue is also low. As inflation rises the inflation tax

revenue first rises and then gradually falls off because at high rates of

inflation the increased cost of holding real balances cones to doninate in

that it reduces real money demand.

        The important point to note from Figure A—i is that there are two

inflationary equilibria, points A and B. At A inflation is low and the

deficit is small while at B inflation and the deficit are large. If an

economy were at B it would, of course, be of interest to shift it to A. The

problem then is how to achieve, at a low cost, that transition.
            Laffer Curve


                                          , /
                                        ,
                                           Ohiveira—Tanzj
                                    r      Curve
                                    B


0
                            /
                                /
                        /
                    /
                /
            /
        I
        (
    A

0
                                                   budget deficit
                                                   (%   of   GDP)
                                      70




REFERENCES

Arida,P. and A. Lara Resende (1985) "Inertial Inflation and Monetary Reform in
Brazil" in LWillianson (ed.) Inflation and Indexation, Institute for
International Economics.

"Anti—Inflation Policies and the Problem of Credibility: Symposium" (1982).
American Economic Review, May.

Arnaudo,A. (1979) "El Programa Antiinf].acionario de 1973" Dearrollo Economico,
3une.

Baer,W and I. Kerstenezky (eds.)(1964) Inflation and Growth in Latin America,
Yale University Press.

Barboso, R.F. (1986) Ensaio Sobre Inflacao e Indexacao, forthcoming, Fundacao
Getulio Vargas.

Bresciani—Turroni,C.(1937) The Economics of Inflation, Allen & Unwin

Bruno,M. (1986) "Sharp Disinflation Strategy: Israel 1985" Economic Policy, No.
2, April.

     and S.Fischer (1984) 'The Inflationary Process in Israel: Shocks and
Accommodation" Falk Institute Discussion Paper.

             (1986) "Inflation and Expectations" Unpublished manuscript, MIT.

Calvo,G. (1986) "Fractured Liberalism: Argentina Under Martinez de Hoz"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, April.

Cardoso,E. (1983) "Iudexacao, Accomodacao Nonetaria e Inflacao Inercial"
Revista Brasileira de Economia,l.

        (1986) "What Policy Makers Can Learn From Brazil and Argentina"
Challenge, September—October.

Corbo,V. and de Mello,J.(eds.)(1985) Liberalization With Stabilization in the
Southern Cone of Latin America, special issue of World Development, August.

Corbo,V., J. de Melo and 3.Tybout(1986) "What Went Wrong With the Financial
Reforms in the Southern Cone?" Economic Development and Cultural Change,
April.

de Pablo,J.C. (1980) Politica Economica Del Peronismo, El Cid Editora.

               (1984) Politica Economica Argentina, Ediciones Macchi.

Diaz Alejandro,C. (1982) "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans" in W.Cline and
S.Weintraub (eds) Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries, Brookings.

diTella, G. Argentina Under Peron: 1973—76, St. Martin's Press.
                                    '11




     —and R.Dornbusch (eds.) The Political Economy of Argentina: 1946-83,
St.Martin's Press, forthcoming

Dornbusch,R. (1982) "Stabilization Policy in Developing Countries: What
Lessons Have We Learnt?" World Development, No.9.

          (1985a) "The Larida Proposal: Comment" In J.Williamson (ed.)
Inflation and Indexatjon, Institute of International Economics.

          (1985b) "Stopping Hyperinflation: Lessons from the German Experience
in the 1920s" forthcoming in S.Fischer (ed.) Essays in Honor of Franco
Modigliani, MIT Press.

          (1986a) "Inflation, Exchange Rates and Stabilization" Princeton
Essays in International Finance, forthcoming.

          (1986b) "Argentina After Martinez de Hoz" in G.diTella and
R.Dornbusch (eds.) The Political Economy of Argentina: 1946—83, St.Martin's
Press.

          (1986c) "Mexico and the IMF", Unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

     and S.Fischer (1986) "Stopping Hyperinflation: Past and Present"
Weltwjrtschaft].iches Archly, April.

Eisner,R. (1986) Bow Real is the Federal Deficit?, Free Press

Fellner,W. (1976) Toward A Reconstruction of Macroeconomics, American
Enterprise Institute.

Fernandez,R.(1985) "The Expectations Management Approach to Stabilization in
Argentina: 1976—82" World Development, (Special Issue) August

           and Rodriguez,c.(eds.) (1982) Inflacion Y Estabilidad, Ediciones
Macci.

Fischer,S.(1982) "Seignorage and the Case for a National Money" journal of
Political Economy, 2, reprinted in his Indexing, Inflation and Economic
Policy, MIT Press, 1986.

          (1985a) "The Economy of Israel: Problems and Prospects" Unpublished
manuscript, MIT.

          (1985b) "Inflation and Indexation: Israel" in J.Willamson (ed.)
Inflation and Indexation, Institute for International Economics.

          (1986) "A Growth Program for Israel" Unpublished manuscript, MIT.
                                     72



        and F.Modigliani (1978) "Towards an Understanding of the Real Effects
 and Costs of Inflation" Weltwjrtschaftliches Archiv,reprinted in S.Fischer
 Indexing, Inflation and Econonjc Policy, MIT Press, 1986.

Foxley,A. Latin American Experiments in Neoconservatjve Economics, University
of California Press.

Graham,F. (1928) Exchange, Prices and Production in Hyperinf].atjon Germany,
Princeton University Press.

Heyman,D. (1986) Tres Ensayos Sobre Inflacion y Politicas de Estabilizacion,
CEPAL, Bunos Aires, Doc. #18.

Keynes,JM. (1923) A Tract on Monetary Reform,reprinted by the Royal Economic
Society, 1971.

League of Nations (1926) The Financial Reconstruction of Austria.

Liviatan,N. and S.Piterman (1985) "Accelerating Inflation and Balance of
Payments Crises: Israel 1973—1984". Research Department, Bank of Israel.

Lopes,F. (1977) "Prob].einas do Controle da Inflacao" in D. Dias Carneiro (ed.)
Brasil: Dilemas da Politica Economica, Editora Campus

         (1986) 0 Chogue Heterodoxo, Editora Campus

Melnick,R. and M.Sokoler (1984) "The Government Revenue from Money Creation
and the Inflationary Effects of a Decline in the Rate of Growth of GNP"
Journal of Monetary Economics, March

Modiano,E. (1986) Da Inflacao Ao Cruzado, Editora Campus

Olivejra,J. (1967) "Money, Prices and Fiscal Lags: A Note on the Dynamics of
Inflation" Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, No. 26.

Pazos,F. (1985) Politica de Desarrollo Economjco, Banco Central de Venezuela

       (1972) Chronic Inflation on Latin America, Praeger Publishers

Plessner,y. (1983) "Description of Alternatives" Unpublished manuscript.

Ramos,J. (1984) Estabjljzacjon y Liberaljzacjon Econonica en el Cono Sur,
Cepal.

Sargent,T. (1982) "The Ends of Four Big Inflatjorxs" in R.Eall (ed.) Inflation,
NBER and University of Chicago Press.

Shiffer,Z.F. (1986) "Adjusting to High Inflation: The Israeli Experience"
Federal Reserve Bank of St.Loujs, Review, April.
                                    73



Simonsen,M. (1964) A Experiencia Inflacionaria No Brasil, Committee for
Economic Development.

           (1971) Ensaios Sobre Economia e Politica Economica:1964—69, APEC
Editora.

           (1985) "Indexation: Current Theory and the Experience in Brazil."
in R.Dornbusch and M.B.Simonsen (eds.) Inflation, Debt and Indexation, MIT
Press.

             (1986a) "Incomes Policy as Game Theory", unpublished manuscript,
Fundacao Getulio Vargas.

            (1986b) "Keynes Versus Expectativas Racionais" Unpublished
manuscript, Fundacao Getulio Vargas.

Schelling,T. (1982) Micromotives and Macrobehavior, Norton.

Tanzi,V. (1977) "Inflation, Lags in Collection and the Real Value of Tax
Revenue" IMF Staff Papers, No.1

Tobin,J.(1980) "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After" Brookings Papers On
Economic Activity, No.1.

        (ed.) (1983) Macroeconomics, Prices and Quantities. Essays in Memory
of Arthur M.Okun, Brookings

Okun,A. (1983) Economics for Policy Making, Brookings,

Yeager,L. (1981) Experiences with Stopping Inflation, American Enterprise
Institute.
