                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ASSESSING INCENTIVES FOR ADVERSE SELECTION IN HEALTH PLAN PAYMENT
                              SYSTEMS

                                        Timothy J. Layton
                                         Randall P. Ellis
                                       Thomas G. McGuire

                                       Working Paper 21531
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21531


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2015




Research for this paper was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290)
and the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The views expressed here are the authors’ own and not
necessarily those of the Foundation’s officers, directors or staff. In addition, Layton was supported
by NIMH T32 019733. We are grateful to Konstantin Beck, David Cutler, Mike Geruso, Laura Hatfield,
Lukas Kauer, Albert Ma, Joe Newhouse, Sherri Rose, Christian Schmid, Mark Shepard, Richard van
Kleef, Wenjia Zhu, and participants at the BU-Harvard-MIT Seminar and the NBER Summer Institute
for comments on a previous version. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Timothy J. Layton, Randall P. Ellis, and Thomas G. McGuire. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing Incentives for Adverse Selection in Health Plan Payment Systems
Timothy J. Layton, Randall P. Ellis, and Thomas G. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 21531
September 2015
JEL No. I11,I13,I18

                                               ABSTRACT

Health insurance markets face two forms of adverse selection problems. On the demand side, adverse
selection leads to plan price distortions and inefficient sorting of consumers across health plans. On
the supply side, adverse selection creates incentives for plans to inefficiently distort benefits to attract
profitable enrollees. These problems can be addressed by features of health plan payment systems
such as reinsurance, risk adjustment, and premium categories. In this paper, we develop Harberger-
type measures of the efficiency consequences of price and benefit distortions under a given payment
system. Our measures are valid, that is, based on explicit economic models of adverse selection. Our
measures are complete, in that they are able to incorporate multiple features of plan payment systems.
Finally, they are practical, in that they are based on the ex ante data available to regulators and researchers
during the design phase of payment system development, prior to observing actual insurer and consumer
behavior. After developing the measures, we illustrate their use by comparing the performance of the
payment system planned for implementation in the ACA Marketplaces in 2017 to several policy alternatives.
We show that, in protecting against both types of selection problems, a payment system that incorporates
reinsurance and prospective risk adjustment out-performs the planned payment system which includes
only concurrent risk adjustment.


Timothy J. Layton                                      Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy                       Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School                                 Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue                                    180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115                                       Boston, MA 02115
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu                             and NBER
                                                       mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Randall P. Ellis
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, Mass 02215
ellisrp@bu.edu
1. Introduction
Public policy in the U.S. relies on private individual health insurance markets to provide coverage to
about one third of the elderly in Medicare and to all those eligible for the new Marketplaces
(formerly called Exchanges) created by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). As is well-known,
individual health insurance markets are vulnerable to adverse selection, the tendency of sicker,
higher-cost consumers to choose more generous coverage.1 This natural pattern of demand causes
two problems: 1) equilibrium premiums reflect selection as well as coverage differences, leading to
price distortions that cause consumers to choose the “wrong” plans (Einav and Finkelstein, 2011),
and 2) insurers distort the coverage of their health plans to make them less attractive to sicker
enrollees (Glazer and McGuire, 2000). Economic analysis contends with these selection-related
inefficiencies by ex ante study of the incentives embedded in insurance markets under alternative
policy environments2 and by ex post evaluation of the performance of implemented policies based on
actual consumer and insurer behavior.3
        This paper develops and implements a general methodology for assessing the ex ante
selection-related incentives created by a health plan payment system. Our perspective is at the
market design phase: with data on patterns of utilization representative of the population to be
covered, we want to develop an approach to assessing how well a payment system – meaning the set
of policies regulating both the premium structure and the plan payment scheme – will contend with
selection problems. Ex ante analysis and simulations are the primary way regulators evaluate and
decide on payment systems for the new Marketplaces, Medicare’s payment system for private health
plans, and plan payment systems in the Netherlands, Switzerland, Israel and Germany.4 Studies in
this literature focus almost entirely on just one component of health plan payment systems: the risk
adjustment scheme, using statistical measures such as the R-squared of a regression of actual costs
on the predicted costs output by the risk adjustment formula. Some papers in this literature also

1 Table 9 in Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) summarizes thirty studies documenting adverse selection in health
insurance. For a more recent review emphasizing studies relevant to the state-level Marketplaces, see
McGuire et al. (2014).
2 An example we discuss later is the ex ante evaluation of the risk adjustment system used to pay plans in the

new Marketplaces by federal contractors (Kautter et al., 2014).
3 See Erickson and Starc (2012) for an early evaluation of insurance pricing in the precursor to national

reform in Massachusetts, and Kowalski (2014) for an evaluation of selection inefficiencies in plan choice in
state health care reforms. We discuss a number of these ex post evaluation studies below.
4 See as examples, Kautter et al., (2014) on US Marketplaces; Pope, et al., (2011) on US Medicare; Shmueli, et

al. (2010) on Israel; Beck, Trottman and Zweifel (2010) on Switzerland; Breyer, Heineck and Lorenz (2003)
on Germany; Van Kleef, Van Vliet and Van de Ven (2013) on the Netherlands.


                                                                                                             1
include “predictive ratios,” the ratio of predicted costs to actual costs for selected groups in the
population, such as those with a chronic illness.5 Although widely used, neither an R-squared nor a
predictive ratio has been shown to have a direct interpretation in terms of economic inefficiency.
        We derive alternative measures for ex ante evaluation of payment system performance,
requiring three things from the measures we propose: First, they should be valid, i.e., the measures
should follow from formal analysis of the economic behavior causing the selection problems the
payment system is designed to correct and they should be based on the effects of a payment system
on consumer welfare rather than just the size of the distortion created by the selection problem.
Second, measures should be complete in the sense of accommodating all relevant features of payment
systems used to pay health plans including multiple premium categories and reinsurance, not just the
risk adjustment formula. Third, the measures should be practical, that is, readily computable from the
large claims databases available at the design phase for ex ante evaluation of payment system
alternatives. We do not require that the measures evaluate payment system performance using a
standard metric such as the total dollars of welfare loss. Instead, we only require that the measures
we develop allow for the comparison of payment systems according to their implications for social
welfare, providing policymakers with a basis for determining which payment systems are “better”
than others.
        While the standard measure used for ex ante analysis of payment system performance, the R-
squared from a regression of costs on risk adjustor variables, is both practical (requirement 3) and
allows for the comparison of payment system performance, it does not accommodate the complete
set of payment system features (requirement 2), nor has it been shown to measure any parameter of
economic importance (requirement 1). The same could be said of predictive ratios. Other more
economically valid welfare metrics, such as the certainty equivalent measure used by Einav et al.
(2010) and others, require estimates of key behavioral parameters among the population of interest,
causing them to lack the practicality (or feasibility) of the more popular R-squared and predictive
ratio metrics and to not be used in actual payment system design. In a nutshell, our paper intends to
equip researchers and regulators with a methodology, or a “toolkit,” for evaluating payment system
alternatives to replace the R-squared/predictive ratio analyses that have been conducted in this
literature for more than 30 years.


5European researchers more commonly study over- and undercompensation – the difference between
projected revenues and cost rather than their ratio. See Van Kleef et al. (2013).


                                                                                                        2
        We address selection-related efficiency problems associated with both inefficient plan choice
and inefficient plan design. In each case, we start with an economic description of the behaviors
associated with adverse selection, and derive a measure (or measures) of efficiency loss due to the
incentive problems. With respect to inefficient plan choice, we show that a combination of two
measures, which we call “premium fit” and “payment system fit,” characterize the magnitude of the
efficiency loss. Premium fit measures how well premium categories explain the variation in
spending in the population, while payment system fit measures how well simulated plan revenues for
an individual, which are a function of payment system features such as premium variation, risk
adjustment, and reinsurance, match that individual’s total cost to the insurer. These measures
incorporate the important insight that even if plans charge the best single premium, except in a very
special case, some consumers will still sort inefficiently (thereby linking to papers by Bundorf, Levin,
and Mahoney (2012), Geruso (2014), and others). With respect to inefficient plan design, we derive
a measure similar to a grouped R-squared that recognizes that plans may distort service offerings to
avoid unprofitable groups where groups are defined based on individual characteristics, by patterns
of service utilization, or by some combination of these two dimensions. All measures can be readily
calculated with data typically available at the ex ante stage of payment system design, without
estimates of any difficult- or impossible-to-estimate behavioral parameters. We believe our
proposed measures satisfy our criteria of practicality, validity and completeness.6 We provide simple
expressions for these measures to allow for easy implementation by policymakers.
        We illustrate the use of our measures for the evaluation of the performance of the payment
system proposed for implementation in the ACA Marketplaces starting in 2017 (ACA 2017) relative
to other counterfactual payment systems. Under ACA 2017, premiums will continue to be set by a
pre-specified age curve, risk adjustment will continue to be concurrent (i.e. based on diagnoses from
the current year rather than the prior year) and mandatory federal reinsurance will be discontinued.


6 We recognize that our three selection-related measures do not constitute a comprehensive evaluation of
plan payment systems. Regulators have other objectives, including incentives for cost control, avoiding
gameability, and fairness. For example, Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2015) show an explicit tradeoff
between the efficiency properties we study and “reclassification risk.” Similarly, Beck et al. (2014) show that
there is an implicit tradeoff between the efficiency properties we study and a concept of “fairness.”
Additionally, Geruso and McGuire (2015) show a similar tradeoff between selection inefficiencies and
incentives for cost control. To maintain simplicity and tractability, we will have little to say about these other,
important objectives. Instead, we focus on improvements over the selection-motivated R-squared and
predictive ratio measures (which also do not assess cost control, reclassification risk, fairness or gameability).
We return in a final section to discuss other dimensions of comprehensive ex ante payment plan evaluation.


                                                                                                                 3
We evaluate three alternative payment systems, cumulatively altering the three main features of the
ACA 2017 proposal: 1) switching to prospective (i.e. based on diagnoses from the prior year) rather
than concurrent risk adjustment, 2) keeping reinsurance, and 3) freeing premium age categories to be
set in market equilibrium rather than by a pre-specified age curve. These simulations illustrate how
our selection metrics work, and also provide relevant evidence for policy choices going forward for
the Marketplaces. As we explain in detail below, the data we use to estimate the measures are an
updated (and better selected) version of the data that was used to calibrate (and evaluate) the current
federally recommended risk adjustment models, so we believe our analyses are informative for policy
decisions.
        We find that the ACA 2017 payment system is out-performed on all measures by a payment
system incorporating prospective risk adjustment combined with the reinsurance policy used in the
Marketplaces in 2014. Our results suggest that it is feasible to move away from the concurrent risk
adjustment system forced on the Marketplaces in 2014 by the absence of a “history” on plan
enrollees to a prospective risk adjustment system without exacerbating problems caused by adverse
selection.7 We also show that when considering sorting inefficiencies the regulated age curve hurts
efficiency by forcing plans to charge prices set by the (slightly inaccurate) curve rather than by the
market, though the difference is small in case of the ACA curve. Finally, we test the sensitivity of
two of our measures to various assumptions about what portion of medical spending is
“predictable,” a concept that our models suggest is relevant for those measures. Among the payment
systems we study, we find that results are largely robust to a fairly comprehensive set of alternative
specifications of “predictable costs.”
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews and critiques existing
methods for assessing payment systems and measuring selection inefficiency and indicates the gaps
in the literature that we seek to fill. We next present theoretically grounded and practical measures
related to inefficiency in consumer choice of plan (Section 3) and in insurer choice of the form of
the insurance product (Section 4). After a description of our data and empirical methods in Section
5, Section 6 reports our metrics for a series of alternative health plan payment systems for
Marketplaces in 2017 and some robustness checks. We summarize and discuss the findings in
Section 7.

7Not all enrollees in 2017 will have a history. We deal with this in our simulations by assuming that in the
prospective risk adjustment case, only age and gender can be used for the large share of enrollees (50%)
without a history.


                                                                                                               4
2. Assessing Adverse Selection in Health Insurance Markets
The literature assessing adverse selection falls into three groups. The first and largest group contains
papers applying statistical measures to assess payment systems. Papers in the second and third
groups apply measures based on the economics of consumer and plan behavior, respectively.
2.1 Statistical Fit of a Risk Adjustment Formula
        The literature applying statistical measures of fit evaluates the risk adjustment component
(only) of plan payment. Here we discuss the development and evaluation of the risk adjustment
system used in Marketplaces as a relevant and representative example of this literature. Kautter et al.
(2014) describe the data, methods and results for the risk adjustment formulas developed for the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for use in the state Marketplaces beginning in
2014.8 The “HHS-HCC” model, with HCC denoting the Hierarchical Condition Categories that
comprise the diagnosis-based indicators for chronic conditions used as variables in estimation and
payment, is based on an earlier Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) version developed
for Medicare (the “CMS-HCC” model from Pope et al., 2011). In addition to being modified and
calibrated for a younger population with different coverage, the HHS-HCC model is “concurrent”
whereas the model for Medicare is “prospective.” In 2014, Marketplace enrollees had no observed
history of health care claims to use for risk adjustment, forcing the HHS-HCC model to use current-
year diagnoses to “predict” annual plan costs from the same year. Data were from a population with
employer-sponsored health insurance, and separate models were estimated for different age
categories and plan metal levels.9 The HHS-HCC model is being used in all states with the
exception of Massachusetts,10 and will be the basis of our evaluations reported in Section 6.




8 Comprehensive review chapters in Volumes 1 and 2 of the Handbook of Health Economics deal with risk
variation and risk adjustment. Van de Ven and Ellis (2000) cover many of the econometric issues associated
with constructing a risk adjustment formula. Breyer, Bundorf and Pauly (2012) discuss the attributes of good
risk adjuster variables, and update the use of risk adjustment in health care systems internationally.
9 See Kautter et al. (2014), pages E6-E8 for explanation and discussion of these issues.
10 Massachusetts had its own risk adjustment formula for use in its health care reform implemented in 2006.

Starting in 2014, Massachusetts has adopted a new risk adjustment model very similar to the HHS-HCC
model but estimated on data only from New England states. For more information on the Massachusetts risk
adjustment model, see HealthConnector (2013).


                                                                                                           5
        After developing the HHS-HCC model, Kautter and colleagues conducted an ex ante analysis
of the Marketplace payment system, reporting two types of statistics:11 The first, used to assess
explanatory power at the individual level, is the model R-squared, the percent of the total variation
in plan liabilities explained by age-gender categories, concurrent HCC indicators, and selected HCC
interactions. For the adult sample (approximately 14m observations), the estimated R-squared was
between 0.35 and 0.36 (Kautter et al., 2014, E12). Using current-year diagnostic information to
predict costs more than doubles the explanatory power in relation to the prospective CMS-HCC
model used for Medicare (Pope et al., 2011).12 R-squared is by far the most common but not the
only statistic used to evaluate risk adjustment models in the literature. Arguments for the less-
common alternatives to R-squared are generally made on statistical rather than economic grounds.13
        The statistic used to assess under- and over-prediction for subgroups is the predictive ratio,
defined as the ratio of plan liabilities predicted by the HHS-HCC model divided by the actual costs
for a subgroup of potential enrollees. The numerator, predicted liabilities, would be the revenues for
the subgroup if the risk adjustment formula were the only factor determining plan payments. A
predictive ratio near 1.0 indicates for the group in question that the predictive model matches
predictions (payments) to actual costs at the group level. Kautter et al. (2014, E22) computed
predictive ratios for various subgroups defined by predicted costs.
        In other papers and reports, model predictions and actual costs have been compared for
subgroups defined in various ways. In their evaluation of the CMS-HCC model, Pope et al. (2011)


11 Prior to discussion of the statistics used for evaluation, the authors first chose the diagnostic variables to
include in the model based on clinical considerations. Kautter et al. (2014, E4) identify four criteria applied to
select diagnostic categories (the HCCs) to be included in the model from among the 264 possible categories,
summarized as: clinical significance, not discretionary or subject to “diagnostic discovery”, not indicators of
poor quality, and indicators of predictable or chronic conditions (not random acute events). On these bases
and after some grouping, 100 HCC factors were selected for inclusion in the model.
12 A more complete analysis of the factors that account for the difference in explanatory power between the

CMS-HCC model and the HHS-HCC model would also consider the fact that while the CMS-HCC model
predicts only medical spending, the HHS-HCC model predicts both medical spending and the more
predictable spending on prescription drugs. Additionally, the HHS-HCC model is estimated on a younger
population for whom, unlike with the older Medicare population on which the CMS-HCC model is
estimated, mortality is a rare event, resulting in a smaller variance in annual spending.
13 The mean absolute prediction error (MAPE) uses a linear rather than quadratic loss function. See, for

example, Van Barneveld et al. (2001) and Ettner et al., (2001). Van Veen et al. (2015) summarize fit measures
used in this literature, and document that MAPE is the second most popular measure of individual fit. The
vast majority of papers use an R-squared statistic (or closely related) measure of fit of the risk adjustment
formula and/or predictive ratios with predicted values from the risk adjustment formula in the numerator.
For an alternative framework with asymmetric weighting of over and underpayments, see Lorenz (2014).


                                                                                                                 6
report predictive ratios for a large number of subgroups, including groups defined by disease,
numbers of prior hospitalizations, demographic characteristics, and others. Van Kleef et al. (2013)
merged survey information with health claims for a subset of people in the Netherlands to calculate
“undercompensation” (defined as the difference in costs and predicted revenue rather than their
ratio) for various groups of people, including those with low physical and mental health scores and
those with chronic conditions.14 They compare seven different risk adjustment models with
different sets of explanatory variables. Brown et al. (2014) divide FFS Medicare enrollees into groups
according to their percentile of ex post spending and calculate the average level of
undercompensation for each group.
           R-squared and predictive ratio measures ignore payment system features other than risk
adjustment that affect both the fit of revenues to costs at the individual level as well as under- and
overpayment for subgroups. Premiums also determine revenue to plans (as in Medicare Advantage,
for example) and affect payment system fit and incentives for both individuals and groups. Other
payment system features such as reinsurance also help match payments to costs for individuals and
groups. Judging how well the full payment system fits costs requires taking these features into
account. Even if the purpose of an analysis is to assess only the risk adjustment methodology,
taking account of the other features of payment is necessary to accurately gauge the incremental
contribution of risk adjustment.
           Simple fixes amend the R-squared and predictive ratio methods to account for other
payment system features. Geruso and McGuire (2015) and Layton et al. (forthcoming) construct the
fit of the payment system at the individual level by substituting a simulated payment that a plan
would receive for enrolling an individual for the regression predicted value. The “payment system
fit” measures the “explained variance” in costs accounted for by risk adjustment and reinsurance,
not just the variance explained by the risk adjustment model.15 McGuire et al. (2014) perform a
similar modification for predictive ratios. The numerator of the “payment system predictive ratio”
for a subgroup is the sum of the payments for the group (which can depend on all payment system
features) rather than the regression predicted values. The denominator in these predictive ratio
measures remains the actual costs for the groups.

14   The “mean prediction error” for subgroups, as figured in Hsu et al. (2010), is similar.
15   If ri is the revenue associated with a person in a payment system and xi is the person’s cost, the “payment
                 Var(xi )−Var(xi −ri )
system fit” is                       .
                       Var(xi )



                                                                                                                   7
        More fundamental is that the underlying economic rationale for these statistical measures
(even the more comprehensive “payment system measures”) is missing. While it is intuitive that
better fit in both forms should improve the performance of a payment system with respect to
selection problems, we are aware of no rigorous derivation of why these measures are the right ones.
One line of critique of R-squared measures argues that “only predictable costs matter” in assessing
alternative risk adjustment models. However, “predictability” is not a simple matter to incorporate
into metrics of ex ante payment system performance.16 One of the virtues of our approach of
deriving metrics from the underlying economic behavior of consumers and plans is that we can see
just where predictability (by the social planner, by consumers, or by insurers) figures into the story,
allowing us to target robustness analyses around the largely unknown degree to which spending is
predictable to the components of the measures where expectations actually matter.
        We now turn to two sets of economic, rather than statistical, measures related to consumer
choice of health plans and insurer choices regarding product design, respectively. After presenting
and critiquing the measures, we note whether they can be assessed at the ex ante design stage of the
health plan payment system.
2.2 Inefficient Consumer Choice of Plan
        In Akerlof’s (1970) “The Market for Lemons,” used cars varied in quality but, because of
information asymmetry, were indistinguishable to consumers and traded at one price. Generally, too
few used cars were traded, and depending on demand and cost conditions, the market might not
exist at all. Cutler and Reber (1998) applied this model to health insurance where enrollees varied in
cost (to insure), but because of premium regulation, insurers could only charge one price.17
Generally, too few consumers buy generous health insurance, and depending on demand and cost
conditions, health insurance markets might fall into a “death spiral” and generous plans could
disappear altogether. Recent influential papers in this stream of the adverse selection literature are


16 Some papers propose an empirical measure of “how much of health care costs are predictable” by using
extensive sets of information that consumers might have available for prediction, such as five years of past
health care spending in Van Barneveld et al (2001) or something similar in Newhouse et al (1989) who
estimate individual fixed effects based on several years of data. These predictions may of course under- or
overstate how much consumers can actually predict. Researchers then compare the R-squared from a
particular risk adjustment formula to this “maximum explainable R-squared.”
17 Premium regulation can cause the same problems as information asymmetries (Pauly, 2008). It may be that

information is available to support premium differences by certain characteristics (e.g., gender), but regulation
prohibits premium discrimination on this basis. A requirement of “community rating” on premiums
prohibits premium discrimination of any kind.


                                                                                                               8
by Einav and Finkelstein and their colleagues.18 Before turning to the ideas and their application in
these papers, we first state the conditions under which consumers choose efficiently among health
plan alternatives.
         Suppose health plans have fixed characteristics (as they do in the papers noted above).
Imagine, for example, consumers choosing between a less generous plan and a more generous plan
designated “silver” and “gold,” or between plans with different management practices, such as
between Traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage. Assuming consumers must choose some
plan, the efficient price or “incremental premium” for a consumer is the difference between the plan
cost for that consumer in the more generous plan and her plan cost in the less generous plan
(Keeler, Carter and Newhouse, 1998). The argument is the same as that for prices generally: when
consumers face prices equal to costs, utility-maximizing consumers make socially efficient choices.
Choices are inefficient when consumers do not face the right prices and/or they do not maximize
utility.19 The fundamental adverse selection problem here is from inefficient plan pricing.
Demand-Based (“Sufficient Statistics”) Models and a Total Surplus Measure of Welfare Loss
        We refer to the Einav and Finkelstein (EF) model as demand-based because the behavior
and welfare analyses are based on demand and cost curves (as opposed to the utility functions which
form the basis of choice and welfare in other papers).20 These models are also referred to as
“sufficient statistics” models outside of the context of health insurance (see Chetty 2009). In what
Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (EFC, 2010) refer to as their “textbook example,” consumers choose
between a high-coverage contract, H, and a low-coverage contract, L. The L contract is normalized
to be “no insurance” and, hence, is costless and free to all consumers. The (incremental) price of
the H contract is denoted by P, which must be the same for all potential enrollees. Consumers
purchase the H contract if their valuation (denoted by D(P)) exceeds P (since the price and value of
the low contract are both zero). As the premium falls, more enrollees choose H. The characteristics
of these enrollees define an average and a marginal cost curve for the H plan. For a given price P,
average cost for plan H (denoted by AC(P)) is the average cost of the enrollees who choose to enroll
in contract H at that price. “Marginal cost” (denoted by MC(P)) is the average cost of the

18 See Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010), Einav and Finkelstein
(2011), and Einav et al. (2013).
19 Models from behavioral economics, as well as some of the utility-based papers discussed later in this

section consider imperfect utility maximization, such as from “inertia” or “status quo bias.”
20 Utility and demand models are clearly connected in theory. Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) develop a

utility basis of demand models, and include a discussion of both types and the associated welfare methods.


                                                                                                              9
consumers newly led to buy H when the premium falls to P, i.e., those whose willingness to pay is
exactly P. Figure 1 replicates (omitting some labeling) the first figure in EFC (2010).
        The (constrained) efficient price (premium) and quantity (enrollment in H) are given by the
point where the marginal cost curve intersects the demand curve. The premium that achieves
efficient sorting cannot be sustained (without a subsidy) because competition enforces zero profits
so that P = AC(P) in equilibrium. The efficiency loss at this P is depicted as the “conventional”
welfare triangle, the shaded area in Figure 1.21 As was acknowledged by EFC (2010), however, if
there is preference heterogeneity such that there exist individuals with the same willingness-to-pay
but different costs, as will generally be the case, then the welfare triangle in Figure 1 will not fully
describe the welfare loss.22 The reason is that with heterogeneity in the relationship between
demand and incremental cost, “marginal cost,” MC(P) is, in fact, an average of the marginal costs over all
individuals whose willingness to pay is exactly P. Thus, even when MC(P) = P, there are individuals
(those whose willingness to pay exceeds P but whose cost is higher than their willingness to pay)
who join the plan even though, from a social welfare point of view, they shouldn’t, and there are
individuals (those whose willingness to pay is less than P but whose cost is lower than their
willingness to pay) who will choose not to join the plan even though, from a social welfare point of
view, they should. A complete welfare analysis of efficiency in consumer choice of plans needs to
include welfare losses from a single premium (or, more generally from a limited number of premium
categories) as well as inefficiencies from adverse selection and the distortion of the incremental price
for the more generous plan it causes.23 This is especially important when comparing the efficiency
properties of payment systems with different premium structures as we do in Section 6 below.
        EFC (2010) implement this demand-based welfare framework with data on health plan
prices and choices of Alcoa employees along with individual-level data on employee medical


21 There are two cases, the “adverse selection” case, where individuals’ willingness to pay for plan H is
increasing with their cost (to the plan) and the other, the “advantageous selection” case, where individuals’
willingness to pay is decreasing with their cost. In the adverse selection case, the one shown in Figure 1 and
the one we work with in this paper, the welfare loss is due to the fact that “too few” individuals join the H
plan, relative to the social optimum.
22 In general, “selection” could occur on many dimensions: healthcare costs, geography, cognitive ability, and

other factors with positive or negative relations to expected future health care costs. See footnote 3 in EFC
for some discussion. See also Einav and Finkelstein (2011), footnote 6, and Einav, Finkelstein and Levin
(2010), page 326.
23 As Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010, p 326) put it: “With richer heterogeneity, we may still be interested

in the degree of efficiency that can be realized with a uniform price, but we may also want to understand how
the potential for efficient coverage depends on the information available to set prices…”


                                                                                                            10
spending. Prices for health insurance options varied with geography, creating enough price variation
for the authors to estimate how demand and cost varied by price. Both demand and cost curves
were downward-sloping in price, in accord with the depiction in Figure 1 above.24 The authors
found some evidence for adverse selection into more generous plans (implied by the estimated
downward-sloping cost curve) but the estimated welfare loss was very small in absolute terms ($9.55
per employee per year) and very small in relation to the full “area under the demand curve” for the
generous plan (less than 3% of that total surplus).
        Hackmann, Kolstad and Kowalski (HKK, 2015) use the EF model to evaluate the welfare
consequences of the Massachusetts health care reform of 2006, the precursor to the national reform,
treating the introduction of the tax penalty as an exogenous price fall for individual health insurance,
and finding more substantial welfare gains.25 Kowalski (2014) applies the HKK version of the EFC
model to estimate the welfare consequences of the implementation of the ACA on consumers in the
U.S. individual health insurance market, leveraging data on average costs, enrollment and prices in
individual health insurance markets through the first half of 2014 for all states except California and
New Jersey (which had incomplete data). Kowalski exploits the economy of the EF welfare model,
using three “sufficient” statistics, average cost, enrollment, and premiums, and estimates of these in
the counterfactual world without the ACA, to estimate the effect of the policy on total surplus.26

24 See Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) Figure V page 914. The cost curves in the figure are not exactly
analogous to the curves estimated by EFC (2010). In the figure, individuals choose between insurance and
uninsurance, making the incremental average cost curve equal to the average cost curve for contract H. In
EFC’s empirical setting, however, individuals choose between two insurance plans. In this setting the
incremental average cost curve is equal to the difference between contract H and contract L’s average cost
curves.
25 The estimated welfare gain was substantial, $335 per person in the individual market. As HKK point out,

the movement in Massachusetts was from no insurance to some insurance, so the welfare gain could be
expected to be larger than the movement between insurance plan types studied by EFC (2010). In addition,
HKK argued that the choice platform in the reform sharpened price competition, reducing insurer markups
and generating welfare gains of another $107 per person per year.
26 HKK (page 1064) make a similar observation, stating their “approach allows us to estimate the welfare

impact of reform using available data and a minimum of assumptions about the underlying structural
preferences of consumers and competing insurers.” As we have indicated and explain later in Section 3, the
demand-cost metric is not a complete measure of inefficiency in plan sorting when estimating welfare
changes across settings with different premium regulations. This does not necessarily mean that the demand
and cost parameters are not “sufficient statistics” for the analysis of the welfare consequences of the policies
studied in these papers. Because the Massachusetts reform studied by HKK and all of the alternative
counterfactual pricing policies studied by EFC did not involve changes to premium regulations (community
rating was required in all cases), these parameters are sufficient for welfare analysis in those settings.
However, more generally, when premium regulations change as part of a reform (or as part of a simulated
reform), parameters of demand and cost are not sufficient for a full welfare analysis of the reform. For


                                                                                                              11
Utility-based (“Structural”) Models
          Utility provides an alternative welfare framework to demand-based measures. Rather than
estimating a few key parameters or “sufficient statistics,” papers using a utility-based, or structural,
framework to study the welfare consequences of adverse selection typically estimate the full joint
distribution of consumer costs and willingness-to-pay and then use that distribution to simulate
consumer sorting and welfare under various premium policies. Utility-based frameworks allow the
researcher to perform virtually any kind of counterfactual policy simulation, including policies that
alter the permitted premium structure.
          Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (BLM, 2012) use a utility-based framework to study the
welfare consequences of adverse selection. Similar to EFC, BLM study a setting where consumers
choose between two insurance plans and different groups of consumers face plausibly exogenous
premium variation. However, rather than use premium differences to identify the slope of the
demand curve as the application of an EF model would do, BLM use premium differences to
estimate the joint distribution of consumer costs and willingness-to-pay for a more comprehensive
PPO relative to a more restrictive HMO. This joint distribution of risk and preferences becomes
the basis for simulations of the effects of different levels of restrictions on premium variation on
consumer sorting and welfare.
          In addition to estimating the welfare consequences of adverse selection in a setting with a
single premium, BLM recognize that no single premium sorts efficiently and show that this
conceptual point is empirically important, finding that the best single price only captures one quarter
of the potential welfare gains from efficient sorting, illustrating the advantage of utility-based over
demand-based models. Einav et al. (2013) use a similar utility-based model to quantify welfare losses
from selection on moral hazard. They estimate the joint distribution of incremental willingness-to-
pay for a more comprehensive plan and individual-level “moral hazard,” or demand response to the
marginal price to the consumer of medical care, also allowing for more exotic counterfactual policy
simulations than could be performed with the basic demand and cost parameters estimated by EFC
(2010).



example, in the context of the national reform, many states adopted community rating for the first time,
making the demand and cost parameters used in the EF framework insufficient for a full analysis of welfare
changes due to the ACA, as such an analysis would be missing the efficiency consequences of premium
restrictions.


                                                                                                           12
        Another set of papers, typically lacking exogenous variation in premiums with which to
identify willingness-to-pay, rely on assumptions about risk aversion and study consumer choice
between plans varying only in cost-sharing rules. Consumer choices are assumed to be a function of
plan premiums, risk aversion, and the consumer’s distribution of expected out-of-pocket costs in
each plan. The researcher specifies each consumer’s distribution of expected out-of-pocket costs
using a cell-based method dividing the population into groups based on a predictive model of their
future medical spending and levels of risk aversion are then identified by assuming that any variation
in choices across plans not explained by variation in expected costs is due to risk aversion. The
most prominent paper using this method is Handel (2013) which studies the interaction between
consumer inertia, or switching costs, and adverse selection, showing that inertia can attenuate
selection problems. Geruso (2014) uses a similar method to study the welfare consequences of
allowing premium variation by age and sex. Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2015) use it to study the
trade-off between adverse selection and reclassification risk in the Marketplaces. Layton (2014) uses
this method to study the welfare consequences of risk adjustment in the Marketplaces, where
premiums vary by age. Finally, Handel and Kolstad (2015) critique the method by showing that it
tends to over-estimate consumer risk aversion by ignoring “information frictions” that cause
consumers to make sub-optimal choices.
        For our purposes, it is important to note that both the demand-based and utility-based
frameworks are typically ex post, i.e., they evaluate the efficiency of plan choice after the market
happens, and are not intended to guide design at the ex ante stage, though they often do include
analyses of important counterfactual policies to provide guidance to policymakers about which types
of problems are most important and which policies are most likely to ameliorate those problems.27
Furthermore, the demand-based framework of EF does not accommodate welfare analysis of
alternative premium structures, and the utility-based approaches, while in principle providing a more
complete welfare assessment, are much more demanding in both the assumptions and the setting
from which the data were extracted required for estimating the necessary economic parameters.
2.3 Plan Actions to Attract Good and Deter Bad Health Insurance Risks
        The literature reviewed in Section 2.2 assumes that insurance contracts are fixed. In reality,
insurers respond to incentives to attract healthy enrollees and avoid sick ones. Rothschild and


27For examples of this type of counterfactual simulation see BLM’s (2012) analysis of alternative premium
policies and EFC’s (2010) analysis of various subsidy policies.


                                                                                                            13
Stiglitz (RS, 1976) were the first to model adverse selection and endogenous insurance contracts. In
RS, since premiums are valued equally by the good and bad risks, and “coverage” is valued more by
the bad risks, plans (inefficiently) reduce both the premium and coverage to attract the good risks.
Glazer and McGuire (2000) applied the RS model to markets for managed care health insurance.
Even with regulated premiums plans can use “service-level selection” to distort their offerings of
different dimensions of coverage (e.g., sicker people value chronic care more) to attract the good
risks. In Marketplace plans and other settings, nominal coverage is regulated, preventing service-
level selection on dimensions like covered services. However, plans can work around the
regulations to create networks and drug formularies favoring/disfavoring certain conditions or
impose more or less strict care management techniques across different categories of care. Breyer,
Bundorf and Pauly (2012, p 729) refer to these activities as “indirect selection.”
        The literature on service-level or “supply-side” selection began with studies of the incentives
of insurers to distort service-level offerings to attract good risks based on models of health plan
profit maximization. Frank, Glazer, and McGuire (FGM, 2000) identify the characteristics of
service-level spending that generate incentives for insurers to inefficiently distort service-level
benefits. Ellis and McGuire (EM, 2007), in an application to Medicare Advantage, show that when
plans are designed to maximize profits, services that are predictive, predictable and exhibit high
demand elasticity are rationed tightly. Predictability, the degree to which enrollees can anticipate
future use of a service, is a necessary condition for service-level rationing to matter -- if consumers
cannot anticipate their use of a service, they cannot be influenced in their plan choices by its
selective rationing. Because risk adjustment and other plan payment system features affect the
revenue a plan receives for enrolling an individual, these features also affect plan incentives to ration
through predictiveness. By transferring payment to individuals with high costs, the correlation
between service use and net revenues can be altered, mitigating or in some cases eliminating
incentives to distort services (Glazer and McGuire, 2002). McGuire et al. (2013) study incentives for
service-level selection in the Marketplaces with a payment system incorporating risk adjustment and
find significant incentives for insurers to discriminate against individuals with chronic diseases.
Note, however, that none of these papers connect incentives to distort plan benefits to social
welfare.
        Other papers assess the evidence for service-level distortions without measuring the
incentives to engage in service-level selection. Cao and McGuire (2003) in Medicare and Eggleston
and Bir (2009) in employer-based insurance find patterns of spending on various services consistent

                                                                                                       14
with service-level selection among competing at-risk plans. Ellis, Jiang and Kuo (2013) rank services
according to incentives to undersupply them. Consistent with service-level selection, they show that
HMO-type plans tend to underspend on predictable and predictive services (in relation to the
average) just as the selection index predicts. This pattern of spending is not observed among
enrollees in unmanaged plans. Brown et al. (2014) and Newhouse et al. (2015) study how selection
into Medicare Advantage changed after the introduction of risk adjustment. Both studies find that
after risk adjustment was introduced, Medicare Advantage plans attracted sicker Medicare
beneficiaries. Finally, Newhouse et al. (2013) studies whether Medicare Advantage insurers select
groups of beneficiaries with high profit margins, finding little evidence that they do.
        Recent work confirms that insurers respond to incentives to distort plan benefits to attract
the healthy and avoid the sick. Carey (2014a, 2014b) studies how insurers respond to these
incentives in the Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance market. Both papers exploit plausibly
exogenous variation in the profitability to a plan of different groups of enrollees. Carey (2014a) uses
variation due to changes in the availability of high cost prescription drugs to treat different
conditions between the time when the Part D risk adjustment model was initially calibrated and the
time when plans were designing their benefit packages and competing for enrollees. Carey (2014b)
uses variation due to a re-calibration of the risk adjustment formula. Both papers estimate that
insurers charge higher copayments for drugs used by groups of enrollees that are less profitable.28
        Shepard (2015) studies the interaction between adverse selection and hospital network
design in the Massachusetts subsidized health insurance exchange, CommCare, finding that
consumers who value the inclusion of a local “star” hospital system most highly also have very high
costs. He shows that this is partially due to “selection on moral hazard,” or the phenomenon that
the people whose spending is most affected by having the star hospital system in their plan’s
network are the ones who have the strongest preferences for a plan including that hospital. Using
simulation, he shows that in equilibrium, selection should result in no plan being willing to include
the star hospital system in its network under the current pricing structure, providing, as far as we
know, the first welfare analysis of this type of “supply-side” selection problem.29


28 See also Kuziemko, Meckel, and Rossin-Slater (2014) for a study of Medicaid managed care plans
attempting to attract lower cost births based on the race-ethnicity of the mother.
29 While Shepard finds that in equilibrium no plan should cover the “star” hospital, he also finds that, in this

particular market, this is efficient: On average, consumers do not value the inclusion of the hospital in a plan’s
network as much as the social cost of including the hospital.


                                                                                                               15
        The extensive literature on supply-side selection problems emphasizes measuring ex ante plan
incentives with respect to benefit manipulation. The incentive measures are group or service-
specific and there has been no standardized metric proposed to compare a payment system creating
one set of incentives with another payment system creating different incentives. A few more recent
papers study ex post performance. Missing is an ex ante welfare metric that can be used to guide plan
payment choice at the design stage.


3. Consumer Choice of Health Plan and Inefficient Sorting
        This section develops a measure of the welfare loss from inefficient sorting of consumers
between health plans in the simple setting where all consumers choose one of two plans with fixed
characteristics, corresponding to the demand and utility-based papers reviewed in Section 2.2 above.
Adverse selection and premium regulations drive a wedge between a consumer’s first-best price and
the price she is charged in equilibrium leading to Harberger-type measures of welfare loss with the
loss proportional to the square of the gap between the efficient and the equilibrium prices.
        Insurer costs for the same person may differ across the two plans for various reasons,
including coverage differences. For tractability, we specify that the difference between the cost to an
insurer from enrolling an individual in the more generous (“gold”) plan is proportional to the cost of
enrolling her in the basic (“silver”) plan. Formally, let xi be the expected cost to an insurer of
enrolling person i in the silver plan and let (1 + γ)xi be the expected cost to an insurer of enrolling
person i in the gold plan, with γ > 0. Person i’s expected incremental cost is defined as the difference
between her expected plan cost in the gold plan and her expected plan cost in the silver plan:
(1 + γ)xi − xi = γxi. Consumers fall into T types, where all type-t consumers have the same
incremental expected cost: γxi = γxt for all i ∈ t. The use of “types” captures an important concept:
due to preference heterogeneity, individuals with the same expected costs may exhibit different
willingness-to-pay for the gold plan. For now, we define type abstractly, but when applying our
metrics to data, we make type empirically operational. Finally, let premjt be the premium the insurer
charges a type-t individual to enroll in plan j, j = g,s, and let the incremental premium charged to a
type-t individual be premt = premgt − premst .
        All consumers must choose either the gold or the silver plan. Let nt (premt ) be the number
of type-t consumers who purchase gold given the incremental price, premt, and let Pt (n) be the
“inverse demand,” or the price at which n type-t consumers enroll in gold. In this setting,
“incremental” welfare for type-t consumers can be described as a function of premt:
                                                                                                          16
                  nt (premt )

Wt (premt ) = (      ∫           Pt (n)dn) − nt (premt )γxt
                     0
Note that this function is maximized at prem∗t = γxt, when each individual’s incremental premium is
set equal to her specific expected incremental cost, the efficiency condition highlighted in Keeler,
Carter, and Newhouse (1998) and Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2012). Also note that the
expected cost, xt, is from the ex ante view of the social planner, i.e. it is the expected cost given the
information available prior to consumers’ plan choice, also known as the “rational” expectation.
This may differ from the consumer’s actual expectation of her future cost which plays a role in the
consumer’s willingness-to-pay, Pt (n), and which may be less accurate than the rational expectation.
The reason the rational expectation is used here instead of the consumer’s actual expectation is that
welfare is based on the difference between valuation and cost, and cost is from society’s point of
view, not the consumer’s. In other words, we measure social welfare, not expected consumer
surplus.
           The welfare loss for the group of all type-t individuals due to a price different from prem∗t =
γxt can be expressed as:
ΔWt (premt ) = Wt (γxt ) − Wt (premt )
                     nt (γxt )                                 nt (premt )

ΔWt (premt ) = [( ∫              Pt (n)dn) − nt (γxt )γxt ] − [(   ∫         Pt (n)dn) − nt (premt )γxt ].
                         0                                         0
             nd
Taking a 2 order Taylor series expansion of ΔWt (premt ) around premt = γxt, we show in Appendix
A that ΔWt (premt ) is approximated by the following expression:
                1
ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − n′t (γxt )(premt − γxt )2 .                                                                 (1)
                2
           The second-order approximation is equivalent to assuming that demand (nt (premt )) is
approximately linear around γxt , and implies that the welfare loss for type-t consumers due to a
distorted price is proportional to the squared difference between the equilibrium price premt and the
first-best price prem∗t = γxt. Summing over types, the welfare loss due to distorted prices in the full
population is approximated by:
 T                               T
                  1
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑ n′t (γxt )(premt − γxt )2
                  2
t=1                          t=1




                                                                                                             17
Assuming the elasticity of demand30 for the plan as a function of the incremental premium is the
                                n′ t
same for all types, i.e., ε =   Nt
                                       , then:31
 T                        T
                  ε
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑ Nt (premt − γxt )2
                  2
t=1                      t=1

Since all individuals of the same type face the same premium and have the same expected costs:
 T                       N
                  ε
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑(premi − γxi )2                                                                            (2)
                  2
t=1                      i=1

         Expression (2) will represent the exact welfare loss in settings where demand is linear (i.e.,
n′′            32
 t (γxt ) = 0). If demand is not linear, then Expression (2) will approximate the actual loss, and the

accuracy of the approximation will depend on the size of the gap between the incremental premium
for person i, premi, and the first-best price, γxi. The extent of any inaccuracy depends on the joint
distribution of prices and expected incremental costs. If the linearity assumption fails to hold and
there is a lot of variation in expected incremental costs and little variation in prices, there will be
types for which the accuracy of (2) would be questionable. The extent of variation in prices depends
on the payment system, with more restrictive payment systems generating less variation in prices.
Given our assumption that the cost of insuring an individual in the gold plan is (1 + γ) times the
cost of insuring her in the silver plan, the variation in expected incremental costs is proportional to
the variation in expected total costs in the population. So, even if demand is non-linear, as long as
premiums are reasonably free to vary and/or the variation in expected costs is not too large,
Expression (2) should be a good approximation.33
3.1 A Health Plan Payment System: Transfers and Premiums
        When efficiency is about consumer sorting between plans with fixed characteristics,
Expression (2) shows that the pathway by which a payment system can affect welfare is by moving



30 This is not quite an elasticity although we refer to it as such. Instead, it is the slope of the demand curve
normalized by the number of type-t individuals. To be a true elasticity, we would need to divide through by
the normalized incremental premium.
31 Note that n′ (γx ) (and thus ε) is negative if willingness-to-pay for the gold plan is greater than willingness-
               t    t
to-pay for the silver plan.
32 The linear demand assumption effectively assumes that there is uniformly distributed heterogeneity in

preferences within types. While there is evidence of a broad range of heterogeneity in preferences (Cohen and
Einav, 2007) the uniform distribution assumption may not be close for high-cost types.
33 Note that the amount of variation in expected costs is related to the predictability of spending. If spending

is more predictable, the variation in expected costs is larger.


                                                                                                                18
equilibrium prices, premi, closer to (or further from) first-best prices, γxi. Different payment
systems will result in different equilibrium premiums and thus different levels of efficient sorting.
        A health plan payment system consists of transfers and premium regulations. We define the
individual-level transfer under payment system p (which might include risk adjustment and other
features) as the net payment from the regulator to the insurer associated with person i:34 transp,i =
rp,i − x̅. This structure follows from the typical risk adjustment system that pays insurers the
difference between the predicted cost of an enrollee, rp,i , and the average cost in the population. We
consider transfers that are budget-neutral in aggregate and independent of plan choice, i.e. r̅p = x̅
     j      j′
and rp,i = rp,i .35 For example, in a system in which transfers are determined only by risk adjustment,

the transfer might be equal to the difference between the product of the normalized risk score and
the population average cost and the population average cost. Once the transfer is set, we can
determine the plan costs net of transfers for each individual under payment system p, which we
denote xp,i = xi − transp,i = xi − (rp,i − x̅). The plan must cover these net costs with premiums.36
        Plans can set premiums separately for each of a set, Γp = {1, … , a, … , Ap }, of premium
categories, with the p subscript referring to a particular payment system’s categorization of
individuals for purposes of premium setting. The number of individuals in premium category a is
Na , with ∑a Na = N. Plans can vary premiums across categories but not among individuals within a
category. Both premiums and transfers cause plan revenues to vary across individuals, with total
                                                                             j                    j
revenue to plan j for an individual under payment system p being equal to revp,i = transp,i + prema.

3.2 Decomposing Welfare Loss
                                                                                                 n′ t
        Expression (2) for welfare loss contains the demand-response parameter ε (=              Nt
                                                                                                        ), which is

unknown ex ante. Rather than assume a value, we construct a metric of the welfare loss under
payment system p, relative to the welfare loss that would occur under a reference or “base” payment


34 In the empirical application below in Section 5, we implement transfer and premium rules based on those
used in the Marketplaces.
35 This condition of transfers being independent of plan choice does not hold exactly in either the

Marketplace or Medicare Advantage markets. In Marketplaces, there are slight differences in the risk
adjustment formula across metal levels and in Medicare Advantage the transfer depends on the level of the
plan bid. Furthermore, if plans have different coding practices systematically by plan type, transfers will differ
according to plan choice (Geruso and Layton 2015).
36 For economy of notation, we assume here that the insurer’s expectation of person i’s future spending

(which is relevant for plan costs and pricing) is equivalent to the rational expectation of person i’s future
spending. We relax this restrictive (and unnecessary) assumption in the empirical section.


                                                                                                                  19
system that results in the incremental premium being equal to the average incremental cost in the
population, premi = γx̅ for all i:37
ε N             ε N                 2                          2
 ∑ (γx       )2  ∑
2 i=1 ̅ − γxi − 2 i=1(prempi − γxi ) = 1 − ∑i=1(prempi − γxi )
                                            N

          ε N                                                                                              (3)
            ∑ (γx       )2                   ∑Ni=1(γx
                                                    ̅ − γxi )2
          2 i=1 ̅ − γxi
Such a measure allows us to compare payment systems without making assumptions about
consumers’ demand response to changes in incremental premiums. Instead, we rely on the fact that
the payment system has no effect on demand except insofar as it moves the equilibrium incremental
premium, prempi.
         Equation (3) can be decomposed (see Appendix A) into two terms corresponding to the two
sources of welfare loss associated with inefficient premiums. This decomposition aids both in the
operationalization of the expression for welfare loss and in the intuition behind its interpretation.
                         2           Ap                          Ap                       2
     ∑N
      i=1(prempi −γxi )             ∑a=1 ∑i∈a(xi −x̅ a )2       ∑a=1 ∑i∈a(prempi −γx̅ a )
1−     ∑N    ̅ −γxi )2
                             =1−[      ∑N       ̅ )2
                                                            +         γ2 ∑ N       ̅ )2
                                                                                              ]           (4)
        i=1(γx                          i=1(xi −x                          i=1(xi −x


                                   δ̃                  ϕ̃
The first term in the expression, δ̃, captures the relative welfare loss due to the deviation of the
second-best price that can be charged given the premium restrictions, γx̅a , from the first-best price
                                  ̃, captures the welfare losses due to any deviation of equilibrium
γxi. The second component of (4), ϕ
prices prempi from the second-best prices. We discuss these two terms in turn.
3.3 Measuring Inefficiency Due to Limited Premium Categories
         The first component of Equation (4), δ̃, is readily computable given ex ante data on expected
costs. To put this measure in a form with a more familiar interpretation, we denote one minus this
measure, δ = 1 − δ̃, as “premium fit,” since it captures the efficiency loss due to premium
regulations. Note that this component is equal to the R-squared from a regression of (expected)
costs on a set of indicator variables for each premium category.38 For a single premium, the


37 Such a single premium could be generated by a payment system with a single premium category and
transfers that perfectly compensate for variation in individual-level spending.
38 More precisely, the regression used to estimate this measure should produce predicted values equal to the

second-best premiums. In the case of premium categories, the correct regression will be of costs on premium
categories. In the Marketplaces, the payment system includes a regulated “age curve” that takes a base
premium that plans set for a 21 year old and maps that premium to age-specific premiums using a set of age
weights derived actuarially. Under such a payment system, all individuals still effectively belong to the same
risk pool, but different individuals will be charged different premiums. Because we wish to estimate our
measures for the Marketplace payment system, in Appendix B we re-derive our measures for the special case
of a regulated age curve. With an age curve, premium fit is the R-squared from a regression of costs on age


                                                                                                           20
numerator and the denominator of δ̃ are equal, implying that in our base payment system premium
fit is equal to 0, the minimum value δ can take. As premium groups “fit” the distribution of
incremental costs better, the measure increases, indicating higher efficiency. At minimum, if
premiums fully capture incremental cost variation for each individual, premium fit will rise to 1.
3.4 Measuring Inefficiency Due to Adverse Selection
                       ̃, the adverse selection component of (4), which characterizes the
        We now address ϕ
inefficiency caused by price distortions beyond the distortion caused by limited premium categories.
                                                                                           ̃ and
This is the distortion studied in EFC (2010) and related papers. Because prempi is part of ϕ
unknown ex ante we need to make an assumption about how premiums are set. We follow EFC
(2010) and Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015) and assume competition forces a plan’s premium
to be equal to the average (net of transfers) cost of those who choose the plan, abstracting from any
additional price distortions caused by imperfect competition. In the presence of multiple premium
categories, competition will result in a plan charging individuals in a particular premium category the
average (net of transfers) cost of the individuals within that category who choose the plan.39 Denoting
     g         s
as x̅p,a and x̅p,a the average silver plan costs net of transfers of the individuals joining the gold and
silver plans, respectively, this implies that the gold and silver premiums for individuals in premium
category z will be equal to:40
                                      g             g
                                 premp,a = (1 + γ)x̅p,a        premsp,a = x̅p,a
                                                                            s


The equilibrium incremental premium for each premium category, premea, must then be equal to the
difference in these average plan net costs:41
                 g                         g
premep,a = premp,a − premsp,a = (1 + γ)x̅p,a − x̅p,a
                                                 s
                                                                                                            (5)
                                                                                              ̃
        We can now plug our expression for premiums from Equation (5) into the expression for ϕ
from Equation (4) to get:


weights. The age-curve variant on payment system fit is similar to payment system fit as defined above with
the addition of a scaling factor equal to one over N times the sum of squared relative age weights.
39 The equilibration process would be different in Marketplaces where the premium categories are age-related

and states impose a single age structure. Equilibration in this case moves the entire age-structure up or down.
We re-derive all measures for the setting with an age curve in Appendix B.
40 Note that the plan costs here potentially differ from the costs from Expression (2). Here, the costs are

those that are relevant for the premium-setting mechanism, not the expected costs from the social planner’s
point of view. For now, we abstract from this issue and assume that the costs relevant for premiums are equal
to the rational expectation of each individual’s cost.
41 Our analysis is based on the difference between gold and silver prices. We assume that administrative costs

are equal for both plans and do not affect the incremental premiums.


                                                                                                            21
                           g                            2
      ∑Aa=1 ∑i∈a ((1 + γ)x̅p,a     s
                               − x̅p,a − γx̅ a )
̃=
ϕ
                     γ2 ∑Ni=1(xi − x̅ )2
This measure is effectively a weighted sum of the distortion of each premium group’s equilibrium
price from its second-best price. Each group’s distortion depends on the relationship between
demand, costs, and transfers among individuals in the premium group. These relationships could
vary across premium groups. We abstract from any differences by making regularity assumptions
about the form of these relationships. Sufficient assumptions are laid out in detail in Appendix A,
but essentially they require two things. First, they require that for each premium group the difference
between the average net cost among individuals choosing the gold plan and the average cost among
all individuals in the group is a fixed proportion of the incremental average cost for the group, and
this proportion does not vary across groups or payment systems. Second, they require that transfers
match costs equally well across premium groups and for individuals enrolled in the gold plan and
individuals enrolled in the silver plan.
                                                              ̃ as
            Given the regularity assumptions, we can re-write ϕ
                                                2
            ∑N
             i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                                 ̅ a − r̅ p,a )))
̃=ω
ϕ
                       ∑N
                        i=1(x i − x
                                  ̅ )2
        [                                           ]
where ω is a scaling parameter that depends on γ and properties of the variation in costs but is
independent of the payment system. Effectively, the assumptions allow us to explicitly relate the
weighted sum of each premium group’s incremental average cost to the “fit” of transfer payments
and premium groups to gross costs in the entire population. This is convenient as it allows us to
derive a measure of payment system performance with respect to this component of the price
distortion without parameterizing a model of consumer demand. The derivation for this expression,
along with an expression for ω, is found in Appendix A.
            Dividing by ω (since it is the same in all payment system alternatives), we define 1 − ϕ = 1 −
̃
ϕ
ω
    , which we refer to as “payment system fit,” the portion of the variance of x that is explained by
                                                                                ̃
                                                                                ϕ
the revenues allocated to a silver plan by the payment system. We subtract ω from 1 merely to make
interpretation of the measure similar to the more familiar R-squared measure. All components of
this measure can be readily calculated with ex ante data on insurance claims and the transfer and
premium category rules of a particular payment system.



                                                                                                         22
        As now defined and similar to premium fit, as payment system fit increases, the incremental
average cost decreases and efficiency increases. If the payment system explains none of the variance
                                                   2
in spending (i.e., ∑Ni=1 [xi − (rp,i + (x̅a − r̅p,a ))] = ∑Ni=1[xi − x̅]2), the gap between gold and silver
average costs is unchanged, and the measure is equal to zero. If the payment system explains 100%
                                                                                            2
of the variance in spending at the individual level (i.e., ∑Ni=1 [xi − (rp,i + (x̅a − r̅p,a ))] = 0), reducing
the gap between gold and silver average costs to zero, the measure will be equal to one, implying
complete elimination of the inefficiency generated by adverse selection.
3.5 Summarizing Inefficiency Due to Inefficient Pricing
        We have now derived two measures characterizing the efficiency loss due to inefficient plan
pricing. The first, 1 − δ, measures the inefficiency due to premium regulations, and the second,
1 − ϕ, represents the inefficiency due to adverse selection. Both measures characterize efficiency
relative to a base payment system where there is a single premium. Similar to the conventional R-
squared measure of statistical fit, they both range from 0 to 1 with 0 implying no efficiency gain
relative to the base payment system and 1 implying complete elimination of the efficiency losses
under the base payment system. In principle, these pieces are part of a total welfare loss (see (2)).
Summing them to one measure would require knowledge of behavioral parameters regarding
demand response to premiums among various cost groups determining the degree of selection,
knowledge unavailable ex ante.42


4. Inefficiencies from Plan Actions
        In Section 3, we assumed health plan characteristics were fixed. In practice, insurers
structure their products to attract profitable consumers and deter unprofitable ones, creating the
second source of selection-related inefficiency in health insurance markets reviewed above in Section
2.3. Plan actions include discriminatory recruitment of consumers with certain chronic illnesses,
decisions about what market segments to enter, and loose (tight) rationing of services attractive to
low-cost (high-cost) potential enrollees.
        In this section, we develop a measure of the relative inefficiency due to insurer incentives to
distort service or benefit offerings. Our approach incorporates discrimination based on groups of


42If a researcher had estimates of these behavioral parameters, a unified measure of inefficient plan choice
could be derived.


                                                                                                               23
people (as in the predictive-ratio strain of this literature) and discrimination based on utilization of
groups of services (as in the service-level selection strain). The development of the measure of
insurer incentives to distort allocations derives from a condition for plan profit maximization as in
earlier papers in this literature, with the primary innovation being a generalization of the basis on
which discrimination can take place.
        We begin with the smallest units over which a plan might conceivably take actions, and,
using these units as building blocks, aggregate as necessary to characterize incentives at the partition
of plan health care spending corresponding to actions a plan might more realistically take. We then
aggregate the distortionary incentives over all partitions to develop a relative measure of payment
system performance with respect to the distortionary incentives the payment system conveys to
insurers. We illustrate how the partition-based measure works by applying it to a series of special
cases at the close of this section.
4.1 A Partition of Health Care Spending
        We regard a health plan as consisting of a set of individual-specific allocations of S medical
services. If person i joins the plan, she receives xis of medical service s, measured in dollars. A
health plan can thus be described as an N × S matrix X of individual allocations of medical services:
                                               x11      ⋯ x1S
                                            X=[ ⋮       ⋱  ⋮ ]
                                               xN1      ⋯ xNS
Total spending on person i for all services is xi = ∑s xis .
        It is clear that {1, … , N} is the most disaggregated partition of spending possible at the person
level and we define {1, … , S} such that it is the most disaggregated partition of medical spending
possible at the service level. Although our building-block partition has N × S cells, a plan might be
able to discriminate only at the service level, or perhaps at the service level for a selected group of
potential enrollees. For example, a plan might locate primary care centers to favor enrollees from
particular counties. This tactic would correspond to a combination of people (the i’s) and services
(the s’s) in our partition.
        Consider a new, coarser partition, Q, grouping people and services according to actions a
plan might realistically take, where Q = {x1 , … , x Q }. We require that each allocation, xis, is in one and
only one element of Q, x q . Figure 2 illustrates the idea of a partition starting with 5 individuals and
5 services, generating 25 allocations of services to individuals. Suppose that insurers can only
modify service-level allocations on the inpatient/outpatient margin where services 1 and 2 are
inpatient services and services 3, 4, and 5 are outpatient services. Also suppose that insurers can

                                                                                                           24
only modify individual-level allocations at the county level where persons 1 and 2 reside in County A
and persons 3, 4, and 5 reside in County B, resulting in the partition Q = {x1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 4 } where:
                                 x1 = {x11 , x12 , x21 , x22 }
                                 x 2 = {x13 , x14 , x15 , x23 , x24 , x25 }
                                 x 3 = {x31 , x32 , x41 , x42 , x51 , x52 }
                                 x 4 = {x33 , x34 , x35 , x43 , x44 , x45 , x53 , x54 , x55 }
When a plan takes action on one element of x q , it must take similar action with respect to all other
elements of x q . This implies, for example, that if an insurer desired to increase person 1’s allocation
of service 1, it must also increase person 1’s allocation of service 2 and person 2’s allocations of
services 1 and 2. In this example, the insurer might perform this action by adding a hospital to its
network in County A.
4.2 A Measure of Incentives to Distort Allocations
                 j
          Let revp,i be the revenue to a plan associated with person i (in plan j) under payment system
p. As above, revenues can be affected by both premiums and transfers. Also as in Section 3, we
evaluate payment systems based on the incentives they convey to plans to take actions to attract/deter
risks, not on the magnitude of the insurer’s behavioral response to those incentives, which is
unknown ex ante. We interpret “actions” as describing any activity directed at deterring/attracting
membership from individuals within a partition element. The incentives to take actions are
operationalized as resulting from a plan changing spending on an element of a partition.
           Efficiency requires an allocation of funds across enrollees and services according to the
enrollees’ valuation of the service-level allocations, whereas a payment system creates incentives to
direct funds towards partitions associated with profitable enrollees and away from partitions
associated with unprofitable enrollees. We characterize an efficient allocation of funds across
elements of Q, compare this to the allocation implied by profit-maximization based on the
incentives created by a payment system, and develop a measure of incentives benchmarked against
efficiency that can be operationalized with elements of ex-ante individual-level health insurance
claims.
          Nt is the number of type-t consumers in the population. Type-t consumers have the same
level of (expected) spending for each of the S services: xis = xts ∀i ∈ t Type-t consumers’ utility




                                                                                                            25
functions over xts are identical and additively separable across services: vt = ∑s vts (xts ).43 Net social
benefits from services are the sum of individual benefits less costs:

W = ∑ Nt ∑[vts (xts ) − xts ]
         t               s

Profits for a plan j, on the other hand, are revenues less costs:

                 j               j             j
πj = ∑ nt [revp,t − ∑ xts ]
        t                                  s

             The partition forces a strict relation between spending at the q level and its distribution to
the xis level, which we capture by shares σqis , which divide each dollar spent on q into spending on
(i,s) combinations in a fixed proportion. Hence, ∑is∈xq σqis = 1 for i,s combinations in cell q and
 q                                                                                                      q
σis = 0 for all i,s not in cell q. Since health care spending is a private good, we can define σts =
 q
σis
Nt
      which divides spending equally among the type-t individuals. Thus, if x̂ q is the total spending on
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                              σ
all allocations in cell q, then the spending going to each type-t individual is xts = x̂ q Nis = x̂ q σqts .
                                                                                                  t

Note also that                   ∑ts Nt σqts   = 1.
             Consider the effect of a marginal change of x̂ q on net benefits and profits. In terms of net
benefits, a change in x̂ q yields:
∂W              q ′       q
    q
      = ∑ Nt ∑[σts vts − σts ]
∂x̂
             t               s

Allocation of a budget across cells is efficient if for any q and q̃ the following equality holds:
            ′        q       ′                         ̃
                                                       q
∑ Nt ∑ σts vts = ∑ Nt ∑ σts vts                                                                                (6)
 t           s                         t           s

             Profit incentives work through consumers’ enrollment decisions as a plan seeks to attract
and deter enrollees depending on their profitability. Define a type-t individual’s utility in health plan
j as vtj = ∑s vts (xts
                    j       j          j                                                                       j
                       ) + ϵt , where xts is the spending on service s a person of type t gets in plan j, and ϵt

is the individual-specific idiosyncratic element of plan valuation. Let njt (∑s vts (xts
                                                                                      j
                                                                                         )) be the number
of type-t individuals choosing to enroll in plan j, which is a function of the total allocation of funds
                                                                                      j
to type-t individuals under the plan. For any amount of spending on a q-cell, x̂ jq, xts follows the
                        j           q
partition rule so that xts = x̂ jq σts.


43In Section 3, “type” involved fixing only total expected spending. Here we require types to have the same
expected spending for each service, s, and the same utility function for services. There will shortly be
heterogeneity within a type with respect to plan valuation.


                                                                                                               26
           Using the expression for profits from above, the change in profits with respect to a change
in the allocation of funds to cell q is:

∂πj            j ′ q          j       j       j q
       = ∑ ∑ {nt ′vts σts [revpt − ∑ xts ] − Nt σts }
∂x̂ jq
            t   s                    s

Assume that plans are in a symmetric equilibrium as in FGM (2000) so the j superscripts can be
dropped. Profit maximization implies that an insurer will allocate funds across partitions such that
for any q and q̃ the following equality must hold:

                    q                                        q
                                                             ̃
∑ n′t ∑ vts
         ′
            σts [revpt − ∑ xts ] = ∑ n′t ∑ vts
                                            ′
                                               σts [revpt − ∑ xts ]                                            (7)
 t     s                     s           t       s                   s
                                                                                    n′
Recalling our earlier assumption that the enrollment elasticity of demand, Nt , is constant for all types,
                                                                                     t

after dividing through by the inverse of the constant elasticity, (7) can be rewritten as:

            ′   q                             ′          ̃
                                                         q
∑ Nt ∑ σts vts [revpt − ∑ xts ] = ∑ Nt ∑ σts vts [revpt − ∑ xts ]                                             (7′)
 t      s                    s           t       s                   s

To operationalize this expression we make the assumption that in the ex-ante claims data, individual-
                                                                    ′
by-service-level allocations are (second-best) efficient such that vts = v′ for all t,s.44 This reduces (7′ )
to the summation of the product of the allocation rule, σqts , and type-t profitability:

                q                                    ̃
                                                     q
∑ Nt ∑ σts [revpt − ∑ xts ] = ∑ Nt ∑ σts [revpt − ∑ xts ]                                                     (7′′)
 t      s                s           t       s                   s

Finally, noting that fund allocations in the data are subject to the partition rule, all components of
this expression are found in ex ante claims data.
           Comparing (6) and (7′′ ) reveals that in this setting the incentive for profit-maximizing firms
to distort a q-cell allocation away from the efficient allocation is governed by the correlation
between the profitability of types, (Revpt − ∑s xts ), and σqts . For a particular q-cell, as the product of
these two terms moves further from zero (in either direction), the equilibrium allocation of funds to
the cell diverges from the efficient allocation. Our measure of payment system performance is

44 Two comments are worth making about this assumption. First, a version of this assumption is commonly,
if implicitly, made in the literature that uses ex-ante claims data to compare the efficiency properties of health
plan payment systems. Use of “predictive ratios” implicitly assumes that the costs for the group in question
are the target for payment. See also Frank, Glazer, and McGuire (2000) and papers that follow in the
literature on service-level selection. Second, this assumption implies that consumers place equal value on an
additional dollar of anticipated service-level spending on any service. Consumer differences in the ability to
predict spending in different categories could interfere with this assumption. We relax the assumption of
equal predictability in the robustness section below.


                                                                                                                27
based on the square of this product, again invoking Harberger-type arguments that the relationship
between the distortionary incentive and welfare loss is approximately quadratic.45
         To characterize the payment system with respect to distortionary incentives over all parts of
the Q partition, we construct a sum of the square of the incentives described in Equation (7′′ ). This
generates the following metric:
                                                2
           q
∑ [∑ Nt ∑ σts (revpt        − ∑ xts )]                                                                       (8)
q  t    s                       s

Similar to Section 3, we normalize our measure to describe the performance of payment system p
relative to a simple payment system where revp,i = x̅ for all i. We also subtract our measure from
one to make the interpretation of the metric similar to an R-squared, yielding:
                                                        2
         ∑q [∑t Nt ∑s σqts (revpt − ∑s xts )]
ψ=1−                                                2       .
              ∑q [∑t Nt ∑s σqts (x̅ − xi )]
Finally, assuming that the fixed proportion by which shares are allocated within a q-cell is governed
by the patterns of service use found in the ex ante claims data, substituting for Nt σqts, and defining x̂iq
as the sum of all of person i’s allocations in cell q, x̂iq = ∑s xis 1[xis ∈ x q ]: 46
                   q                    2
                  x̂i
         ∑q (∑i        (revp,i − xi ))
                  x̂ q
ψ=1−                   q            2       .
                  x̂
            ∑q (∑i iq (x̅ − xi ))
                  x̂
                                                                                          q
                                                                                         x̂
The (revp,i − xi) term in the numerator is the profit per person. The ratio x̂iq captures which
individuals are “hit” by an increase in spending in cell q of a partition and therefore encouraged to


45 We choose the square of the product rather than raising the gap to some other power for reasons similar to
those discussed in Section 3. Our social welfare function generates a setting in which the welfare loss due to
distorted allocations of funds is proportional to one-half times the square of the difference between the
equilibrium and efficient allocations. Assuming a linear relationship between the distortionary incentive and
the actual allocation distortion, there should thus be a quadratic relationship between the incentive and
welfare.
46 This relationship can alternatively be derived by considering a setting where insurers set their benefits in

competition. First, note that the Harberger-type argument implies that the welfare loss due to distorted
allocations of funds is proportional to one-half times the square of the difference between the equilibrium
and efficient allocations. Assume that the total spending for an individual in the ex ante data is the efficient
allocation. Assume that insurers can set allocations at the individual level. Competition will force the insurer
to set each individual’s equilibrium allocation equal to the revenue attached to that individual. This results in
the welfare loss for an individual being proportional to the square of the difference between her revenue and
the cost found in the data, a special case of the measure presented here where insurers can select at the
individual level. This argument is also generalizable to the more general metric presented here.


                                                                                                              28
join. Incentives work at the q level so the correlations between joining incentives and profits per
person must be summed over all q cells to fully characterize incentives. As the payment system does
a better job at matching revenues to costs, ψ increases, denoting an improved set of incentives.
4.3 Illustrative Special Cases
        We illustrate how our measure works in four special cases of the selection partition, showing
how our measure relates to some previously applied measures discussed in Section 2.3. Columns in
Table 1 indicate whether the plan can distort allocations at the most disaggregated service level and
the rows indicate whether the plan can distort allocations at the most disaggregated individual level.
There are four possibilities. The top left combination illustrates the setting where the plan can
distort on neither the individual nor the service level and the partition has only one cell which
includes all possible allocations:
                                                   x11        ⋯ x1S
                                         x1 = X = [ ⋮         ⋱  ⋮ ]
                                                   xN1        ⋯ xNS
and

                                               x̂1 = ∑ ∑ xis .
                                                      s   i

In the bottom right combination the plan can select on both people and services, and the partition
has a cell for every possible individual-service combination: x1 = x11 , x 2 = x12 , … , x N×S = xNS. The
upper right cell corresponds to only service-level (but not individual-level) selection and the lower
left cell is only individual-level (and not service-level) selection.
        There are several notable features of these four special cases. First, the table shows that
under any partition where insurers can discriminate at the individual-level, the selection measure
reduces to the R-squared from a regression of (expected) individual annual medical spending on
revp,i .47 The formula for ψ is the same in both columns for “Yes” individual selection. This is true
whether the insurer can discriminate across all services or no services and everything in between
those two extremes. This result is due to our assumption that given the allocations in the ex-ante
claims data, an additional dollar of spending has the same effect on consumer utility, no matter what
                                          ′
service that dollar is allocated toward: vts = v′ for all t,s. Thus, if the insurer can discriminate at the
individual-level, it can perfectly manipulate the utility the plan offers the consumer, whether it can
distort allocations at the service level or not.

47We show in Section 5.3 below that in a setting where premiums are set in competition (and there is no
regulated age curve) this is equal to “payment system fit.”


                                                                                                            29
        Second, the top right cell of the table presents our selection measure in the case where
insurers can distort at the service level but not at the individual level, as studied by FGM (2000),
Glazer and McGuire (2000), and Ellis and McGuire (2007). Similar to those papers, our measure
implies that in this setting the appropriate metric for comparing insurer incentives to inefficiently
distort benefits is related to the “predictiveness” of a service, or the correlation between an
individual’s utilization of the service and her total profitability to the plan.48
        Finally, in the case where an insurer cannot discriminate at the individual or the service level
(the top left cell of the table), there is still potential for efficiency loss, and the loss is related to the
                                                                                                x
correlation between an individual’s share of total medical spending in the population ( x̅i ) and her
profitability to the insurer (revp,i − xi). While there is only one cell in the partition, it remains
possible for a plan to cut back on all of these services and distort coverage away from the optimal
allocation just as originally described by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) who modelled coverage
versus premium as the mechanism for distortion. In their model, the correlation between demand
x
( xi ) and cost (revp,i − xi) results in inefficient contracts being provided in equilibrium (or the lack of

an equilibrium altogether). This same correlation drives our measure of inefficiency in this special
case.
        Moving beyond review of these cases, it is important to note that this measure is
customizable for any setting. A researcher or policymaker can choose partitions that align with their
beliefs about the margins on which insurers can distort contracts in a particular market. For
example, if a policymaker believes insurers can distort benefits only through hospital networks and
through strategic prescription drug formulary construction, she may want to partition the data
according to drug class and hospital. If she also believes that benefits can be distorted
geographically, she may choose to combine the hospital and drug partition with an individual
partition that groups people by county. The only requirement is that the partition consists of a
mutually exclusive and exhaustive set of cells of the allocations. In the empirical section below, we
will provide some examples of potential partitions.




48The measure here does not capture the element of predictability also emphasized by FGM (2000) and EM
(2007). The implicit assumption is that the degree of predictability does not differ across services. We relax
this in the robustness section below.


                                                                                                                 30
4.4 Summary of Selection Measures
        Table 2 summarizes the three selection-based measures we have derived, capturing both
selection-related inefficiency associated with inefficient plan choice, and the inefficiency associated
with plan distortion of benefits. The first row relates to the properties of the premium categories
themselves and the second row to the combined premium-plan payment system features capturing
how well the payment system tracks costs and reduces the gap between gold and silver average (net)
costs. These two metrics were derived in Section 3 and they measure welfare loss due to inefficient
sorting. The third row presents the general expression for the measure derived in Section 4, the
measure of efficiency loss due to insurer incentives to distort plan benefits to attract healthy
enrollees. Recall that to operationalize this measure the researcher or policymaker must choose a
partition of spending corresponding to her belief about the individual- and service-level margins on
which an insurer can discriminate.
        The measures vary between 0 and 1 with 0 implying the payment system fails to improve
efficiency in relation to a base payment system and 1 implying complete elimination of inefficiency.
Notably, the measures have affinities to the measures traditionally used in the literature to capture
selection-related inefficiencies under risk adjustment: the R-squared statistic and predictive ratios.
The first two measures are basically modified R-squareds. The fit of the premium categories
captures one aspect of the sorting problem and the payment system fit is a metric relevant to EF-
type selection problems. The third measure is similar to an aggregation of an exhaustive set of
predictive ratios that relates distortionary incentives to welfare by squaring the incentive to distort
each q-cell allocation.


5. Data and Methods
5.1 Data
        To illustrate the computation and interpretation of the selection measures developed in the
preceding two sections we put ourselves in the position of a policymaker or regulator designing a
payment system for the Health Insurance Marketplaces. We use a more recent version of the health
insurance claims data used by Kautter et al (2014) to develop the HHS-HCC Marketplace payment
system, the Truven MarketScan Commercial Claims and Encounters dataset (MarketScan) for 2012
and 2013 which includes information on individuals with employer-based group health insurance.
The payment system designed for use in the Marketplaces applies separate risk adjustment formulas
to children and adults. We focus on adults 21-64, not children. Following criteria applied for

                                                                                                          31
estimation of the 2014 HHS-HCC model, we keep individuals enrolled in a preferred provider
organization (PPO) or other fee-for-service (FFS) health plan in both the first and last months of a
both years,49 and who have no payments made on a capitated basis (Kautter et al., 2014). Also,
following HHS criteria, we require individuals to have both mental health and drug coverage. We
exclude individuals who have claims with negative payments in services. Since we will be estimating
prospective as well as concurrent risk adjustment models, we require individuals to be enrolled in
both 2012 and 2013. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria, we have two years of claims
for 7,072,964 individuals.
        In addition to being more recent and including two years of data, our sample differs from
that used in Kautter et al (2014) in another important way. Rather than using the full remaining
MarketScan sample, we use a propensity-matched subsample of MarketScan data which yields a
sample chosen to more closely reflect the age, gender, geography and disease characteristics of
people eligible for coverage in the ACA Marketplaces. Adults covered by group health insurance in
MarketScan will, for example, likely be older and sicker than those in the Marketplaces. We
anticipate that the selected sample, with over 2 million people, will improve calibration of risk
adjustment models and yield more valid simulations of likely Marketplace incentives by using data
on individuals more similar to Marketplace enrollees.50
        We select this subset from MarketScan using methods from earlier work using the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to define persons with the characteristics that would make them
eligible for the Marketplace (McGuire et al., 2013, 2014), and propensity model methods within
MEPS using variables common to MEPS and MarketScan (Rose et al., forthcoming). In essence we
estimate the propensity an observation in MEPS is Marketplace eligible (in relation to large group
health insurance) and then use this propensity score, along with nationally representative population
weights from MEPS to draw a sample from MarketScan, which we refer to as the MarketScan
Marketplace (MM) sample. Among the advantages of this sample is that it is nationally
representative and can be used for estimation and simulation without further weighting. Appendix
C to this paper has more details on our matching and selection methods.



49 Other FFS plans include Exclusive Provider Organization, Non-Capitated Point-of-Services, Consumer-
Driven Health Plan, and High-Deductible Health Plan.
50 At some point, claims and enrollment data will be available for at least some Marketplaces. It is unlikely

that such a large sample will be available in time for any recalibration of payment models for 2017.


                                                                                                                32
        Summary statistics for our MM sample and, for purposes of comparison, a random sample
from the full MarketScan sample (meeting our inclusion/exclusion criteria and from which our
sample was drawn) are shown in Table 3. Most of the variables are self-explanatory. Among the
variables we used in the propensity score are indicator variables for the presence of any of ten
chronic illnesses from any time during the two years of observation. As anticipated, the full
MarketScan sample was older and had a higher prevalence of all chronic conditions than the MM
sample. Observations in our MM sample spent less on average than the full MarketScan data
though this was not true for each major spending category.
5.2 Payment Systems
        We calculate our measures under payment systems that differ in three dimensions: risk
adjustment, reinsurance, and premium regulation. The payment systems were chosen because they
are of potential policy interest and also to illustrate important features of the selection measures.
The payment systems are listed in Table 4.
        The first column of Table 4 is ACA 2017, the proposed payment system for Marketplaces in
2017 and beyond. For this case, we assume that Marketplaces continue to apply the federally
recommended age curve for premiums, risk adjustment is concurrent based on the specification of
the HHS-HCC model, and the compulsory reinsurance system in place for 2014-2016 is
discontinued as was stipulated in the ACA. We also apply the risk adjustment “transfer formula”
used by HHS to coordinate risk adjustment and premiums when both include age adjustments.
        The next three columns in Table 4 describe three alternative payment systems. Alternative 1
changes risk adjustment to be prospective (based on prior year diagnoses) rather than concurrent
(based on current year diagnoses) using the same HHS-HCC specification. Prospective diagnostic
risk adjustment was not feasible in 2014, but it is for 2017, as diagnoses from prior year claims are
now available. We implement prospective risk adjustment combined with simple age-gender risk
adjustment for new enrollees, mimicking the approach used by Medicare to pay Medicare Advantage
plans for new enrollees. We assume a random 50 percent of all Marketplace enrollees to be new
enrollees, and use the age-gender only model for them. As with the ACA 2017 payment system, we
maintain the HHS transfer formula to avoid over-adjusting for age.




                                                                                                        33
        Alternative 2 is the same as Alternative 1 but restores the reinsurance program in force in the
Marketplaces during 2014, paying 80% of costs over an attachment point of $60,000 in plan costs.51
Finally, Alternative 3 is similar to Alternative 2 in that it uses prospective risk adjustment (with an
age-sex model for new enrollees) combined with reinsurance, but allows premiums for all ages to be
set in market equilibrium rather than according to a pre-specified age curve.
5.3 Estimation of Selection Measures
        The selection measures call for individual level data on xi, rpi , and revpi under each payment
system. For now, we assume that consumers and plans have perfect foresight so that the expected
cost, xi, is equal to ex post medical spending, which is observed in the data. We will relax this
assumption later and consider the sensitivity of our findings to assumptions about cost
predictability. rpi and revpi must be simulated under each payment system, taking into account risk
adjustment, reinsurance, and the risk adjustment transfer formula. We explain how we simulate each
of these components of rpi and revpi and outline the partitions of medical spending we choose for
estimating ψ from Section 4.
Risk Adjustment
        Under all payment systems we consider, an individual’s risk score is defined (following HHS)
as a linear combination of a vector of individual risk adjustment variables and a vector of weights
assigned to those variables: riskpi = βzi . In the ACA 2017 payment system, zi consists of the same
set of variables used in the HHS-HCC risk adjustment model used in the Marketplaces: a set of
dummy variables indicating the individual’s age-by-sex cell and any recognized conditions she
received a diagnosis for during the current year. Three risk adjustment models are calibrated: a
concurrent model that mimics the estimation used in the existing HHS-HCC concurrent risk
adjustment model that consists of indicators for HCCs (along with age and sex) from 2013 to
predict 2013 spending, a prospective model with the same structure but which uses HCCs from
2012 to predict 2013 spending, and an age-sex only model that is used for predicting spending for
“new enrollees” without information on prior diagnoses.52




51 Some form of this reinsurance policy is in place in the Marketplaces for the first three years of operation
(2014-16), though the parameters of the policy vary for each year, with the generosity of the policy decreasing
monotonically.
52 While the actual weights used in the Marketplaces are publicly available, we estimate our own weights so

that the comparison of concurrent and prospective risk adjustment are “apples-to-apples.”


                                                                                                            34
        We apply HHS software to the data to generate HHS-HCCs for 2013 and 2012 for
estimating the concurrent and prospective models, respectively.53 For the simulated payment
systems, these HCCs along with a set of age-by-sex cells also included in the HHS-HCC risk
adjustment model make up the vector of risk adjustment variables, zi . The vector of weights, β, is
estimated for each model via a regression of total 2013 spending on zi for the full MM sample. To
avoid “overfitting,” we use a k-fold estimation procedure by which the weights used for calculating a
particular individual’s risk score are estimated using data only on other individuals.54 We also estimate
an age-gender only model on data from 2013, with the same age and gender categories used in the
HHS-HCC risk adjustment formula. All three models are normalized to have a mean risk score of
1.0 in the MM sample.
        To simulate plan payments with prospective risk adjustment, we recognize that a share of the
population will not have prior year diagnostic data available by designating a random share (we
assume 50%) of the population to be “new enrollees.” We call the others “incumbent enrollees” for
whom we observe claims from the prior year. For the new enrollees, zi consists of only the age-by-
sex cells and not the chronic condition indicators. For the incumbent enrollees, zi consists of the
same set of dummy variables as in the ACA 2017 payment system case, but the chronic condition
indicators are based on diagnoses from the prior year rather than the current year. The β-weights
are also estimated separately for the prospective model used for the incumbent enrollees and the
age-gender model used for the new enrollees. Estimated coefficients for the three risk adjustment
models using the MM sample are reported in Appendix D.
Transfer Policy
        The Marketplace transfer policy is intended to take account of the age structure of premiums
in risk adjustment transfers (Pope et al. 2014). Consistent with this policy, for the ACA 2017
payment system and Alternatives (1) and (2), we define the risk adjustment transfer, rapi , as follows:
        risk pi αi − α
                     ̅
rapi = (        −      ) x̅.
         ̅̅̅̅̅
         risk p    ̅
                   α
In the expression, riskpi is person i’s risk score and ̅̅̅̅̅
                                                       risk p is the population average risk score under
payment system p. Similarly, αi is person i’s “age weight” and α
                                                               ̅ is the population average age


53 Software can be found here: http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Downloads/SASsoftware.zip. For simplicity, we do not impose constraints on the coefficients as
was done by Kautter et al (2014) to ensure monotonicity within each hierarchy and nonnegative coefficients.
54 For all models, we set k=10. The k-fold procedure is described in more detail in Appendix C.




                                                                                                         35
weight. Under these payment systems, the age weights are defined by the age curve specified by
HHS. The curve is presented in Table D2 in Appendix D with values ranging from 1.0 for 21 year-
olds to 3.0 for 64 year-olds. Under Alternative (3), the zero-profit market equilibrium makes an age-
adjustment unnecessary in a transfer policy.
Reinsurance
        Consistent with the reinsurance policy in place in the Marketplaces during 2014, we define
reinsurance payments, repaypi, to be 80% of an individual’s annual spending above $60,000. While
the Marketplace policy is not required to be budget neutral, we enforce that here and require that the
average value of the net reinsurance payment, repi , be equal to zero. To implement this, we calculate
the insurer’s constant actuarially fair reinsurance premium per person, reprem, define the net
reinsurance payment as repi = repaypi − reprem, and include this adjustment in the net revenue
calculation.
Revenues and Transfers
        Measuring premium fit and payment system fit requires xi, rpi , and revpi . As discussed above,
for now we define xi as ex post spending as it appears in the claims data. We define rpi to account for
all transfers and the transfer formula itself. First, denote the concurrent normalized (relative) risk
            conc     riskpi        βconc zi
score as RRSpi   =   ̅̅̅̅̅̅p
                     risk
                               =     conc z .
                                   ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
                                   β
                                                Then, for each payment system:
                            conc                       ̅
                                                   αi −α
        ACA 2017: rpi = (RRSpi   −                  ̅
                                                    α
                                                        ) x̅
                                   pros                     ̅
                                                        αi −α
        Alternative (1): rpi = (RRSpi   −                  ̅
                                                           α
                                                               ) x̅
                                   pros                     ̅
                                                        αi −α
        Alternative (2): rpi = (RRSpi   −                  ̅
                                                           α
                                                               ) x̅ + repaypi − reprem
                                  pros
        Alternative (3): rpi = RRSpi   x̅ + repaypi − reprem

        For the measure developed in Section 4, ψ, we also need to define revpi . The risk adjustment
and reinsurance transfers defined above combine with premiums to generate the total revenue a plan
receives for enrolling an individual. Revenues can be expressed as revpi = transpi + premjzi. Recall
that in Section 4 we assumed that insurance plans were in a symmetric equilibrium. This implies that
all plans have the same premium. Under payment systems that use the regulated age curve, the
premium for individual i will be equal to a base premium multiplied times the age weight, premi =
̂ αi. We assume that competition forces premiums to be equal to average cost on average,
prem
                                                                                         α
producing the result that the premium for individual i can be written as premi = x̅ α̅i . Transfers are
defined by the risk adjustment and reinsurance policies above so that for a payment system

                                                                                                          36
incorporating both risk adjustment and reinsurance, transpi = rapi + repaypi − reprem − x̅. The
exact expressions we use to construct revenues are found by the appropriate substitutions and are
written out here. These correspond to the four simulations listed in Table 4:55
                              conc
         ACA 2017: revpi = RRSpi   x̅
                                     pros
         Alternative (1): revpi = RRSpi   x̅
                                     pros
         Alternative (2): revpi = RRSpi   x̅ + repaypi − reprem
                                     pros                                ̅̅̅̅̅ppros x̅ + ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
         Alternative (3): revpi = RRSpi   x̅ + repaypi − reprem + x̅a − (RRS             repaypa − reprem)

All of the components of revpi for each payment system are found in our data, with the exception of
   conc            pros
RRSpi   and RRSpi         which we estimate through regressions as discussed above. Note that the
transfer formula is used in the definition of revpi , but that the age adjustments in the formula and
the age adjustments to premiums cancel each other out.
Partitions for Benefit Distortion Measures
         We choose three partitions of spending that generate different variations on the general
measure of insurer incentives to distort plan benefits. We denote these three variatons ψ1 , ψ2 , and
ψ3 . For ψ1 , we assume that insurers can discriminate against individuals with four common chronic
diseases (cancer, diabetes, heart disease and mental health) separately, generating a partition with 5
cells, one for each chronic disease containing all of the spending among individuals with that disease
and one containing all spending for individuals with none of the chronic diseases. We classify
individuals into chronic disease groups using diagnoses. If a person has a claim for more than one
chronic illness, we place that person in the category with the largest amount of spending so that the
disease groups are mutually exclusive.
         For ψ2 , we assume that insurers can manipulate medical services at the level of three broad
categories: inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug services. This categorization is consistent
with the insurer’s ability to set different levels of cost sharing for these broad service categories.
Notably, for ψ2 we only allow insurers to manipulate benefits at the service-level, not at the person-
level. For ψ3 , we maintain the insurer’s ability to manipulate benefits at the service-level but now
allow insurers to manipulate service-level benefits separately for the old and the young, doubling the


55Note that for the ACA 2017 payment system and Alternatives (1) and (2) the age weights from the risk
adjustment transfer formula and the age weights from the premium expression cancel each other out,
implying that in those cases the variation in revenues is determined entirely by the risk adjustment and
reinsurance payments. The age-based premium variation will matter only in the premium fit measure.


                                                                                                             37
number of cells in the partition. For each of the four payment systems we calculate ψ, the measure
of incentives to inefficiently distort benefits three times, once for each partition.


6. Results
           This section presents estimates of our three selection measures and compares them to the
commonly applied R-squared and predictive ratio measures. We also present results regarding the
robustness of the estimated measures to various assumptions about the specification of ex ante
expected costs, xi. Bootstrapped confidence intervals are presented for all measures.
6.1 Basic Results
           Figure 3 displays our first two measures of efficiency for the ACA 2017 payment system and
three alternatives. A value of 0 on a measure implies no improvement over the base payment
system, while a value of 1 implies that the given payment system completely eliminates the
inefficiency corresponding to that measure. Error bars show bootstrapped 90% confidence
intervals.
           The dark bars represent premium fit, which captures the inefficiency due to premium
regulation, i.e., the portion of the variance in costs that is explained by the second-best premiums
given the set of premium regulations embedded in the payment system (here, this is equivalent to
the portion of the variance explained by the weights of the age-curve, as derived in Appendix B).
The low level of the dark bars indicate that none of the payment systems considered do much in the
way of matching premium categories to costs. The ACA 2017 payment system and the first two
alternatives all have identical premium fit because they all rely on the same government-issued age
curve. Under all of these payment systems, an insurer sets the price that a 21 year-old would pay,
and then the premiums for all ages are the prescribed multiples of that age 21 bid.56 Because the
reinsurance and risk adjustment payments modeled here are all budget neutral, the entire age
structure of premiums is the same under these three payment systems. For the ACA 2017 and first
two alternative payment systems, the premium fit measure reflects the portion of the variance in
costs explained by the age curve, which is precisely estimated to be 0.013.
           For the third alternative payment system – which encompasses prospective risk adjustment
plus reinsurance and age-based premiums freely set by insurers – the point estimate for premium fit
is slightly higher than for the other payment systems, implying greater efficiency. This result is due

56   The age curve was estimated by HHS and requires 64 year-olds to pay 3 times the premium of 21 year-olds.


                                                                                                          38
to the fact that the federal age curve does not perfectly match the true age gradient in the claims
data. However, the difference in premium fit is small, and the 90% confidence interval includes the
point estimates of premium fit for ACA 2017 and Alternatives (1) and (2). This implies that a much
more radical reform of premium setting than freeing up the age curve would be necessary to make
much of an improvement in premium fit.
        The light bars are payment system fit, where there is much more action across the
alternatives. For the ACA 2017 payment system, this measure is simply equal to the conventional R-
squared statistic from a regression of costs on a modified concurrent risk adjustment risk score
where the age weights have been removed (because of the way the transfer system works as
explained in Section 5.3). We estimate this measure to be equal to 0.432, consistent with, though
larger than, the 0.350 R-squared reported by Kautter et al. (2014).57 Payment system fit for
prospective risk adjustment (Alternative 1) is much smaller, 0.065, implying lower efficiency. This is
lower than the typical R-squared for a prospective risk adjustment system reflecting our assumption
of 50% turnover in Marketplace enrollment and the use of age/gender risk scores for new enrollees.
Adding reinsurance to prospective risk adjustment (Alternatives (2) and (3)), moves payment system
fit much higher: 0.73.58 The estimates of both premium fit and payment system fit are also found in
Table 5.
        Figure 4 presents the measures developed in Section 4 that capture insurer incentives to
distort benefits to attract healthy enrollees and avoid sick ones. These measures also range between
zero (no inefficiency reduction) and one (eliminating inefficiency). As with payment system fit, the
results imply that the ACA 2017 payment system outperforms prospective risk adjustment
(Alternative 1). However, prospective risk adjustment plus reinsurance (Alternative 2) again
dominates the ACA 2017 payment system. Alternative (3), which allows insurers to freely price by
age, not surprisingly performs almost identically to Alternative (2): the improved payment system fit
through premium flexibility does not affect benefit or service-level selection incentives because plan

57 We expect our payment system fit to differ from that in Kautter et al. (2014) because our sample reflects
the different age, illness and spending distribution expected to better match the Marketplace sample and we
predict plan payments without adjusting for levels of cost-sharing (as in gold, silver, etc.) plans as was done in
Kautter et al. (2014). We also do not tamper with the estimated coefficients. Finally, our payment system fit
is based on modified risk scores where the age weights have been removed, while the R-squared in Kautter et
al. (2014) is based on unmodified risk scores.
58 While the point estimate for Alternative (3) exceeds the estimate for Alternative (2), the confidence

intervals for these measures overlap, suggesting the actual performance of these two payment systems with
respect to this type of distortion may not differ.


                                                                                                               39
revenues for a given individual are effectively unchanged between Alternatives (2) and (3). In sum,
across our four alternative partitions, prospective risk adjustment combined with reinsurance
(Alternative 2) dominates the other payment systems on all measures, supporting the view that
reinsurance plus prospective risk adjustment improves upon the concurrent risk adjustment model
alone, even when the claims necessary to generate diagnosis-based prospective risk scores are only
available for 50% of the enrollees. The estimates of these measures are also presented in Table 5.
6.2 Comparison to Conventional Metrics
        It is informative to compare our new metrics with the conventional metrics used to evaluate
payment systems: the R-squared for the risk adjustment model and predictive ratios for selected
disease categories. The R-squared measures are presented in Figure 5. The ordinary R-squareds
from concurrent and prospective risk adjustment are slightly larger than our estimates of payment
system fit for ACA 2017 and Alternative (1) (prospective risk adjustment only), respectively. In
these settings the R-squared and payment system fit vary in two ways. First, while the R-squared is
based on raw risk scores, payment system fit takes into account the transfer formula by removing
the age-weights from the risk scores as discussed in Section 5.3. Second, as discussed in Appendix B,
in these settings payment system fit accounts for the fact that the regulated age curve effectively
magnifies the EF price distortion for the old and shrinks it for the young by including a scaling
                1       α   2
factor equal to N ∑Ni=1 ( α̅i ) . As the scaling factor is likely to be close to 1, the removal of the age
weights is more important than the inclusion of the scaling factor, and it is easy to see how the
removal of the age-weights would result in payment system fit being less than the R-squared.
        After adding reinsurance in Alternatives (2) and (3) the difference between the R-squared
and payment system fit grows substantially. This is due to the fact that in addition to ignoring the
consequences of the regulated age curve, the conventional R-squared differs from payment system
fit by ignoring the contribution of reinsurance in matching revenues to costs. The conventional R-
squared measure can be seriously misleading when a payment system incorporates features other
than regression-based risk adjustment. The R-squared measures are also found in Table 6.
        Figure 6 presents the predictive ratios for four disease categories commonly used to assess
insurer incentives to discriminate against individuals with chronic conditions: mental health, cancer,
heart disease and diabetes. These ratios are closest in spirit to our ψ1 measure, where the plan was
assumed to be able to discriminate according to spending on these four disease areas. A ratio close
to 1 implies that payment for the group is equal to the group’s cost. A ratio below (above) one


                                                                                                             40
implies under(over)payment. Conventional predictive ratios are constructed by dividing the average
risk adjustment transfers for the group by the average cost for the group, as is done for the
predictive ratios reported in Figure 6 for the ACA 2017 payment system and prospective risk
adjustment (Alternative (1)). For Alternatives (2) and (3), we report “payment system predictive
ratios” that differ from the conventional predictive ratios in that the payment system ratios account
for reinsurance. We construct these payment system predictive ratios by dividing the average
revenue an insurer receives for enrolling a member of a group (revpi ) by the average cost of the
members of the group. For Alternatives (2) and (3), the unmodified conventional predictive ratios
would be identical to those reported for Alternative (1) because all three payment systems
incorporate the same risk adjustment model.
       Consistent with the findings for the Q1 partition reported above, all conventional predictive
ratios are better under the ACA 2017 payment system than under prospective risk adjustment alone
(Alternative (1)). Additionally, the “payment system predictive ratios” improve with the addition of
reinsurance (Alternative (2)). However, the payment system predictive ratio analysis diverges form
our results in Figure 4/Table 5 comparing the ACA 2017 payment system to prospective risk
adjustment with reinsurance (Alternative (2)). The chronic disease payment system predictive ratios
for prospective plus reinsurance range from 0.70 to 0.82, which are further from one than the
predictive ratios for the concurrent, ACA 2017 payment system, which range from 0.81 to 0.96,
implying lower suggested efficiency. All predictive ratios are also found in Table 6.
       There are at least two potential sources of these divergent results. First, the payment system
predictive ratios include everyone with any positive spending in a group (e.g., those with mental
health problems) and treat low and high-spenders with equal importance when computing the
predictive ratio. Our measure weights each person by spending in the category in question (based
on the greater importance of the spending category for persons who spend more). Second, the
payment system predictive ratio consists of revenue for the numerator and costs for the
denominator. In contrast, by squaring this measure for each disease group to go from measuring
incentives to measuring welfare, our measure penalizes larger group-level discrepancies between
revenues and costs more than small ones. Reinsurance directs revenues to the highest-cost people
and gets more credit in a metric based on squared deviations which are much larger among the
higher costs groups.
6.3 Robustness to Assumptions about Expectations of Cost



                                                                                                    41
        Up to this point, our estimates of the selection efficiency measures make no distinction
between realized and expected spending. Note that both the conventional measures of R-squared
and predictive ratios also ignore the distinction between actual versus expected costs. Many have
argued that because much of spending is not likely to be predictable, the fact that these conventional
measures ignore this issue is a critical shortcoming. However, without a model of the economic
behavior that generates inefficiencies, it is unclear (1) why predictability of spending is important and
(2) from whose point of view (consumers, firms, or society’s) predictability should be considered. In
this section, we first discuss where our economic framework suggests predictability matters and then
test the robustness of the set of our measures for which predictability is relevant to alternative
specifications of expected costs. A primary objective is to check if the results favoring reinsurance
withstand this robustness check. Reinsurance payments are directed to the high-end portion of the
spending distribution, and if this spending is less predictable, our results favoring reinsurance may
need reconsideration.
        Deriving measures based on economic behavior guides analysis of where expectations matter
and whose expectations are relevant for each of our measures. With respect to premium fit, recall
that we showed that an individual’s first-best premium is equal to the expected cost for her type.
This expected cost was the “rational expectation,” or the expectation from the social planner’s point
of view, and incorporates all information available to society ex ante. The reason for this was that in
Section 3 we focused solely on a “total surplus” concept of welfare based on the difference between
the individual’s valuation of the plan and the cost to society of providing it. The same logic implies
that the second-best prices to which the first-best prices are compared should also be based on the
expected cost from the social planner’s point of view. This implies that premium fit should be
calculated using expected costs from the social planner’s point of view.
        The expected costs incorporated into payment system fit are different. Recall that this
component captures the difference between the equilibrium price and the second-best price. This
implies that this component is affected by the mechanism by which prices are set, which involves
market forces rather than the specification of expected costs.59 Importantly, the only assumption in


59We should note that the second-best price is still defined according to the social planner’s expectations.
However, for most relevant payment systems premium groups are large, resulting in approximately the same
second-best prices (gamma times the average cost in the premium group) under any specification of the social
planner’s expectations (including perfect foresight, i.e. ex ante expected costs = ex post realized costs) because
the non-predictable component of spending will average out.. This is especially true in the payment systems


                                                                                                               42
the derivation of this measure related to expectations was that in equilibrium competitive market
forces result in insurers setting prices equal to the average realized cost of those consumers choosing
the gold plan and the average realized cost of those consumers choosing the silver plan. This
assumption is reasonable and is consistent with the assumptions made by EFC (2010). Consumer
demand behavior, also influenced by expectations, comes in through the response to equilibrium
premiums. Consumer response and expectations have a scaling effect on the welfare loss due to
EF-type inefficiency, but in our relative measures, behavioral response cancels out. Thus, as long as
insurers get averages right in equilibrium, different assumptions about expectations are not relevant
for the payment system fit measure representing the EF component of selection-related
inefficiencies.60 Instead, this measure can be based on ex post realized costs as in Section 6.1.
        Finally, consider ψ, the measure derived in Section 4 related to incentives for plans to distort
service offerings across people or services. Recall that this measure was derived from a model of
plan profit maximization, where plans set allocations of different services to different individuals
based on the effect of altering an allocation on plan profits, and that effect depends on the
correlation between an individual’s willingness-to-pay for a particular set of services and her
profitability (For example, if consumers were unable to forecast their likely use of a particular set of
services, there would be no value to a plan in attempting to use those services for purposes of
selection.). Plans’ expectations matter here, but note that plans must anticipate what consumers
expect in order to make decisions about service offerings to maximize profits. This implies that for
this measure, consumer expectations, and the plan’s expectation of those consumer expectations, are
relevant.
        It is unknown both how “predictable” spending is from the social planner’s point of view
(relevant for premium fit) and how well consumers can forecast their spending (relevant for ψ), so
we test the robustness of our two measures that incorporate expectations to various specifications of
expected spending. For ψ, we make no distinction between consumers’ expectations and plans’




we simulate here where either everyone is effectively in the same premium group or premiums are allowed to
vary by age.
60 This argument is similar to the insight that in the EF framework the incremental average cost curve is based

on insurer expectations of the spending of individuals enrolling in each plan given a price P. Different
payment systems will shift the incremental average cost curve, but the demand and incremental marginal cost
curves will remain fixed across payment systems.


                                                                                                            43
beliefs about those expectations.61 We also do not separately specify consumers’ expectations and
the social planner’s expectations. Instead, for the measures affected in any way by expectations,
premium fit and ψ, we will consider the effect of a range of assumptions from perfect foresight to
being able to predict only on the basis of age, gender, and prior utilization. Our measure of
expected spending is generated by a linear regression predicting total medical spending in 2013 using
the age-by-sex cells from the risk adjustment models and indicators for each consumer’s decile of
2012 inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug spending.62 We report estimates of our measures
where we specify expected spending as a weighted average of our “predicted” spending and ex post
medical spending, with weights equal to 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100%. The results from the
sensitivity analysis are found in Figure 3. Each panel of the figure shows a different measure.
Estimates for the selection measures for each payment system are on the y-axis and the weight put
on ex post spending relative to predicted spending is on the x-axis. The top-left panel presents the
results for premium fit. ACA 2017 and Alternatives (1) and (2) always have identical estimates for
this measure, shown by the solid black line. Alternative (3) always has slightly lower values,
indicating higher efficiency, though the gap is decreasing in the weight on ex post spending, implying
that the federal age curve matches the ex post age gradient better than the age gradient based on
predicted spending. This is not surprising given that our specification for predicted spending
includes only 5-year age bins as predictors, while the age curve is based on 1-year age bins. The other
three panels present the results for the Section 4 measures, ψ, with the top-right panel presenting
results for the ψ1 measure (chronic disease groups), the bottom-left presenting the ψ2 measure
(service-level discrimination), and the bottom-right presenting the ψ3 measure (service-by-age-level
discrimination). The results are similar for all three versions of ψ: Alternative (1) is always dominated
by ACA 2017 and alternatives with reinsurance dominate ACA 2017 for all of the relative weighting
specifications except for the specification where expected spending is equal to predicted spending
and the weight on ex post spending is 0. This implies that the results reported above regarding the

61 We have no empirical basis for making any distinction. This is the approach also used in FGM (2000) and
related papers. Additionally, it seems reasonable to assume that over time insurers learn (the relevant
dimensions) of consumer expectations so that in equilibrium they know consumer expectations precisely.
62 Instead of traditional deciles, we form one cell including all individuals with $0 of spending and then 9

equally sized cells of individuals with positive spending. Details from the prediction regressions can be found
in Appendix E. Note that for ψ2 and ψ3 we will need to construct separate measures of expected inpatient,
outpatient, and prescription drug spending in addition to the measure of expected total spending. To do this,
we use the same prediction regressions with 2013 total service-level spending on the left-hand side rather than
2013 total spending.


                                                                                                            44
ACA 2017 payment system being dominated by prospective payment with reinsurance are robust to
reasonable assumptions about the social planner’s and consumers’ ability to predict future medical
spending. Only in the case where no part of spending beyond what is predictable from
demographics and deciles of prior spending is predictable by the social planner or by consumers
does the ACA 2017 payment system dominate Alternatives (2) and (3). We interpret this result as
validation that reinsurance plus prospective risk adjustment is likely to outperform concurrent risk
adjustment alone with respect to price and service-level distortions caused by adverse selection. This
result also implies that across a fairly wide range of payment system alternatives, our measures will
produce similar results when estimated using either simple ex post realized costs or using more
complicated specifications of expected costs. This result may be important for policymakers
designing health plan payment systems under constraints that may prevent the use of complex
methods for producing estimates of expected costs.


7. Discussion
        This paper develops metrics of incentives for selection that we argue are valid, complete and
practical to use for the ex ante evaluation of the efficiency of alternative payment systems. By valid
we mean our measures are derived from economic principles rather than based on ad hoc statistical
criteria, and parallel the Harberger-type measures of inefficiency driven by the square of the gap
between equilibrium and efficient prices. The measures reflect the primary sources of inefficiency
caused by adverse selection in individual health insurance markets. By complete we mean these
metrics allow for comparisons among payment systems that differ on a wide variety of margins
including premium regulation, risk adjustment, mixed payment systems, or reinsurance. By practical
we mean our measures can be readily calculated from the data typically available for an ex ante
assessment of plan payment alternatives. We have conducted such an assessment here on an
updated (and better-selected) version of the data likely to be used for any recalibration of
Marketplace plan payments for 2017, demonstrating the practicality of the metrics.
        Our first two measures (premium fit and payment system fit) capture inefficiencies due to
price distortions caused by premium regulation and adverse selection. These measures are based on
how well premiums and total plan revenues match costs at the individual level. Our third measure
captures inefficiencies caused by insurer incentives to distort benefits to attract profitable enrollees.
This measure requires that the researcher or policymaker specify the dimensions of spending for
which distortion by insurers is feasible. The measure is then based on the correlation between

                                                                                                         45
individuals’ distort-able spending and their profitability to the insurer, also known as the
“predictiveness” of the spending dimension. Higher correlations between spending on distort-able
dimensions of spending and profitability imply stronger incentives to distort plan benefits and larger
potential inefficiencies.
        We demonstrate the usefulness of our measures by comparing three alternative payment
systems to the payment system slated for use in the ACA Marketplaces in 2017. Our analysis shows
that while a prospective risk adjustment model performs notably worse than the proposed
concurrent model on all selection metrics, this deficiency is more than overcome when prospective
risk adjustment is combined with reinsurance similar to that in use in the Marketplaces during 2014.
This result regarding the value of reinsurance for combatting distortionary incentives caused by
adverse selection is consistent with other recent research bearing on reinsurance in the Marketplace
context (Zhu et al. 2013, Geruso and McGuire 2015). This result about reinsurance is robust to
assumptions regarding the portion of the variance of medical spending that is “predictable” by
consumers.
        A comparison of our metrics of relative payment system performance to more conventional
metrics typically used in the literature highlights differences between the measures and identifies
where the conventional measures may be misleading. Unsurprisingly, when evaluating payment
systems using measures of the statistical fit of a risk adjustment model, the benefits of other
payment system features are ignored. More interestingly, we find that when evaluating payment
systems using predictive ratios for important disease groups, the benefits of reinsurance are
undervalued, even when accounting for reinsurance payments in the ratios. This discrepancy can be
explained by two differences between predictive ratios and the welfare-related measures we derive
from a model of plan profit maximization. First, while both measures are based on the profitability
of attracting a particular group, predictive ratios effectively weight the profitability of each member
of the group equally. We show that plan profit maximization implies that members of a group
should be weighted by their level of spending relative to the total spending of the group. This
weighting is captured by our measure but not by predictive ratios, explaining part of the
undervaluation of reinsurance by the predictive ratio measure of incentives. Second, predictive
ratios evaluate welfare loss due to an insurer’s incentive to discriminate against groups of individuals
using raw averages of spending and simulated revenues at the group level. However, basic
economics implies that welfare loss is proportional to the square of the distortion and thus also
proportional to the square of these measures of relative profitability of the different groups, causing

                                                                                                      46
the profitability of the most expensive enrollees to be weighted even more heavily and driving a
larger wedge between the value of reinsurance implied by predictive ratios and the value implied by
our model-based measure of welfare loss due to insurer incentives to discriminate against groups of
enrollees.
        Our approach is subject to a number of limitations. The most important is that our
measures do not evaluate welfare losses in standard units such as dollars. This implies that the
measures cannot easily be used to explicitly model trade-offs among the multiple inefficiencies we
focus on (price and benefit distortions due to adverse selection) or between these inefficiencies and
other objectives of the payment system. For example, imposing a steeper federal age curve, say 5-1,
rather than the current 3-1 maximum between 64 and 21 year olds, will likely better address adverse
selection problems and improve welfare according to our measures. It may, however, weaken the
perceived fairness of the payment system by requiring older (generally sicker) enrollees to pay much
more than the young and healthy. This lack of a standard unit unfortunately prevents us from using
these measures to find an “optimal” payment system that maximizes efficiency over multiple
objectives. It is worth keeping in mind that this limitation is shared with the conventional ex ante
measures of insurer incentives we seek to improve upon such as the conventional R-squared and
predictive ratios.
        Other measures of payment system performance can be considered along with those we
develop here, even if they cannot be added together in the same units. For example, our measures
can be combined with measures of insurer moral hazard to determine whether a particular payment
system dominates other systems. Concerning insurer moral hazard, Geruso and McGuire (2015)
measure the “power” of a payment system, capturing incentives for cost control. Results of the
power analysis show that a payment system incorporating prospective risk adjustment along with
reinsurance dominates a payment system consisting only of concurrent risk adjustment with respect
to payment system fit and power. Our results complement their finding by showing that
prospective risk adjustment plus reinsurance also dominates concurrent risk adjustment alone with
respect to premium fit and our measure of welfare loss due to insurer incentives to distort plan
benefits.
        In addition to objectives related to fairness and insurer moral hazard, our measures and
analysis also abstract from concerns about the “game-ability” of payment system features such as
risk adjustment (Kronick and Welch 2014, Geruso and Layton 2015) and from protection against
“reclassification risk” (Handel, Hendel and Whinston 2015). While these issues are important and

                                                                                                       47
should also be taken into account when evaluating payment systems, they are beyond the scope of
this paper.
        Despite the limitations, we believe our measures of welfare loss are more meaningful
economically and nearly as easy to use as the measures currently in use to evaluate the ex ante
performance of plan payment systems. Although developed here in the context of the ACA
Marketplaces, the metrics are designed to be applicable to other private health insurance markets in
the U.S. Medicare system, and in other countries relying on risk adjustment tied to other plan
payment features to address issues of adverse selection in individual health insurance.




                                                                                                   48
References
Akerlof G.A. (1970), “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3): 488-500.

Beck, K., M. Trottman and P. Zweifel (2010), “Risk adjustment in Health Insurance and Its Long-
       Term Consequences,” Journal of Health Economics 29(4): 489-98.

Beck K, Buchner F, van Kleef R, von Wyl V. (2014) “Risk equalization and cost saving options:
      How to marry solidarity with efficiency?” Unpublished.

Breyer, F., M. Heineck and N. Lorenz (2003) “Determinants of Health Care Utilization by German
        Sickness Fund Members – with Application to Risk Adjustment,” Health Economics 12(5):
        367-76.

Breyer F., Bundorf K., and Pauly M.V. (2012) "Health Care Spending Risk, Health Insurance, and
      Payment to Health Plans," in M. Pauly, T. McGuire, P. Barros (eds.) The Handbook of Health
      Economics, Vol. 2, Elsevier.

Brown J, Duggan M, Kuziemko I, and Woolston W. (2014) “How does risk selection respond to
      risk adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage program," American Economic Review
      104(10): 3335-3364.

Bundorf, M. K, J. D. Levin and N. Mahoney. (2012) “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan Choice,"
      American Economic Review 102(7): 3214-3248.

Cao, Z. and McGuire, T. 2003, "Service-Level Selection by HMOs in Medicare," Journal of Health
       Economics 22(6): 915-931.

Carey, C. (2014a) “Government Payments and Insurer Benefit Design In Medicare Part D,"
       Working Paper.

Carey, C. (2014b) “Sharing the Burden of Subsidization: Evidence from a Payment Update in
       Medicare Part D," Working Paper.

Chetty, R. (2009) “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
      Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 1:451-488.

Cohen and Einav, (2007) “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice,” American Economic
      Review, 97(3): 745-788.

Cutler D.M. and Reber S.J. (1998) “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff between
       Competition and Adverse Selection,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 433-466.

Cutler D.M. and Zeckhauser R. (2000) “The Anatomy of Health Insurance,” Handbook of Health
       Economics. Culyer A.J. and Newhouse J.P. (eds) Amsterdam: North Holland, Elsevier.

                                                                                                   49
Eggleston K. and Bir A. (2009), “Measuring Selection Incentives in Managed Care: Evidence from
       the Massachusetts State Employees Insurance Program,” Journal of Risk and Insurance 76: 159-
       175.

Einav L. and Finkelstein A. (2011) “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
       Pictures,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 115-138.

Einav L., Finkelstein A. and Cullen M.R. (2010) “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
       Variation in Prices,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3): 877-921.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen. 2013.
       "Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance." American Economic Review, 103(1): 178-219.

Einav, L., Finkelstein A. and Levin, J. (2010) “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
       Markets,” Annual Review of Economics 2:311-36.

Ellis, R.P., Jiang S. and Kuo, T-C. (2013) “Does Service-Level Spending Show Evidence of Selection
         Across Health Plan Types?” Applied Economics 45(13): 1701-12.

Ellis R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (2007) “Predictability and Predictiveness in Health Care Spending,”
        Journal of Health Economics 26(1): 25-48.

Ericson, K.M. and Starc, A. (2012), “Age-Based Heterogeneity and Pricing Regulation on the
       Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” NBER Working Paper 18089.

Ettner, S., Frank, R., McGuire, T. and Hermann, R. (2001), “Risk Adjustment Alternatives in Paying
        for Behavioral Health Care Under Medicaid,” Health Services Research 36(4): 793-811.

Frank R.G., Glazer J. and McGuire T.G. (2000) “Measuring Adverse Selection in Managed Health
       Care,” Journal of Health Economics 19(6): 829-854.

Geruso M. (2014) “Selection in Employer Health Plans: Homogeneous Prices and Heterogeneous
      Preferences”, Unpublished.

Geruso M. and Layton, T. (2015) “Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk
      Adjustment,” NBER Working Paper 21222.

Geruso, M. and McGuire, T.G. (2015) "Tradeoffs in the Design of Health Plan Payment Systems:
       Fit, Power and Balance," NBER Working Paper 20359 (revised).

Glazer J. and McGuire T.G. (2000), “Optimal Risk Adjustment of Health Insurance Premiums: an
       Application to Managed Care,” The American Economic Review 90(4): 1055-1071.

Glazer J. and McGuire T.G. (2002) “Setting Health Plan Premiums to Ensure Efficient Quality in
       Health Care: Minimum Variance Optimal Risk Adjustment,” Journal of Public Economics 84(2):
       153-173.

                                                                                                   50
Hackmann, M.B., Kolstad J.T., and Kowalski A.E. 2015. "Adverse Selection and
     an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice." American Economic Review, 105(3):
     1030-66.

Handel B. (2013), “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging
       Hurts,” American Economic Review 103(7): 2643-2682.

Handel B., and Kolstad J.T. 2015. "Health Insurance for "Humans": Information Frictions, Plan
       Choice, and Consumer Welfare." American Economic Review, 105(8): 2449-2500.

Handel B., Hendel I. and Whinston M.D. (2015), “Equilibria in Health Exchanges: Adverse
       Selection vs. Reclassification Risk,” Econometrica 83(4): 1261-1313.

HealthConnector (2013) “Commonwealth of Massachusetts Notice of Benefit and Payment
       Parameters 2014: Risk Adjustment Methodology and Operation.” (Accessed March 23,
       2015) Available at: https://betterhealthconnector.com/wp-content/uploads/reports-and-
       publications/Risk_Adjustment/MANoticeofBenefitPaymentParameters.pdf

Hsu J., Fung V., Huang J., et al. (2010), “Fixing Flaws in Medicare Drug Coverage that Prompt
        Insurers to Avoid Low-Income Patients.” Health Affairs, vol. 29(12): 119-141.

Kautter, J., Pope, G.C., Ingber, M., Freeman, S., Patterson, L., Cohen, M. and Keenan, P. (2014),
       “The HHS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model for Individual and Small Group Markets under the
       Affordable Care Act,” Medicare & Medicaid Research Review 4(3): E1-E11.

Kronick, R. and Welch, P.W. (2014), “Measuring Coding Intensity in the Medicare Advantage
       Program,” Medicare & Medicaid Research Review 4(2): E1-E19.

Keeler, E., Carter, G. and Newhouse, J. (1998), “A Model of the Impact of Reimbursement
        Schemes on Health Plan Choice,” Journal of Health Economics 17(3): 297-320.

Kuziemko I, Meckel K, Rossin-Slater M. (2014) “Do Insurers Risk-Select Against Each Other?
      Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health Reform.” NBER Working Paper No.
      19198.

Kowlaski, A. 2014 "The Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act, State by State," Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings Institution, vol. 49(2
      (Fall)), pages 277-355.

Layton, T., (2014), “Imperfect Risk Adjustment, Risk Preferences, and Sorting in Competitive
       Health Insurance Markets,” Unpublished.

Layton, T., McGuire, T.G. and Sinaiko, A.S. (forthcoming), “Risk Corridors and Reinsurance in
       Health Insurance Marketplaces: Insurance for Insurers” American Journal of Health Economics.

Lorenz, N. (2014) “Using Quantile Regression for Optimal Risk Adjustment.” Universitat Trier
       Research Papers in Economics No. 2014-11. http://www.uni-
       trier.de/fileadmin/fb4/prof/VWL/EWF/Research_Papers/2014-11.pdf.
                                                                                                 51
McGuire, T. G., Glazer, J., Newhouse, J.P., Normand, S-L., Shi, J., Sinaiko, A.D. Zuvekas, S. (2013)
      “Integrating Risk Adjustment and Enrollee Premiums in Health Plan Payment,” Journal of
      Health Economics 32(6): 1263-1277.

McGuire, T.G., Newhouse, J.P., Normand, S-L., Shi, J. and Zuvekas, S. (2014) "Assessing Incentives
      for Service-Level Selection in Private Health Insurance Exchanges," Journal of Health
      Economics 35: 47-63.

Newhouse, J.P., W.G. Manning, E.B. Keeler and E.M. Sloss (1989), “Adjusting Capitation Rates
     using Objective Health Measures and Prior Utilization,” Health Care Financing Review 15(1):
     39-54.

Newhouse JP, McWilliams JM, Price M, Huang J, Fireman B, Hsu J, (2013) “Do Medicare
     Advantage Plans Select Enrollees in Higher Margin Clinical Categories?” Journal of Health
     Economics 32(6): 1278-1288.

Newhouse JP, Price M, McWilliams JM, Hsu J, McGuire TG. (2015) “How Much Favorable
     Selection Is Left in Medicare Advantage?” American Journal of Health Economics, 1(1): 1-26.

Pauly M. (2008) "Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard: Implications for Health Insurance Markets,"
       Incentives and Choice in Health Care, Sloan F. and Kasper, H. (eds) Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       2008

Pope, G.C., Bachofer, H., Pearlman, A., Kautter, J., Hunter, E., Miller, D. and Keenan, P. (2014)
       “Risk Transfer Formula for Individual and Small Group Markets Under the Affordable Care
       Act,” Medicare & Medicaid Research Review 4(3): E1-E23.

Pope, G. C., Kautter, J., Ingber, J.J., Freeman, S., Sekar, R., Newhart, C. (2011), Evaluation of the
       CMS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model, In Final Report, RTI Project Number 0209853.006,
       RTI International, March.

Rothschild M and Stiglitz J. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
       Economics of Imperfect Information.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4): 629-649.

Rose, S., Shi, J., McGuire, T.G. and Normand, S-L. (2015) “Matching and Imputation Methods for
        Risk Adjustment in Health Insurance Exchanges,” Statistics in Biomedical Sciences (Special Issue
        on Big Data). Advance online publication.

Shepard, M. (2015) “Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the
       Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange,” unpublished.

Shmueli, A., Messika, D., Zmora, I. and Oberman, B. (2010) “Health Care Costs During the Last 12
      Months of Life in Israel: Estimation and Implications for Risk Adjustment,” International
      Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 10(3): 257-73.




                                                                                                        52
Van Barneveld, E., L. Lamers, R. Van Vliet and W. Van de Ven (2001), “Risk Sharing as a
      Supplement to Imperfect Capitation: A Tradeoff Between Selection and Efficiency,” Journal
      of Health Economics 20(2): 147-168.

van de Ven, W.P.M.M. and Ellis, R.P. (2000) “Risk Adjustment in Competitive Health Plan
       Markets,” Handbook of Health Economics Culyer, A.J. and Newhouse, J.P. (eds.) Amsterdam,
       Elsevier.

van Veen, S.H.C.M., van Kleef, R.C., van de Ven, W.P.M.M. and van Vliet, R.C.J.A. (2015) “Is
       There One Measure of Fit that Fits All? A Taxonomy and Review of Measures of Fit for
       Risk Equalization Models,” Medical Care Research and Review, pp 1-24.

van Kleef, R.C., van Vliet, R.C.J.A. and van de Ven, W.P.M.M. (2013) “Risk Equalization in The
       Netherlands: an Empirical Evaluation,” Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomic Outcomes Research
       13(6): 829-39.

Zhu, J.M., Layton, T.J., Sinaiko, A.D. and McGuire T.G. (2013) “The Power of Reinsurance in
       Health Insurance Exchanges to Improve the Fit of the Payment system and Reduce
       Incentives for Adverse Selection,” Inquiry 50(4): 255-75.




                                                                                                    53
Figure 1. Efficiency Costs of Adverse Selection in the Einav-Finkelstein Model




    Source: Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen (2010)




                                                                                 54
  Figure 2. Possible Partition of Medical Services Spending by Person and Service




Notes: The figure illustrates the partitioning of total medical spending under an insurance contract based on
services and individuals. There are 5 services and 5 individuals. The researcher must choose on which service-
or person-level groupings insurers can discriminate. The figure illustrates a case where insurers can discriminate
on county and inpatient/outpatient spending, resulting in 4 cells across which the insurer can distort spending
allocations to attract (avoid) the healthy (sick).




                                                                                                               55
                              Figure 3. Premium Fit and Payment System Fit for Each Simulated Payment System

                        0.9                                                                    0.018


                        0.8                                                                    0.016


                        0.7                                                                    0.014


                        0.6                                                                    0.012
   Payment System FIt




                                                                                                       Premium Fit
                        0.5                                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                     Payment System Fit
                        0.4                                                                    0.008                 Premium Fit


                        0.3                                                                    0.006


                        0.2                                                                    0.004


                        0.1                                                                    0.002


                         0                                                                     0
                                  ACA 2017     Alternative 1   Alternative 2   Alternative 3
Notes: The figure displays premium fit (right y-axis) and payment system fit (left y-axis), the measures of welfare loss
due to price distortions caused by premium regulations and adverse selection derived in Section 3. 1 implies complete
elimination of the inefficiency and 0 implies reduction in inefficiency. Premium fit is the portion of the variance in costs
explained by premium categories. Payment system fit is the portion of the variance in costs explained by variation in
transfers and premiums. Error bars show bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals. The simulated payment systems are as
follows: ACA 2017, concurrent risk adjustment + federal age curve; Alternative 1, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50%
“new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2, Prospective risk adjustment (w/
50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3, Prospective risk
adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance + freely set age-based premiums.




                                                                                                                                      56
                  Figure 4. Measures of Removal of Insurer Incentives to Distort Health Plan Benefits (ψ)

                   1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7
   Measures 1-3




                  0.6

                                                                                                               Measure 1
                  0.5
                                                                                                               Measure 2
                                                                                                               Measure 3
                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                   0
                           ACA 2017         Alternative 1      Alternative 2           Alternative 3
Notes: The figure displays the measure of inefficiency due to insurer incentives to distort health plan benefits due to
adverse selection (ψ), derived in Section 4 of the paper. The measure describes inefficiency of the given payment system
relative to a base payment system with no transfers and a single premium. 1 implies complete elimination of the
inefficiency and 0 implies no better than the base payment system. ψ1 -ψ3 are three variants on ψ. ψ1 assumes insurers
can independently discriminate against individuals with any of four chronic diseases: Cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and
mental health conditions. ψ2 assumes insurers can discriminate only at the level of broad service categories: inpatient,
outpatient, and prescription drugs. ψ3 assumes insurers can discriminate at the service level and by age (over 40/under
40). The simulated payment systems are as follows: ACA 2017, concurrent risk adjustment + federal age curve;
Alternative 1, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age
curve; Alternative 2, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal
age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk
scores) + reinsurance + freely set age-based premiums




                                                                                                                       57
                      Figure 5. R-squared Statistics for the Payment System Alternatives
                0.5

               0.45

                0.4

               0.35

                0.3
   R-squared




               0.25

                0.2

               0.15

                0.1

               0.05

                 0
                      ACA 2017              Alternative 1            Alternative 2             Alternative 3
Notes: The figure presents the conventional measure of the performance or fit of a risk adjusted payment system. The
R-squared measure is the R-squared statistic from a regression of costs on risk scores from the risk adjustment model
used in the given payment system. The simulated payment systems are as follows: ACA 2017, concurrent risk adjustment
+ federal age curve; Alternative 1, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk
scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender
risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees”
assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance + freely set age-based premiums




                                                                                                                  58
                                                      Figure 6. Payment System Predictive Ratios
                                      2


                                     1.8
   Payment System Predictive Ratio




                                     1.6


                                     1.4                                                                           Cancer
                                                                                                                   Diabetes

                                     1.2                                                                           Heart Disease
                                                                                                                   Mental Health
                                      1                                                                            No Chronic Condition
                                           ACA 2017




                                                                   Alternative 1




                                                                                   Alternative 2




                                                                                                   Alternative 3
                                     0.8


                                     0.6


                                     0.4
Notes: The figure presents payment system predictive ratios for various disease groups under each of the simulated
payment systems. Payment system predictive ratios are defined as average revenues divided by average costs for the
specified group under the given payment system. Revenues incorporate both risk adjustment and reinsurance.
Conventional predictive ratios would be identical to payment system predictive ratios for the ACA 2017 payment
system. For Alternatives 1-3, conventional predictive ratios would be equal to the payment system predictive ratios
under Alternative 1, as this payment system consists only of risk adjustment. The chronic disease groups are mutually
exclusive. If an individual has one diagnosis mapping to a CCS code corresponding to the chronic disease, she is
assigned to that chronic disease group. If she is assigned to multiple chronic disease groups, she is assigned only to the
one for which she has the highest spending. The simulated payment systems are as follows: ACA 2017, concurrent risk
adjustment + federal age curve; Alternative 1, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned
age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees”
assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50%
“new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance + freely set age-based premiums




                                                                                                                                      59
Figure 7. Sensitivity of Selection Measures to Assumptions about Consumer Expectations

                                                                                       Alternative 2 ≈ Alternative 3




                                                                                                    ACA 2017




                                                                     Alternative 1
      ACA 2017 = Alternative 1 = Alternative 2




                           Alternative 2 ≈ Alternative 3                             Alternative 2 ≈ Alternative 3




                                                                                                   ACA 2017
                                            ACA 2017




     Alternative 1
                                                                     Alternative 1




Notes: Figures show how selection measures vary as the weight on ex post spending relative to predicted
spending increases. Predicted spending is specified as the predicted value from a regression of 2013 spending on
age-by-sex cells and deciles of 2012 inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug spending. Each figure shows a
different selection measure, labeled on the y-axis. For all measures, 1 is interpreted as total elimination of
inefficiency and 0 is interpreted as no reduction in inefficiency. The simulated payment systems are as follows:
ACA 2017, concurrent risk adjustment + federal age curve; Alternative 1, Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50%
“new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2, Prospective risk adjustment
(w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3,
Prospective risk adjustment (w/ 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance + freely
set age-based premiums




                                                                                                                       60
                   Table 1: Special Cases of Measure of Incentives to Inefficiently Distort Health Plan Benefits

                           No Service-level Selection                        Yes Service-level Selection
                                                   2                                    xis                   2
                                 x                                                ∑s (∑i    (rev     − x   ) )
No Individual-               (∑i xi (revp,i − xi ))                                      xs      p,i     i
                        ψ=1−                                            ψ=1−
level Selection                     x            2                                         x               2
                               (∑i xi (x̅ − xi ))                                   ∑𝑠 (∑i is (x̅ − xi ))
                                                                                            xs

                                            2                                                 2
Yes Individual-         ∑i(revp,i − xi )                                 ∑i(revp,i − xi )
 level Selection   ψ=1−                  = R2 (x, Revp,i )          ψ=1−                  = R2 (x, Revp,i )
                          ∑i(x̅ − xi )2                                    ∑i(x̅ − xi)2


      Notes: This table shows special cases of our measure of an insurer’s incentive to inefficiently distort plan
      benefits to attract healthy enrollees. The measure requires the researcher/policymaker to choose a particular
      partition of spending across people and services.




                                                                                                                  61
                                       Table 2: Summary of Selection Measures

                                      Measure                                                     Description
                                         ∑i(xi − x̅a    )2                     R-squared from regression of spending on a set of
 Premium
                               δ=1−                                            indicators for premium groups. Based on expected
      Fit                                ∑i(xi − x̅)2                          spending from social planner’s point of view.
                                                                       2       R-squared from regression producing predicted
  Payment                     ∑N
                               i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                                                   ̅ a − r̅ p,a )))
                                                                               values equal to (rp,i + (x̅a − r̅ p,a )). Based on
                ϕ=1−
System Fit                               ∑N
                                          i=1(xi    −   x̅)2                   expected spending from the insurer’s point of view.
                          [                                                ]   Captures Einav-Finkelstein type inefficiency.
                                                                               R-squared-like measure incorporating the
                                                                               “predictiveness” of different services for different
                                            q                      2
                                           x̂i                                 types of people. Revenue must be simulated for the
Incentives                        ∑q (∑i        (revp,i − xi ))                chosen payment system and the researcher must
                                           x̂ q
to Distort           ψ=1−                       q              2
                                                                               specify a partition of spending corresponding to the
  Benefits                                x̂                                   margins on which the insurer can distort benefits.
                                    ∑q (∑i iq (x̅ − xi ))                      Based on expected spending from the insurer’s point
                                          x̂
                                                                               of view of the consumer’s point of view. Captures
                                                                               “service-level” selection and other cases.

Notes: This table presents our three measures of selection-related inefficiencies developed in Sections 3 and 4. The first
measure captures the inefficiency due to limited premium categories the second measure captures inefficient sorting, and
the third measure captures incentives to inefficiently distort plan benefits to attract healthy enrollees.




                                                                                                                                62
         Table 3: Data Used for Estimation and Simulation: Means and Standard Deviations
                                              Marketplace Sample                 Random Sample of Full
                                                 (N=2,006,126)                   MarketScan (N=498,398)
                                             Mean         Std. Dev.               Mean         Std. Dev.
Age                                          42.40          12.46                 44.70          11.58
Female                                       0.49                                 0.52
Census Region:
                           Northeast          0.14                                 0.17
                             Central          0.23                                 0.26
                              South           0.43                                 0.39
                               West           0.20                                 0.17
Total Spending                               $5,059           $20,134             $5,838             $18,779
Inpatient Spending                           $1,357           $13,657             $1,221             $10,910
Outpatient Spending                          $2,779           $10,204             $3,344             $11,150
Drug Spending                                 $922             $4,189             $1,273              $5,251
One or More Chronic Conditions                0.33                                 0.40
Cancer                                        0.07                                 0.08
Heart Disease                                 0.07                                 0.09
Mental Health                                 0.11                                 0.13
Diabetes                                      0.08                                 0.11
Recalibrated Concurrent RRS                    1.0              2.63                1.0                2.02
Recalibrated Prospective RRS                   1.0              1.45                1.0                1.25
Age-sex only RRS                               1.0              0.49                1.0                0.36

Notes: Our Full MarketScan sample consists of adults (21-64 in 2012) who are continuously enrolled for 2012-13 and
have drug and mental health coverage. Individuals must be enrolled in a plan type that does not include capitated
payments to providers. The Marketplace Sample is a subset of the Full MarketScan sample, selected with propensity
score methods described in the text. The recalibrated concurrent and prospective models use our Marketplace sample
for calibration, and hence have means of one once normalized. Also shown are the sample standard deviations.




                                                                                                               63
                             Table 4: Simulated Payment Systems

                        Current Law                           Alternative Payment Systems
                         ACA 2017               1                           2                       3
                        Specified age                                                        Age curve set in
     Premiums                           Specified age curve       Specified age curve
                           curve                                                               equilibrium
                                           HHS-HCC                    HHS-HCC                  HHS-HCC
                        HHS-HCC         Prospective, Age-          Prospective, Age-        Prospective, Age-
  Risk Adjustment
                        Concurrent       Gender for new             Gender for new           Gender for new
                                            enrollees                  enrollees                enrollees
    Reinsurance             No                No                         Yes                      Yes
ACA Risk Equalization                                                                       No: age curve not
                            Yes                Yes                       Yes
  Transfer Formula                                                                                used




                                                                                                           64
                       Table 5: Estimated Measures for Simulated Payment Systems

                                                                          Payment System
Measure                                          ACA 2017          Alternative 1 Alternative 2           Alternative 3
Premium Fit: δ                                      0.013              0.013          0.013                  0.014
                                                 (.012, .014)       (.012, .014)   (.012, .014)           (.015, .013)
Payment System Fit: ϕ                               0.423              0.065          0.727                  0.732
                                                 (.414, .433)       (.061, .069)   (.711, .743)           (.716, .748)
Incentives to Distort Benefits:
ψ1 – Four Chronic Diseases                          0.702              0.148              0.859              0.857
                                                 (.701, .702)       (.147, .148)       (.859, .860)       (.857, .858)
ψ2 – Service-level                                  0.694              0.101              0.860              0.858
                                                 (.668, .721)       (.091, .101)       (.846, .872)       (.845, .871)
ψ3 – Service-level and Young/Old                    0.659              0.095              0.855              0.854
                                                 (.655, .712)       (.087, .104)       (.840, .868)       (.840, .867)
Notes: Shown are point estimates (and confidence intervals) for measures of the inefficiency of the given payment
system. For each measure, 1 implies complete elimination of the inefficiency and 0 implies no reduction in inefficiency.
Premium fit is the portion of the variance in costs explained by premium categories. Payment system fit is the portion of
the variance in costs explained by variation in premiums and transfers. ψ1 -ψ3 are three variants of our measure of
insurer incentives to distort plan benefits. ψ1 assumes insurers can independently discriminate against individuals with
any of four chronic diseases: Cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and mental health conditions. ψ2 assumes insurers can
discriminate only at the level of broad service categories: inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drugs. ψ3 assumes
insurers can discriminate at the level of broad service levels and by age (over 40/under 40). The four simulated payment
systems are shown: ACA 2017 is concurrent risk adjustment + federal age curve; Alternative 1 is Prospective risk
adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2 is Prospective
risk adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance;
Alternative 3 is Prospective risk adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance +
freely set age-based premiums.




                                                                                                                      65
                      Table 6: Conventional Measures for Simulated Payment Systems

                                                                       Payment System
Measure                                     ACA 2017            Alternative 1   Alternative 2             Alternative 3
R-squared                                     0.432                 0.079           0.079                     0.079
Payment System Predictive
Ratios:
                       Cancer                  0.920                0.641                0.797                0.778
                     Diabetes                  0.956                0.680                0.820                0.797
               Heart Disease                   0.825                0.659                0.716                0.703
               Mental Health                   0.807                0.640                0.704                0.712
        No Chronic Condition                   1.270                1.780                1.538                1.567
Notes: The R-squared measure is the R-squared statistic from a regression of costs on risk scores from the risk
adjustment model used in the given payment system. Predictive ratios are defined as average revenues divided by average
costs for the specified group under the given payment system. The chronic disease groups are mutually exclusive. If an
individual has one diagnosis mapping to a CCS code corresponding to the chronic disease, she is assigned to that
chronic disease group. If she is assigned to multiple chronic disease groups, she is assigned only to the one for which she
has the highest spending. The four simulated payment systems are shown: ACA 2017 is concurrent risk adjustment +
federal age curve; Alternative 1 is Prospective risk adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender risk
scores) + federal age curve; Alternative 2 is Prospective risk adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees” assigned age/gender
risk scores) + federal age curve + reinsurance; Alternative 3 is Prospective risk adjustment (with 50% “new enrollees”
assigned age/gender risk scores) + reinsurance + freely set age-based premiums.




                                                                                                                        66
Appendix A: Derivations from Section 3

A.i. Derivation of Equation (2)

          This appendix includes the derivations of the expressions/measures of sorting inefficiencies
due to premium regulations and adverse selection presented in Section 3. We start by deriving
Equation (1) from the text. Let xi be the (expected) cost to an insurer of enrolling person i in a basic
(“silver”) plan and let (1 + γ)xi be the cost to an insurer of enrolling person i in a generous (“gold”)
plan, with γ > 0. Person i’s expected incremental cost is defined as the difference between her
expected plan cost in the gold plan and her expected plan cost in the silver plan: (1 + γ)xi − xi = γxi.
Consumers fall into T types, where all type-t consumers have the same incremental expected cost:
                                          j
γxi = γxt for all i ∈ t. Finally, let premi be the premium the insurer charges person i to enroll in plan
j, j = g,s, and let the incremental premium charged to person i, be premi = premgi − premsi .
          Consumers have heterogeneous preferences for plans, but we require all consumers to
choose either the gold or the silver plan. Let nt (premt ) be the number of type-t consumers who
purchase gold given the incremental price, premt, and let Pt (n) be the “inverse demand,” or the price
at which n type-t consumers enroll in gold. In this setting, “incremental” social welfare for type-t
consumers can be described as a function of premt:
                nt (premt )

Wt (premt ) = (    ∫           Pt (n)dn) − nt (premt )γxt
                   0
This function is maximized at prem∗t = γxt . The welfare loss due to a price different from prem∗t =
γxt can be expressed as ΔWt (premt ) = Wt (γxt ) − Wt (premt ):
                   nt (γxt )                                 nt (premt )

ΔWt (premt ) = [( ∫            Pt (n)dn) − nt (γxt )γxt ] − [(   ∫         Pt (n)dn) − nt (premt )γxt ]
                       0                                         0
Now, take a 2nd order Taylor series expansion of ΔWt (premt ) around premt = γxt,
                             ∂ΔWt (γxt )                    1 ∂2 ΔWt (γxt )
ΔWt (premt ) ≈ ΔWt (γxt ) +               (premt − γxt ) +                  (premt − γxt )2
                              ∂premt                        2 ∂prem2t
ΔWt (premt ) ≈ −{[pt n′t (premt ) − n′t (premt )γxt ]}premt=γxt (premt − γxt )
                  1
                − {premt n′′                 ′              ′′
                              t (premt ) + nt (premt ) − nt (premt )γxt }premt =γxt (premt − γxt )
                                                                                                  2
                  2
                 1
ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − n′t (γxt )(premt − γxt )2                                                                (A1)
                 2
Now, sum Equation (A1) over all types,
 T                             T
                  1
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑ n′t (γxt )(premt − γxt )2
                  2
t=1                        t=1
                           n′ t
and assume that ε =                for all t
                           Nt
 T                             T
                  ε
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑ Nt (premt − γxt )2 .
                  2
t=1                        t=1




                                                                                                           67
Now, since all individuals of the same type face the same premium and have the same expected
costs, this implies that:
 T                          N
                  ε
∑ ΔWt (premt ) ≈ − ∑(premi − γxi )2                                                                                                          (A2)
                  2
t=1                        i=1


A.ii. Expression for 𝛚
In Section 3.4, we claim that the following equality holds given a set of regularity assumptions:
                                                         2                                                        2
                                 g
      ∑Aa=1 Na ∑i∈a ((γ + 1)x̅ p,a − x̅ sp,a − γx̅ a )                ∑N
                                                                       i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                                                                                           ̅ a − r̅ p,a )))
̃=
ϕ                                                            =ω
                    γ2 ∑Ni=1(xi − x̅ )2                                           ∑N
                                                                                   i=1(x i − x
                                                                                             ̅ )2
                                                                  [                                                   ]
The regularity assumptions are as follows:

ASSUMPTION 1 (UNIFORM SELECTION): Under any payment system and within each premium
category the relationship between the average cost in the gold plan and the average cost overall is
                                 g                      g       s
similar. Formally, re-writing (x̅p,a − x̅a ) as ηp,a (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ), we assume that ηp,a = η for all relevant
payment systems and premium categorizations.

ASSUMPTION 2 (PROPORTIONAL SORTING): In expressions for the incremental average cost, we
assume that the sorting of consumers across plans is similar across payment systems and premium
groups. Write gold and silver plan enrollment among individuals in premium category a under
payment system p as
                                                             g
                                                          Npa = τpa Na
                                                        s
                                                       Npa = (1 − τpa )Na
Formally, we assume that τpa = τ for all premium groups and payment systems.

ASSUMPTION 3 (PROPORTIONAL VARIANCE): We assume that the ratio of the within-plan variance
within a premium category to the total variance within a premium category is constant across
premium categories. For payment system p, premium group a, and plan-type j, let ξjpq be the ratio:
                                                                           2
                                                     ∑ j (xpi − x̅pa )
                                                      Na                          j
                                                                           2   = ξpa
                                                     ∑Na(xpi − x̅pa )
Formally, we assume that for each plan type ξjpa is constant across payment systems and premium
         j
groups, 𝜉pa = ξj .
                                                                                                                        g                      2
                                                                                                        ∑A            ̅ p,a − x̅sp,a −γx̅a )
                                                                                                         a=1 Na ((γ+1)x
We will now prove the claim given the assumptions. We start by re-writing                                                 γ2 ∑N       ̅ )2
                                                                                                                              i=1(xi −x
as
                  g                       2                    g                 g                  2
∑A
 a=1 Na ((γ + 1)x
                          s
                ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )            ∑A
                                                   a=1 Na (γ(x
                                                                                         s
                                                             ̅ p,a − x̅ a ) + (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ))
                                              =                                                                                              (A3)
         γ2 ∑N
             i=1(x i − x
                       ̅ )2                               γ2 ∑N
                                                              i=1(x i − x
                                                                        ̅ )2
                        g                     g       s
Now, if we re-write (x̅p,a − x̅a ) as ηp,a (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) we can write Equation A3 as
                  g                       2                                                               2
                                                                                           g
∑A
 a=1 Na ((γ + 1)x
                          s
                ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )            ∑A        2 2
                                                   a=1 Na [γ ηp,a + 1 + 2γηp,a ](x
                                                                                           s
                                                                                 ̅ p,a − x̅p,a )
                                              =                                                               .                              (A4)
            γ2 ∑N
                i=1(x i − x
                          ̅ )2                                    γ2 ∑N
                                                                      i=1(xi − x
                                                                               ̅ )2



                                                                                                                                              68
Now, if we invoke Assumption 1 from above that ηp,a = η for all premium groups a and all
(relevant) payment systems p, then we can re-write Equation A4 as
                  g                                   2                                                                             2
                                                                                                            g
∑A
 a=1 Na ((γ + 1)x
                          s
                ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )                           1 2η ∑A
                                                                       a=1 Na (x
                                                                                         s
                                                                               ̅ p,a − x̅p,a )
                                                                 2
                                                          = [η + 2 + ]                         .                                                                    (A5)
              γ2 ∑N
                  i=1(x i − x
                            ̅ )2                                γ   γ      N
                                                                         ∑i=1(xi − x̅)  2


                                                                    g                                                                   2
We now focus our attention on the numerator of (A5), ∑Aa=1 Na (x̅p,a        s
                                                                        − x̅p,a ) . The intuition behind
this expression is that for each individual the welfare loss is proportional to the square of the
equilibrium premium faced by that individual, which, under our assumptions, is equal to the
incremental average cost among all people in that individual’s premium group/risk pool. Summing
over individuals gives the expression.

                                                  g                                                     2
Now, we will derive an expression for ∑Aa=1 Na (x̅p,a     s
                                                      − x̅p,a ) that consists only of values available in
the claims data and variables that are constant across payment systems. We start by deriving an
expression for the incremental average cost faced by individual i in premium group a. To do this,
note that the total sum of squares for xp among all members of premium group a can be written as
within-plan components and across-plan components as follows:
                                     2                   s   g       2                                  2           g       g               2                   2
SSTa (xp ) = ∑(xpi − x̅a ) = ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) + ∑(xpi − x̅ pa ) + Na (x̅pa − x̅pa ) + Nas (x̅pa
                                                                                           s
                                                                                              − x̅pa )                                                              (A6)
                                               g
                 Na                           Na                                 Nsa


It is straightforward to show that
                                                            g g          2
 g g              2         g    g           Nas x̅pa
                                                   s
                                                      + Na x̅pa
Na (x̅pa    − x̅pa ) =     Na (x̅pa      −                           )
                                                      Na
                         s 2
 g g             2   g Na     g       s     2
Na (x̅pa − x̅pa ) = Na ( ) (x̅p,a − x̅p,a )
                        Na
Likewise,
                               g 2
                  2           Na    g                         2
Nas (x̅pa
       s
            − x̅pa ) =     s
                          Na ( ) (x̅p,a                  s
                                                     − x̅p,a )
                              Na
If we plug these expressions back into (A6), we get
                                                                                      s 2                                                g 2
                                  g 2                          s 2                g Na     g                      s    2             s
                                                                                                                                        Na    g         s   2
SSTa (xp ) = ∑(xpi −            x̅pa )       + ∑(xpi −       x̅pa )          +   Na ( ) (x̅p,a              −   x̅p,a )         +   Na ( ) (x̅p,a   − x̅p,a )       (A7)
                  g
                                                                                     Na                                                 Na
                 Na                            Nsa

It is straightforward to show that
     s 2                                  g 2                                                                         s 2                        g 2
 g Na     g                 s    2    s
                                         Na    g                       s     2                g           s    2  g Na                       s
                                                                                                                                                Na
Na ( ) (x̅p,a         −   x̅p,a )  + Na ( ) (x̅p,a               −   x̅p,a )           =   (x̅p,a   −   x̅p,a ) [Na ( )                 +   Na ( ) ]
    Na                                   Na                                                                          Na                         Na
                                          g 2                                                                           g
  g    Nas 2 g              s    2       Na    g                                  2          g                  2   Na Nas
Na (      ) (x̅p,a −      x̅p,a ) + Nas ( ) (x̅p,a                   s
                                                                 − x̅p,a                s
                                                                         ) = (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) [                            ]
       Na                                Na                                                                          Na
This allows us to simplify (A7) as follows:
                                                                                                                g
                                 g      s2                s          2                 g                2   Na Nas
SSTa (xp ) = ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) + ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) + (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) [                                                  ]
                  g
                                                                                                             Na
                 Na                            Nsa


                                                                                                                                                                     69
               g       s         2
Solving for (x̅p,a − x̅p,a )

   g       s    2    Na                   2             g 2              s 2
(x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) = ( g s ) [∑(xpi − x̅pa ) − (∑(xpi − x̅pa ) + ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) )]                 (A8)
                    Na Na                      g                s
                                     Na                         Na                  Na

Now, for premium group a and payment system p let us define δgpa and δspa as the ratios of the
variance of net costs among individuals choosing the gold and silver plans to the variance of net
costs among all individuals in the premium group, respectively:
                                                           g     2       g               2
                                             ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) = δpa ∑(xpi − x̅pa )
                                                 g                            Na
                                             Na

                                                       s         2                       2
                                             ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) = δspa ∑(xpi − x̅pa )
                                             Nsa                              Na


This allows us to re-write (A8) as
   g       s    2         g              Na                  2
(x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) = (1 − (δpa + δspa )) ( g s ) ∑(xpi − x̅pa )
                                        Na Na
                                                           Na


Recall that this expression represents the welfare loss for person i in premium group a. Because the
incremental average cost (and the welfare loss) is the same for all individuals in premium group a, we
can sum this expression over all individuals in the group to get the group a welfare loss:
      g       s    2         g              Na2                 2
Na (x̅p,a − x̅p,a ) = (1 − (δpa + δspa )) ( g s ) ∑(xpi − x̅pa )
                                           Na Na
                                                                Na


To get the total welfare loss, we need to sum over all premium groups:
 A                              A
        g           s    2              g              Na2                  2
∑ Na (x̅p,a   −   x̅p,a )    = ∑ (1 − (δpa + δspa )) ( g s ) ∑(xpi − x̅pa )                         (A9)
                                                      Na Na
a=1                            a=1                                       Na


Now, we invoke Assumptions 2 and 3 from above, allowing us to re-write (A9) as

 A                                                    A
        g           s    2                                     Na2                     2
∑ Na (x̅p,a   −   x̅p,a )    = (1 − (δg + δs )) [∑ (                   ) ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) ]
                                                           τ(1 − τ)Na2
a=1                                                  a=1                       Na


The Na2 in the numerator and denominator cancel, allowing us to further simplify

 A                                                                   A
        g           s    2                               1                        2
∑ Na (x̅p,a   −   x̅p,a )    = (1 −   (δg   +δs ))
                                                     (         ) [∑ ∑(xpi − x̅pa ) ]
                                                      τ(1 − τ)
a=1                                                                  a=1 Na


Now note that the part in brackets is now a sum over individuals. We can also plug in xpi = xi −
(rpi − x̅) and x̅pa = x̅a − (r̅ p,a − x̅) to get



                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                    2
           g           2                              1
∑A                                                     i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                       ) = (1 − (δg + δs )) (τ(1−τ)) [∑N
                   s
 a=1 Na (x
         ̅ p,a − x̅p,a                                                     ̅ a − r̅ p,a ))) ]                       (A10)


Finally, we can plug (A10) back into (A5) to get that

                  g                     2                                                   2
                                                                                g
∑A
 a=1 Na ((γ + 1)x
                          s
                ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )             1 2η ∑A
                                                         a=1 Na (x
                                                                           s
                                                                 ̅ p,a − x̅p,a )
                                                  2
                                            = [η + 2 + ]
           γ2 ∑N
               i=1(x i − x
                         ̅ )2                     γ   γ      N
                                                           ∑i=1(xi − x̅)  2

                       g                      2
∑A
 a=1 Na ∑i∈a ((γ + 1)x
                               s
                     ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )
             γ2 ∑N
                 i=1(x i − x
                           ̅ )2
                                                                                                                2
                            1 2η                         1                   i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                                                                            ∑N                   ̅ a − r̅ p,a )))
                  = [η2 +       + ] (1 − (δg + δs )) (         )
                            γ 2  γ                    τ(1 − τ)                         ∑N
                                                                                        i=1(x i − x
                                                                                                  ̅ )2

                                    1    2η                             1
And, if we define ω = [η2 + γ2 + γ ] (1 − (δg + δs )) (                      ), which does not vary across payment
                                                                      τ(1−τ)
systems, we get

                                              2                                                 2
                                                           i=1 (x i − (rp,i + (x
                                                          ∑N
                       g
     ∑A
      a=1 Na ((γ + 1)x
                               s
                     ̅ p,a − x̅p,a − γx̅a )                                    ̅ a − r̅ p,a )))
̃=
ϕ                                                 =ω
                γ2 ∑N
                    i=1(xi − x
                             ̅ )2                                    ∑N
                                                                      i=1(xi − x
                                                                               ̅ )2




                                                                                                                       71
Appendix B: Adverse Selection Measures with an Age Curve

Under some payment systems, including the one in the Marketplaces, relative prices for different age
                                                                                                   j
groups are fixed by an age curve. Effectively, an insurer sets a single base price for plan j, prem
                                                                                               ̂ p, and
then each individual is charged a price equal to the base price times an age weight, αi: premjp,i =
     j
 ̂ p αi.
prem

Then the incremental base premium is equal to
                                                                 g
                                                prem
                                                ̂ p = prem  ̂ sp
                                                      ̂ p − prem

And the individual’s incremental premium is equal to

                                                    prempi = prem
                                                             ̂ p αi

Then
                                                            2                               2
                                      ∑N
                                       i=1(prempi − γxi )             ∑N
                                                                       i=1(prem
                                                                           ̂ p αi − γxi )
                                1−                              =1−
                                        ∑N
                                         i=1(γx
                                              ̅ − γxi )2                ∑N
                                                                         i=1(γx
                                                                              ̅ − γxi)2

Then, we decompose to get
                                                                                        2
                                                              αi          α
      ∑N
                          2                ∑N
                                            i=1 ((prem
                                                  ̂ p αi −       γx̅) + ( i γx̅ − γxi ))
       i=1(prem
            ̂ p αi − γxi )                                    ̅
                                                              α           ̅
                                                                          α
1−                                   =1−
         ∑N
          i=1(γx
               ̅ − γxi )2                                 N
                                                         ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi )2


                                 2
      ∑N
       i=1(prem
           ̂ p αi − γxi )
1−
         ∑N
          i=1(γx
               ̅ − γxi )2
                                                  αi     2   α             2                 α        α
                            ∑N     ̂ p αi −
                             i=1 [(prem              γx̅) + ( i γx̅ − γxi) + 2 ∗ (prem
                                                                                     ̂ p αi − i γx̅) ( i γx̅ − γxi )]
                                                  ̅
                                                  α          ̅
                                                             α                               ̅
                                                                                             α        ̅
                                                                                                      α
                  =1−
                                                                 ∑N i=1(γx
                                                                         ̅ − γx i )2

Now, distribute the sum
                             2
      ∑N
       i=1(prem
           ̂ p αi − γxi )
 1−
         ∑N
          i=1(γx
               ̅ − γxi )2
                  =1
                                             αi     2   αi            2                           α        α
                       ∑N
                        i=1 [(prem
                              ̂ p αi −
                                             α
                                             ̅
                                                γx̅) + ( α
                                                         ̅
                                                           γx̅ − γxi ) ] + ∑α ∑Ni=1α
                                                                                          ̂ p αi − i γx̅) ( i γx̅ − γxi )
                                                                                     2 ∗ (prem
                                                                                                  α
                                                                                                  ̅        α
                                                                                                           ̅
                   −                                              N
                                                                 ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi ) 2
                                                        α
                                 ̂ p αi − ̅i γx̅) is constant. Allowing 𝜇𝛼 to be the age-weight for
And note that within an α group (prem     α
age group 𝛼,
                            2
      ∑N
       i=1(prem
           ̂ p αi − γxi )
1−
        ∑N
         i=1(γx
              ̅ − γxi )2
                 =1
                                            αi     2   α             2                    𝜇        Nα α i
                       ∑N
                        i=1 [(prem
                              ̂ p αi −                                            ̂ p 𝜇𝛼 − 𝛼 γx̅) ∑i=1
                                               γx̅) + ( i γx̅ − γxi ) ] + 2 ∗ ∑α (prem                 ( γx̅ − γxi )
                                            α
                                            ̅          α
                                                       ̅                                   α
                                                                                           ̅            α
                                                                                                        ̅
                  −                                               N
                                                                ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi )2


                                                                                                                       72
                                                                               𝜇𝛼
Now, as long as the age curve is “close” to being accurate, i.e.               ̅
                                                                               α
                                                                                    γx̅ ≈ γx̅α , then the cross term goes
                            𝜇𝛼            αi
to zero: ∑α (prem
             ̂ p 𝜇𝛼 −        ̅
                             α
                               γx̅) ∑N
                                     i=1 ( α
                                           ̅
                                             γx̅ −   γxi ) ≈ 0 so that


                                            αi               2                     αi      2
                               2       N                          N
   ∑N  (prem
          ̂      α  −   γx    )       ∑    (   γx̅ − γx   i )    ∑      ̂
                                                                      (premp αi −      γx
                                                                                        ̅ )
                                 ≈ 1−[ N α   ̅                                      ̅
                                                                                    α
    i=1        p  i         i          i=1                        i=1
1−                                                             +                             ]                       (B1)
      ∑Ni=1(γx
             ̅  −  γx i ) 2            ∑ i=1(γx̅ −  γx i )2          ∑ N (γx
                                                                       i=1 ̅ −  γx i )2


Note that as the age curve becomes less accurate, the approximation (and the measures derived from
it) becomes worse.

Now, it is clear that the first component of the expression (premium fit) is the R-squared from a
regression of x on the age weights, and all necessary pieces of data will be available in an ex ante
claims dataset. The second component requires additional derivations.

First, we need to determine how premiums are set. As before, we assume that competition forces
insurers to set base prices equal to average net costs. Then the base premium for the gold plan can
be written

                                                         g       (γ + 1)x̅pg
                                                    prem
                                                    ̂p =
                                                                     αg
                                                                     ̅

And for the silver plan
                                                                     x̅ ps
                                                       ̂ sp =
                                                       prem
                                                                     ̅s
                                                                     α

Individual gold premiums are then equal to
                                                g            g                  g   αi
                                                   ̂ p αi = (γ + 1)x̅p
                                         premp,i = prem
                                                                                    ̅g
                                                                                    α

And individual incremental premiums are equal to

                                                          (γ + 1)x̅pg x̅ps
                                           premei,a = αi (           − s)
                                                              ̅g
                                                              α       ̅
                                                                      α

                  ̅g = α
If we assume that α    ̅s = α
                            ̅, then
                                                         αi           g
                                           premei,a =       ((γ + 1)x̅p − x̅ps )
                                                         ̅
                                                         α

Now, plugging this expression back into the second component of (B1), we get that
                                           αi         2         α              g            α       2
                         ∑N
                          i=1 (prem
                               ̂ p αi −         γ x̅)     ∑N   ( ̅i ((γ + 1)x̅ p − x̅ sp ) − i γx̅)
                                            α
                                            ̅           =
                                                           i=1   α                          α
                                                                                            ̅
                             ∑N
                              i=1 (γx
                                    ̅ − γx i ) 2                      ∑ N (γx
                                                                        i=1 ̅  − γx i ) 2
                                                                                                 2
                                         αi       2         αi            g      s
                                                      ∑N
                                                             ̅ ((γ + 1 x̅ p − x̅ p − γx̅))
                         ∑N
                          i=1 (prem
                               ̂ p αi −      γx̅)      i=1 ( α        )
                                          α
                                          ̅         =
                             ∑N
                              i=1(γx
                                   ̅ − γxi )2                   ∑N
                                                                 i=1(γx
                                                                      ̅ − γxi )2


                                                                                                                        73
                                                                                           2
                                        αi       2         αi 2             g
                                                     ∑N                             s
                                                            ̅ ) (((γ + 1 x̅ p − x̅ p − γx̅))
                         ∑N
                          i=1 (prem
                               ̂ p αi −     γx̅)      i=1 ( α             )
                                         α
                                         ̅         =
                            ∑N
                             i=1(γx
                                  ̅ − γxi )2                    γ2 ∑Ni=1(xi − x̅ )2

By assumption 1 we know that

                     g              2         g              g            2                    g       2
          ((γ + 1)x̅p − x̅ps − γx̅) = (γ(x̅p − x̅) + (x̅p − x̅ps )) = [γ2 η2 + 1 + 2γη](x̅p − x̅ps )

This allows us to simplify to get
                                      αi      2                      αi 2 g            2
                     ∑N    ̂ p αi −
                      i=1 (prem           γx
                                           ̅ )          1  2η ∑N    (   ) (x̅p − x̅ps )
                                       ̅
                                       α            2
                                                = [η + 2 + ]
                                                                i=1   ̅
                                                                      α
                         ∑Ni=1(γx
                                ̅ − γxi )2             γ    γ      ∑Ni=1(x i − x
                                                                               ̅ )2
                                      αi      2                                     αi 2
                     ∑N                                          g      s 2 ∑N
                            ̂ p αi − α
                      i=1 (prem        ̅  γx
                                           ̅ )          1  2η (x
                                                               ̅ p −  x
                                                                      ̅ p )   i=1 ( ̅)
                                                                                    α
                           N                    = [η2 + 2 + ]        N
                         ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi )2             γ    γ      ∑i=1(xi − x̅)  2


which, by the derivations in Appendix A, can be written as


                    αi     2                                                                     2 1         αi 2
   ∑N    ̂ p αi −
    i=1 (prem          γx̅                                                      [∑N (x − rp,i ) ] ∑N
                    ̅ ) = [η2 + 1 + 2η] (1 − (δg + δs )) ( 1 ) i=1 i
                    α                                                                               N i=1 ( α̅)
        N
      ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi )2                γ2    γ                        τ(1 − τ)            N
                                                                                        ∑i=1(xi − x̅)2
                     α      2                                                                     2     N
   ∑N     ̂ p αi − i γx̅)
    i=1 (prem                           1    2η                           1      [∑N
                                                                                   i=1(xi − rp,i ) ] 1      αi 2
                     ̅
                     α        = [η 2
                                     +     +    ] (1  − (δg
                                                             +  δs )) (        )                       ∑   (   )
       ∑Ni=1(γx
              ̅ − γxi )2                γ2    γ                        τ(1 − τ) ∑N           ̅ )2 N
                                                                                    i=1(xi − x               ̅
                                                                                                             α
                                                                                                       i=1
                     α      2                        2     N
   ∑N     ̂ p αi − i γx̅)
    i=1 (prem                     [∑N i=1(xi − rp,i ) ] 1       αi 2
                     ̅
                     α        = ω                         ∑   (   )
         N
       ∑i=1(γx̅ − γxi )2               N
                                     ∑i=1(xi − x̅)2 N           ̅
                                                                α
                                                             i=1

                        ̃ age as a function of ϕ
This allows us to write ϕ                      ̃:
                                                                  N
                                                             1   αi 2
                                              ̃ age = ϕ
                                              ϕ       ̃        ∑( )
                                                             N   ̅
                                                                 α
                                                              i=1
And, analogously, the final measure with the age-curve can be written as a function of the normal
measure under the single premium system:
                                                                                N
                                                                             ̃1
                                                                             ϕ    αi 2
                                                  age              age
                            Payment System Fit          = 1−ϕ            =1−    ∑( )
                                                                             ωN   ̅
                                                                                  α
                                                                                i=1

The intuition behind this measure is that there are two things that affect an individual’s price with an
age curve. First, because under the age-curve payment system everyone is effectively in the same risk
pool, the variance of net costs across all individuals helps determine the base incremental premium.
Second, the age curve causes different age groups to pay different premiums while being in the same
risk pool. The age curve effectively magnifies the incremental premium for the old and shrinks it for
                                                  1      α    2
the young. This presents the need for the N ∑Ni=1 ( α̅i ) term in the payment system fit measure.




                                                                                                                    74
Appendix C: Matching and Selection Methods

          In Section 5.1 of the main text, we describe the sample of individuals whose health insurance
claims data we use to estimate our selection measures. As discussed in that section, we use a sample
of individuals from the 2012-2013 Truven Analytics Marketscan Database selected to mimic the
group of individuals eligible to enroll in the Health Insurance Marketplaces. We choose our sample
by identifying a group of Marketplace-eligible individuals in the MEPS and by using propensity score
methods to determine which individuals in the MarketScan Database look most similar to the MEPS
sample. Here, we explain this process in detail.
          The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) is a large, nationally representative survey of
the civilian non-institutionalized U.S. population with information on approximately 33,000
individuals annually. We pool MEPS data from Panels 9 (2004/5) through 16 (2011/12) and select a
population of individuals we designate as Marketplace eligible based on income, insurance, Medicaid
eligibility, and employment status using the requirements outlined in the ACA.63 Each person in
MEPS is present for two years in the data. We apply our inclusion and exclusion criteria annually,
and include an individual if they satisfy the inclusion criteria in either year. We include adult, non-
elderly individuals (19-64 in the first year of the data) in households earning at least 138 percent of
the federal poverty level (FPL) and children in households with income of at least 205 percent of
FPL. Selection criteria into the Marketplace population, as defined by the ACA, include individuals
from these groups who are, or in the case of children those who live in, a household where an adult
is: ever uninsured, a holder of a non-group insurance policy, or a holder of a self-employed
insurance policy. We ignore the premium affordability criteria, as we focus on the individual
Marketplaces and those who pay high group premiums would probably enter the special small group
market (SHOP) or remain in group coverage.64 We also exclude individuals continuously enrolled in
Medicaid for the entire year. Marketplaces apply separate risk adjustment formula to children and
adults. The adult risk adjustment formula is applied to Marketplace enrollees 21-64. In this analysis,
we focus on adults 21-64, not children.
          In order to prepare for application of a matching algorithm to the MarketScan data, we
identify a second group in MEPS, those adults who have coverage similar to that in the MarketScan
sample. Specifically, we identify the group of individuals who at any time during the two-year survey
period have employer-sponsored health insurance and work in a firm with more than 100
employees. We call this set of people the Large Group sample. Our sample selection criteria when
applied to MEPS identified 17,377 individuals with a designation of Marketplace Eligible and 19,964
with a designation of Large Group.
          The Truven Analytics MarketScan data is a large longitudinal enrollment and claims
databases from large employers and large insurers in the U.S. MarketScan data from 2010 were used

63 We used a similar data selection process in MEPS in McGuire et al (2013) and McGuire et al. (2014). Here
we add one more MEPS panel.
64 The premium affordability criterion is that individuals would also be eligible for the Marketplace if they are

covered by group insurance with premiums more than 9.5% of their income. SHOP refers to the Small
Business Health Options Program, part of the ACA.


                                                                                                               75
to calibrate the HHS-HCC risk adjustment system for Marketplaces applied beginning in 2014, and
are likely candidates for future recalibration. Here, we use MarketScan data from 2012 and 2013,
applying the same criteria used by the developers of the present Marketplace risk adjustment
formula.
         Following criteria applied in the HHS-HCC model developed for the Marketplaces for 2014
(Kautter et al, 2014), we keep observations for individuals who are continuously eligible for
coverage, enrolled in a preferred provider organization or other fee-for-service (FFS) health plan in
both the first and last month of a year,65 and have no payments made on a capitated basis. Also,
following HHS criteria, we required individuals to have both mental health and drug coverage. We
also exclude individuals who have claims with negative payments. Since we are estimating both
prospective and concurrent risk adjustment models, we require individuals continuously eligible for
FFS coverage in both 2012 and 2013. Altogether 7,072,964 individuals in MarketScan meet our
inclusion and exclusion criteria.
         From this Marketscan sample of potentially matchable eligible adults we seek a subset of the
population with characteristics similar to adults eligible for Marketplace coverage. Our approach is
to identify a set of variables available in both the MEPS and Marketscan samples and then use
propensity score matching methods to identify a sample of individuals in the Marketscan sample that
matches the joint distribution of the matching variables in the MEPS sample. The matching
variables we use are: age, gender, region, an indicator for residence in a Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA), an indicator for an inpatient admission in each of ten diagnostic categories (including a large
“other” category), the total number of inpatient admissions, and quantile of outpatient and
prescription drug spending. All variables are defined from claims and eligibility data from 2012 for
MarketScan and the first year of each MEPS two-year panel, except for the diagnostic indicators for
admissions and the count of admissions, for which we use 2012 and 2013 data for MarketScan and
both panel years for MEPS.
         To categorize admissions in MarketScan, we use the ICD-9 principle diagnosis. These are
aggregated to Clinical Classification Software (CCS) codes, and are further classified into 10 broader
categories as described in Table C1, paralleling the earlier study (McGuire et al., 2014). MEPS has a
CCS indicator for each admission. To define spending distributions, we specify unequal quantiles, in
order to capture the skewness in spending distributions. Specifically, for both outpatient and
prescription drug spending we define four unequal quantiles: 0-50%, 50-80%, 80-90%, and 90-
100%. The variables in the matching file are summarized in Table C2. Income has been inflated to
2012 dollars according to CPI-U, and health spending has been inflated to 2012 dollars according to
CPI-Medical Care.
         The propensity score model was built in the MEPS data using an indicator for being in the
Marketplace-eligible group as the outcome. All variables except the person ID, weight variables,
age, and sex were used to fit a weighted regression, where the weight was the MEPS individual
weight used to make the MEPS data nationally representative, perwt99f_y1. Age and sex were not

 Other plan types included are Exclusive Provider Organization, Non-Capitated Point-of-Service,
65

Consumer-Driven Health Plan, and High-Deductible Health Plan.


                                                                                                     76
included in favor of the age/sex category bins as described in Table C2. An indicator was also
dropped for each set of categorical variables.
        We drew a matched sample of subjects from MarketScan that had similar characteristics to
those who were Exchange eligible in MEPS. This involved the use of common variables to select
individuals in MarketScan such that the distribution of these common variables was similar in MEPS
and MarketScan. Each subject in MarketScan received a predicted value (propensity score) based on
the propensity score model estimated among MEPS subjects. We matched K= perwt99f_y1/64
MarketScan subjects to each Exchange-eligible MEPS subject based on these propensity score
values, where K is a scaled nationally-representative weight given to each MEPS observation. The
nationally representative weight was divided by 64 to yield a sample size of Marketscan subjects that
was at least 2 million. The match involved finding subjects in MarketScan who had similar
propensity score values, where the greatest distance allowed was defined by c=SD(logit(propensity
score))/4.




                                                                                                  77
Appendix D: Risk Adjustment Estimation

        As discussed in the text, we simulate insurer revenues under payment systems incorporating
both concurrent and prospective risk adjustment. In order to simulate revenues under risk
adjustment, we first have to assign risk scores to each individual. Risk scores are assigned using the
following formula:
risk pi = βzi                                                                                     (D1)
where riskpi is person i’s risk score under payment system p, zi is a vector of risk adjustment
variables, and β is a vector of weights describing the contribution of each risk adjustment variable to
the risk score. Each of these variables differs for the concurrent and prospective models. In addition
to the concurrent and prospective risk scores, we also assign each individual a risk score based on a
simple age/gender risk adjustment model. Denote the variables for model j as riskjpi , zij , and βj
where j ∈ {conc, pros, age}.
         For the concurrent and prospective risk adjustment models, zij consists of the same variables
included in the HHS-HCC risk adjustment model. The model includes a set of 18 mutually exclusive
age-by-sex indicators, 91 indicators for chronic conditions referred to as Hierarchical Condition
Categories, and 19 interaction terms capturing interactions between different sets of chronic
conditions.66 We assign each zij variable to each individual using publicly available software provided
by HHS.67 The software takes diagnoses and information on the individual’s age and sex and outputs
each of the variables in the risk adjustment model. For the prospective model we provide the
software with diagnoses from 2012, and for the concurrent model we provide the software with
diagnoses from 2013. This results in zipros and ziconc. For the age/gender model, we use the
age/gender categories output by the software when generating the prospective (2012 diagnoses)
variables, producing ziage .
         We estimate the weights for each model, βj , using the same method employed by the
policymakers who developed the HHS-HCC model. While we could have used the weights
estimated by the policymakers, they only estimated the concurrent weights, so to make sure that the
prospective, concurrent, and age/gender models were on a “level playing field” we estimate all of
the weights ourselves. We estimate the weights via a linear regression of ex post annual spending, xi,
on zij using our 2013 MarketScan Marketplace (MM) sample.68 To protect against “overfitting,” we
estimate the weights using a k-fold cross validation procedure. To do this, we randomly divide all of
the individuals in the MM sample into 10 groups. For the first group, we estimate the weights, βj , via
a linear regression of xi on zij using data from the other 9 groups. We then repeat the same
procedure for the other 9 groups. This ensures that the weights for each group are not estimated
using data from individuals in that group. The estimated weights for each model (averaged across
the 10 groups) are found in Table D1.
         Raw risk scores for the concurrent risk adjustment model were assigned according to
Equation D1. For the prospective model, we randomly divided the MM sample into 2 groups:
incumbent enrollees and new enrollees. The new enrollees were assigned the risk score implied by

66 The 91 categories consist of 74 HCCs and 17 groups of other HCCs not already included in the model.
67 The software can be found here: http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Downloads/SASsoftware.zip
68 Note that because our MM sample only includes individuals with 24 continuous months of coverage through 2012

and 2013, there was no need to “annualize” spending as done in Kautter et al. (2014). Also note that we regress total
                                          j
spending (plan paid + out-of-pocket) on zi rather than just the portion paid by the plan.


                                                                                                                        78
the age/gender risk adjustment model, and the incumbent enrollees were assigned the score implied
by the prospective risk adjustment model:
                     age
    pros       βage xi        if new
risk pi    =          pros
               βpros xi       if incumbent
Relative risk scores were calculated by dividing each individual’s raw risk score by the average raw
risk score in the population.




                                                                                                       79
Appendix E: Prediction Models for Expected Spending

           In Section 6.3, we test the robustness of two of our measures, premium fit and the measure
developed in Section 4, to various assumptions about the specification of expected spending. As
discussed in that section, we assign each individual a “predicted cost” and then re-estimate our
measures replacing ex post spending with a weighted average of the predicted cost and ex post
spending, varying the weight on ex post spending from 0% to 100%. Here, we discuss how we
estimate each individual’s predicted cost.
           We specify an individual’s 2013 predicted cost to be a linear function of the same
age/gender cells used in the HHS-HCC risk adjustment model plus indicators for the individual’s
decile of 2012 inpatient spending, outpatient spending, and prescription drug spending. More
formally, let AgeSexij be a dummy variable equal to 1 if person i falls into age/gender cell j. Similarly,
let IPij, OPij , and RXji be dummy variables equal to 1 if person i’s 2012 spending put them in decile j of
2012 inpatient, outpatient, or prescription drug spending in the population, respectively. We define
deciles in an atypical way, reflecting the large portion of individuals who have zero spending in each
category. We define the first decile as all individuals with zero spending in that category, and then we
divide the remaining individuals who have positive spending into 9 equally sized groups.
           We specify person i’s 2013 predicted spending to be equal to the predicted value from the
following regression:
                 j          j           j           j
xi = ∑ ζj AgeSexi + ∑ κj IPi + ∑ λj OPi + ∑ τj RXi
The estimated values for ζj , κj , λj , and τj are found in Table E1. We repeat this exercise to generate
predicted inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug spending, replacing xi with 2012 inpatient,
outpatient, and prescription drug spending, respectively, while keeping the right-hand side of the
equation the same.




                                                                                                        80
Table C1. 10 Groups of CCS codes

1 Heart Disease (96, 97, 100-108)
2 Injury (225-236, 239, 240, 244)
3 Cancer (11-45)
4 Mental Health and Substance Abuse (650-663)
5 Lower Respiratory Disorders (122, 127-133)
6 Diabetes (49, 50)
7 Non-Traumatic Joint and Back Disorders (201-205)
8 Pregnancy and/or Delivery (181-196)
9 Kidney Diseases (156-158, 160, 161)
10 All Other

* Numbers in the parenthesis are CCS codes included in each group.




                                                                     81
Table C2. Variables in MEPS File

Category              Variable Name           Description
Identifier            Dupersid                person id
                      Core                    Exchange eligibility, core=1 if Exchange eligible
Demographics
                      Age                     first year age
                      Sex                     first year gender, 1=male, 2=female
                      age-gender categories   a group of dummy variables, 5 year bands for people
                                              with age 21-54, and 2 year bands for people with age
                                              55-64
                      Msa                     Metropolitan Statistical Area, 1=live in MSA in first-
                                              year
                      region_northeast        1=live in northeast in the first year
                      region_midwest          1=live in midwest in the first year
                      region_south            1=live in south in the first year
                      region_west             1=live in west in the first year
Inpatient diagnosis
                      ip_ccs1_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS1 in either year
                      ip_ccs2_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS2 in either year
                      ip_ccs3_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS3 in either year
                      ip_ccs4_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS4 in either year
                      ip_ccs5_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS5 in either year
                      ip_ccs6_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS6 in either year
                      ip_ccs7_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS7 in either year
                      ip_ccs8_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS8 in either year
                      ip_ccs9_2yrs            1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS9 in either year
                      ip_ccs10_2yrs           1= has the inpatient diagnosis in CCS10 in either year
                      ip_adm_0                1= no inpatient admissions in two-year periods
                      ip_adm_1                1= 1 inpatient admissions in two-year periods
                      ip_adm_2                1= 2 inpatient admissions in two-year periods
                      ip_adm_3                1= 3 inpatient admissions in two-year periods
                      ip_adm_4p               1= 4 or more inpatient admissions in two-year periods
Health Spending
                      opexp_below50           1= outpatient spending below 50% quantile in first
                                              year
                      opexp_5080              1= outpatient spending between 50%-80% in first year
                      opexp_8090              1= outpatient spending between 80-90% in first year
                      opexp_90above           1= outpatient spending above 90% in first year
                      rxexp_below50           1= drug spending below 50% quantile in first year
                      rxexp_5080              1= drug spending between 50%-80% in first year
                      rxexp_8090              1= drug spending between 80-90% in first year
                      rxexp_90above           1= drug spending above 90% in first year

Other                 perwt99f_y1             weight of the person in the first year
                      perwt99f_y2             weight of the person in the second year

                                                                                                   82
Table D1: Estimated Risk Adjustment Model Weights

Variable                                             Prospective   Concurrent   Age/Gender
Intercept                                                1.168        0.751         1.893
Male 21-24                                              -0.973       -0.592        -1.589
Male 25-29                                              -0.944       -0.577        -1.572
Male 30-34                                              -0.865       -0.527        -1.449
Male 35-39                                              -0.772       -0.473        -1.313
Male 40-44                                              -0.693       -0.415        -1.187
Male 45-49                                              -0.538       -0.335        -0.946
Male 50-54                                              -0.334       -0.244        -0.623
Male 55-59                                              -0.079       -0.167        -0.209
Male > 60                                                0.101       -0.028         0.163
Female 21-24                                            -0.715       -0.456        -1.296
Female 25-29                                            -0.406       -0.368        -0.950
Female 30-34                                            -0.404       -0.288        -0.917
Female 35-39                                            -0.468       -0.249        -0.937
Female 40-44                                            -0.469       -0.203        -0.885
Female 45-49                                            -0.363       -0.161        -0.698
Female 50-54                                            -0.250       -0.098        -0.489
Female 55-59                                            -0.158       -0.084        -0.281
Female > 60                                            omitted      omitted       omitted
HIV/AIDS                                                 4.327        4.128
Septicemia, Sepsis, Systemic Inflammatory Response
Syndrome/Shock                                         2.497         10.118
Central Nervous System Infections, Except Viral
Meningitis                                              1.396        4.238
Viral or Unspecified Meningitis                        -0.415        2.379
Opportunistic Infections                                2.234        4.578
Metastatic Cancer                                      13.989        16.375
Lung, Brain, and Other Severe Cancers, Including
Pediatric Acute Lymphoid Leukemia                      8.922         8.544
Non-Hodgkin`s Lymphomas and Other Cancers and
Tumors                                                 3.332         4.068
Colorectal, Breast (Age < 50), Kidney, and Other
Cancers                                                2.543         4.033
Breast (Age 50+) and Prostate Cancer,
Benign/Uncertain Brain Tumors, and Other Cancers
and Tumors                                             1.392         2.311
Thyroid Cancer, Melanoma, Neurofibromatosis, and
Other Cancers and Tumors                               0.817         1.250
Pancreas Transplant Status/Complications               6.924         6.112
Protein-Calorie Malnutrition                           4.877         9.653

                                                                                         83
Liver Transplant Status/Complications                  7.538    20.413
End-Stage Liver Disease                                12.056   4.073
Cirrhosis of Liver                                     3.772    1.593
Chronic Hepatitis                                      1.178    1.670
Acute Liver Failure/Disease, Including Neonatal
Hepatitis                                              0.918    2.525
Intestine Transplant Status/Complications              0.693    10.423
Peritonitis/Gastrointestinal Perforation/Necrotizing
Enterocolitis                                          1.960    14.033
Intestinal Obstruction                                 1.980    4.562
Chronic Pancreatitis                                   4.629    4.934
Acute Pancreatitis/Other Pancreatic Disorders and
Intestinal Malabsorption                               1.243    2.309
Inflammatory Bowel Disease                             2.559    2.394
Rheumatoid Arthritis and Specified Autoimmune
Disorders                                              3.005    2.568
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and Other
Autoimmune Disorders                                   1.280    0.805
Cleft Lip/Cleft Palate                                 1.366    1.249
Hemophilia                                             35.480   29.502
Coagulation Defects and Other Specified
Hematological Disorders                                1.175    2.135
Schizophrenia                                          2.012    2.566
Major Depressive and Bipolar Disorders                 1.216    1.342
Reactive and Unspecified Psychosis, Delusional
Disorders                                              1.336    3.172
Personality Disorders                                  1.217    1.363
Anorexia/Bulimia Nervosa                               1.412    2.230
Prader-Willi, Patau, Edwards, and Autosomal
Deletion Syndromes                                     2.188    4.704
Down Syndrome, Fragile X, Other Chromosomal
Anomalies, and Congenital Malformation Syndromes       0.524    -0.027
Autistic Disorder                                      0.432     0.167
Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Except Autistic
Disorder                                               0.416    0.641
Spinal Cord Disorders/Injuries                         1.172    5.449
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Anterior
Horn Cell Disease                                      5.580    4.826
Quadriplegic Cerebral Palsy                            13.157   6.415
Cerebral Palsy, Except Quadriplegic                    0.543    0.197
Spina Bifida and Other Brain/Spinal/Nervous
System Congenital Anomalies                            1.954    -0.428


                                                                         84
Myasthenia Gravis/Myoneural Disorders and
Guillain-Barre Syndrome/Inflammatory and Toxic
Neuropathy                                              2.973    4.187
Multiple Sclerosis                                      7.549    7.111
Seizure Disorders and Convulsions                       1.645    6.366
Hydrocephalus                                           1.690    7.025
Non-Traumatic Coma, Brain Compression/Anoxic
Damage                                                  2.351    9.391
Respirator Dependence/Tracheostomy Status               7.092    27.955
Congestive Heart Failure                                2.439    2.606
Acute Myocardial Infarction                             1.688    7.322
Unstable Angina and Other Acute Ischemic Heart
Disease                                                 1.121    4.095
Heart Infection/Inflammation, Except Rheumatic          0.457    3.802
Specified Heart Arrhythmias                             1.252    2.380
Intracranial Hemorrhage                                 1.463    6.753
Ischemic or Unspecified Stroke                          1.125    2.766
Cerebral Aneurysm and Arteriovenous Malformation        1.790    4.026
Hemiplegia/Hemiparesis                                  1.419    5.021
Monoplegia, Other Paralytic Syndromes                   1.213    3.189
Atherosclerosis of the Extremities with Ulceration or
Gangrene                                                5.219    7.635
Vascular Disease with Complications                     2.108    5.210
Pulmonary Embolism and Deep Vein Thrombosis             1.556    7.699
Lung Transplant Status/Complications                    20.605   43.748
Cystic Fibrosis                                         11.712   9.934
Fibrosis of Lung and Other Lung Disorders               1.719    1.605
Aspiration and Specified Bacterial Pneumonias and
Other Severe Lung Infections                            1.656    4.496
Kidney Transplant Status                                5.451    6.380
End Stage Renal Disease                                 28.792   24.537
Chronic Ulcer of Skin, Except Pressure                  2.572    1.807
Hip Fractures and Pathological Vertebral or Humerus
Fractures                                               2.146    6.307
Pathological Fractures, Except of Vertebrae, Hip, or
Humerus                                                 0.835    1.567
Stem Cell, Including Bone Marrow, Transplant
Status/Complications                                    7.515    19.868
Artificial Openings for Feeding or Elimination          2.156    5.743
Amputation Status, Lower Limb/Amputation
Complications                                           1.833    4.036
Group 1                                                 1.379    1.038
Group 2                                                 1.472    1.443

                                                                          85
 Group 3                                                         2.451          4.953
 Group 4                                                         2.233          2.552
 Group 6                                                        13.044         10.437
 Group 7                                                         4.243          4.634
 Group 8                                                         3.497          3.156
 Group 9                                                         2.455          3.045
 Group 10                                                        6.401         10.766
 Group 11                                                        4.258          7.094
 Group 12                                                        2.618          1.596
 Group 13                                                        2.550         11.649
 Group 14                                                       12.082         30.263
 Group 15                                                        0.912          0.822
 Group 16                                                        5.234          1.178
 Group 17                                                        1.270          0.894
 Group 18                                                       -0.054          2.633
 Interaction Group M                                             0.698         -3.284
 Interaction Group H                                             0.729        -15.242
 Severe V3                                                      -0.428         -5.480
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC006                                         -1.105         22.307
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC008                                          2.582         18.013
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC009                                         -2.181         17.873
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC010                                          1.752         19.153
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC115                                         -1.812         11.488
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC135                                          1.359         20.228
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC145                                         -1.882         17.204
 SEVERE_V3_x_G06                                               -13.682         10.319
 SEVERE_V3_x_G08                                                10.617         19.391
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC035                                        -10.007          6.682
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC038                                         -1.236          2.284
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC153                                         -5.542         -0.929
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC154                                          0.356          4.570
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC163                                         -0.623          3.415
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC253                                         -2.487          8.126
 SEVERE_V3_x_G03                                                 0.510          9.427
Notes: The table reports the (average) normalized estimated coefficients for each risk adjustment
variable for the prospective (prior year diagnoses), concurrent (current year diagnoses), and
age/gender models. Coefficients are estimated using k-fold techniques described in the text to
protect against “overfitting.” The coefficients reported in the table are the average of the estimated
coefficients across the k groups. Coefficients are normalized by dividing by the average cost in the
population, so that a risk score of 2.0 implies the individual is expected to have costs equal to 2
times the average cost. The coefficients are estimated on the Marketscan Marketplace sample.




                                                                                                     86
Table D2: Federal Age Curve
                              HHS Age Curve         HHS Age Curve
               Age              Weights       Age     Weights
               21                    1        43        1.357
               22                    1        44        1.397
               23                    1        45        1.444
               24                    1        46         1.5
               25                 1.004       47        1.563
               26                 1.024       48        1.635
               27                 1.048       49        1.706
               28                 1.087       50        1.786
               29                 1.119       51        1.865
               30                 1.135       52        1.952
               31                 1.159       53        2.04
               32                 1.183       54        2.135
               33                 1.198       55        2.23
               34                 1.214       56        2.333
               35                 1.222       57        2.437
               36                  1.23       58        2.548
               37                 1.238       59        2.603
               38                 1.246       60        2.714
               39                 1.262       61        2.81
               40                 1.278       62        2.873
               41                 1.302       63        2.952
               42                 1.325       64          3




                                                                    87
Table E1: Estimated Risk Adjustment Model Weights
Variable                                  Total          IP         OP         RX
Intercept                              59809.98      25294.33    25505.81   9009.84
Male 21-24                             -2357.07       -947.43    -1486.17     76.54
Male 25-29                             -2249.62       -937.28    -1430.86     118.52
Male 30-34                             -2181.57       -913.44    -1396.04     127.91
Male 35-39                             -1930.17       -801.77    -1283.90     155.50
Male 40-44                             -1676.23       -642.00    -1185.08     150.85
Male 45-49                             -1233.19       -417.94     -973.84     158.58
Male 50-54                              -598.11        14.59      -730.04     117.34
Male 55-59                               383.19        650.33     -368.45     101.31
Male > 60                              1115.75         939.37      111.08     65.31
Female 21-24                           -2105.67       -770.53    -1373.78     38.64
Female 25-29                           -1292.77       -242.64    -1112.41     62.27
Female 30-34                           -1227.73       -378.12     -946.54     96.93
Female 35-39                           -1337.50       -701.10     -752.11     115.71
Female 40-44                           -1404.13       -845.10     -675.91     116.89
Female 45-49                           -1044.56       -733.26     -424.47     113.17
Female 50-54                            -830.54       -558.00     -380.53     107.99
Female 55-59                            -564.80       -355.27     -285.10     75.57
Female > 60                             omitted       omitted     omitted    omitted
Outpatient Decile 1                   -10313.63      -2888.16    -6701.02    -724.45
Outpatient Decile 2                   -10144.61      -2913.07    -6502.46    -729.09
Outpatient Decile 3                   -10096.14      -2948.70    -6421.25    -726.19
Outpatient Decile 4                    -9946.72      -2910.46    -6313.63    -722.63
Outpatient Decile 5                    -9806.36      -2910.45    -6168.80    -727.11
Outpatient Decile 6                    -9546.67      -2850.92    -5991.42    -704.32
Outpatient Decile 7                    -8931.24      -2604.63    -5648.41    -678.20
Outpatient Decile 8                    -8199.03      -2400.75    -5197.29    -601.00
Outpatient Decile 9                    -7105.40      -2061.19    -4518.05    -526.16
Outpatient Decile 10                    omitted       omitted     omitted    omitted
Inpatient Decile 1                    -33800.03     -18800.13   -13630.51   -1369.39
Inpatient Decile 2                    -31651.99     -17533.77   -12791.47   -1326.76
Inpatient Decile 3                    -31565.50     -17414.97   -12953.71   -1196.82
Inpatient Decile 4                    -31332.28     -17473.79   -12649.28   -1209.22
Inpatient Decile 5                    -30281.66     -16791.58   -12344.84   -1145.24
Inpatient Decile 6                    -30012.53     -16830.76   -12038.53   -1143.23
Inpatient Decile 7                    -27802.92     -15745.36   -10948.43   -1109.13
Inpatient Decile 8                    -25727.99     -14668.83   -10016.48   -1042.68
Inpatient Decile 9                    -20274.86     -11901.62    -7562.81    -810.44
Inpatient Decile 10                     omitted       omitted     omitted    omitted
Prescription Drug Decile 1            -12853.38      -2597.95    -3294.55   -6960.89
Prescription Drug Decile 2            -12965.08      -2648.13    -3363.68   -6953.27

                                                                                       88
 Prescription Drug Decile 3                    -12934.92    -2664.84     -3330.95       -6939.13
 Prescription Drug Decile 4                    -12782.24    -2621.85     -3256.70       -6903.69
 Prescription Drug Decile 5                    -12670.91    -2601.90     -3205.91       -6863.10
 Prescription Drug Decile 6                    -12323.83    -2493.62     -3054.17       -6776.05
 Prescription Drug Decile 7                    -11884.46    -2448.36     -2860.23       -6575.87
 Prescription Drug Decile 8                    -11270.02    -2296.51     -2714.10       -6259.41
 Prescription Drug Decile 9                     -9878.78    -2035.35     -2334.46       -5508.96
 Prescription Drug Decile 10                     omitted     omitted      omitted        omitted
Notes: The table presents the estimated coefficients from a regression of total or service-level 2013 spending
on the variables listed. The model is estimated on the Marketscan Marketplace sample, and it is used to
construct a measure of each individual’s 2013 predicted level of spending from the consumer’s point of view.




                                                                                                            89
