ARE WE APPROACHING AN ECONOMIC SINGULARITY?
  INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE FUTURE
            OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
              William D. Nordhaus


            WORKING PAPER 21547
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE WE APPROACHING AN ECONOMIC SINGULARITY? INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
                AND THE FUTURE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                         William D. Nordhaus

                                         Working Paper 21547
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21547


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? Information Technology and the Future of
Economic Growth
William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 21547
September 2015
JEL No. O3,O33,O4,O47

                                             ABSTRACT

What are the prospects for long-run economic growth? The present study looks at a recently launched
hypothesis, which I label Singularity. The idea here is that rapid growth in computation and artificial
intelligence will cross some boundary or Singularity after which economic growth will accelerate sharply
as an ever-accelerating pace of improvements cascade through the economy. The paper develops a
growth model that features Singularity and presents several tests of whether we are rapidly approaching
Singularity. The key question for Singularity is the substitutability between information and conventional
inputs. The tests suggest that the Singularity is not near.


William D. Nordhaus
Yale University, Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu
                   Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity?
             Information Technology and the Future of Economic Growth

                                    William D. Nordhaus1
                                     September 1, 2015

                                           Abstract

       What are the prospects for long-run economic growth? The present
       study looks at a recently launched hypothesis, which I label Singularity.
       The idea here is that rapid growth in computation and artificial
       intelligence will cross some boundary or Singularity after which
       economic growth will accelerate sharply as an ever-accelerating pace
       of improvements cascade through the economy. The paper develops a
       growth model that features Singularity and presents several tests of
       whether we are rapidly approaching Singularity. The key question for
       Singularity is the substitutability between information and
       conventional inputs. The tests suggest that the Singularity is not near.


I. Introduction

       What are the prospects for long-run economic growth? One prominent line of
economic thinking is the trend toward stagnation. Stagnationism has a long history
in economics, beginning prominently with Malthus and surfacing occasionally in
different guises. Prominent themes here are the following: Will economic growth
slow and perhaps even reverse under the weight of resource depletion? Will
overpopulation and diminishing returns lower living standards? Will unchecked CO2
emissions lead to catastrophic changes in climate and ecosystems? Have we




1The author is Sterling Professor of Economics; Cowles Foundation, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06511, USA. Mailing address: P. O. Box 208268, Yale Station, New Haven, CT 06511-8268, USA.
Email: william.nordhaus@yale.edu. The author declares no financial conflict. Version is
Singularity_090115.docx.



                                               1
depleted the store of potential great inventions? Will the aging society lead to
diminished innovativeness?2

      However, the present study looks at the opposite idea, a recently launched
hypothesis which I label Singularity. The idea here is that rapid growth in
computation and artificial intelligence will cross some boundary or Singularity, after
which economic growth will accelerate sharply as an ever-increasing pace of
improvements cascade through the economy. The most prominent exponents are
computer scientists (see the next section for a discussion and references), but a soft
version of this theory has recently been advanced by some economists as well
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014)

       At the outset, I want to emphasize that this is not a tract for or against
Singularity. Rather, the purpose is two-fold. First, I lay out some of the history,
current views, and show an analytical basis for rapidly rising economic growth.
Next, I propose several diagnostic tests that might determine whether Singularity is
occurring and apply these tests to recent economic behavior in the United States. In
the end, I hope that the analysis and tests will allow us to keep a running scoreboard
as to whether the economic universe is on a stagnationist or accelerating path … or
possibly in that middle ground of steady growth.


II. Artificial Intelligence and the Singularity

        For those with a background primarily in economics, the present section is
likely to read like science fiction. It will explain the history and a modern view about
how the rapid improvements in computation and artificial intelligence (AI) have the
potential to increase its productivity and breadth to the extent that human labor and
intelligence will become increasingly superfluous. The standard discussion in
computer science has no explicit economic analysis and leaves open important
economic issues that will be addressed in later sections.



2There is a vast literature on the potential sources of stagnation. In the modern era, the “Limits to
Growth” school was an early computerized modeling effort that produced scenarios for overshoot
and decline in living standards (see Meadows et al 1972 and Ranjens et al 1990). Gordon (2012,
2015) argues that a decline in fundamental inventions may slow growth of leading countries. Some
foresee a long period of demand-side stagnation in the wake of the long recession that began in
2008 (see Summers 2014).


                                                  2
       It will be useful to summarize the argument before giving further
background. The productivity of computers and software has grown at phenomenal
rates for more than a half-century, and rapid growth has continued up to the
present. Developments in machine learning and artificial intelligence are taking on
an increasing number of human tasks, moving from calculations to search to speech
recognition, psychotherapy, and robotic activities on the road and battlefield. At the
present growth of computational capabilities, some have argued, information
technologies will have the skills and intelligence of the human brain itself. For
discussions of the background and trends, see Moravec (1988), Kurzweil (2000,
2005), Schmid and Cohen (2013).

             The foundation of the accelerationist view is the continuing rapid
growth in the productivity of computing. One measure of the productivity is the cost
of a standardized operation in constant prices, shown in Figure 1. The costs of a
standard computation have declined at an average annual rate of 53% per year over
the period 1940-2012. There may have been a slowing in the speed of chip
computations over the last decade, but the growth in parallel, cloud, and high-
performance clusters as well as improvements in software appear to have offset
that for many applications.

       Computer scientists project the trend shown in Figure 1 into the indefinite
future. At some point, these projections move from computer science to computer
science fiction. They involve improved conventional devices and eventually
quantum computing. If high-qubit quantum computing becomes feasible, then
computing will be essentially free and the constraints on artificial intelligence will
largely be ones of software and engineering (see particularly Moravec 1988,
Kurzweil 2005).




                                           3
                                                    1.E+04


                                                    1.E+02


              Cost of computer power (2003$/MUCP)   1.E+00


                                                    1.E-02


                                                    1.E-04


                                                    1.E-06


                                                    1.E-08


                                                    1.E-10


                                                    1.E-12
                                                          1850   1900       1950   2000


Figure 1. The progress of computing measured in cost per computation per second
deflated by the price index for GDP in 2006 prices

Source: Nordhaus (2008) updated by the author using PassMark from
http://www.cpubenchmark.net/, results as of April 2014.




      One important milestone will be when inexpensive computers attain the
computing capacity of the human brain. Current estimates are that the
computational capacity of the human brain is in the range of 1018 computations per
second (sometimes measured as “flops” or floating point operations per second).
The fastest supercomputer as of 2015 was clocked at 3.4 x 1017 flops, and the speed
of supercomputers has been growing at a rate of 82% per year over the 2007-2015
period (Top500, 2015). At this rate of increase, supercomputers will reach the
upper level of 1018 flops by 2017. Computational speed does not easily translate into
human intelligence, but it would provide the raw material for scientists to work


                                                                        4
with. Others have put the date at which human intelligence would be attained by
computers from 10 to 100 years in the future.

        As computer scientists look further into their crystal ball, they foresee
artificial intelligence moving toward superintelligence, which denotes “intellect that
is much smarter than the best human brains in practically every field, including
scientific creativity, general wisdom and social skills.” (Bostrum, 2006)

      At the point where computers have achieved superintelligence, we have
reached the “Singularity” where humans become economically superfluous in the
sense that they make no difference to economic performance. Superintelligent
computers are the last invention humans would make, as described by the
mathematician Irving Good (1965) as follows:

       Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass
       all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of
       machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine
       could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an
       “intelligence explosion,” and the intelligence of man would be left far behind.
       Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need
       ever make.

This point at which the rate and breadth of technological change will be so great is
sometimes call the “Singularity” in a sense analogous to passing over the event
horizon into a black hole – here the event horizon is where the forces of computer
intelligence leave no room for human interventions.3

      Before ourselves falling into the event horizon of accepting the Singularity
hypothesis, we need to clarify some of the implicit economic assumptions that lie
behind it. This will be the purpose of the next section.




3The notion of Singularity of superintelligence is often attributed to John von Neumann. The only
reference to “Singularity” comes in an appreciation by Stanislaw Ulam to von Neumann in 1958:
“One conversation centered on the ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the
mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential Singularity in the
history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue.” Ulam
(1958).


                                                 5
III. Historical perspectives on Singularity in economics

      Societal Singularity is a recent theory, but concerns about replacement of
humans by machines have been persistent for more than two centuries. The
concerns tended to focus on displacement of particular skills or occupational
categories. With the rise of computers, the major concern has been the replacement
of unskilled labor by computers.

       Macroeconomic concerns about rapid productivity growth and “automation,”
as it was called in the early days, focused first on the potential for satiation of human
wants and a crisis either of unemployment or superabundant leisure. This was the
theme of J.M. Keynes’s essay, “The Economic Prospects for Our Grandchildren”
(1930). He wrote:

      Suppose that a hundred years hence we are eight times better off than today.
      Assuming no important wars and no important increase in population, the
      economic problem may be solved. This means that the economic problem is
      not—if we look into the future—the permanent problem of the human
      race….Must we not expect a general “nervous breakdown”? Thus for the first
      time since his creation man will be faced with his real, his permanent
      problem—how to use his freedom from pressing economic cares, how to
      occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest will have won for
      him, to live wisely and agreeably and well.

Although we are close to the hundred-year mark, perhaps humans are suffering
from a nervous breakdown, but there is no sign that humans have found themselves
satiated with goods or overendowed with leisure.

        One of the most impressive attempts to deal with the macroeconomic
implications of computerization was Herbert Simon in “The Shape of Automation”
(1965). Simon was unique in the intellectual history of the accelerationist debate in
being a pioneering computer scientist as well as a leading economist. Writing a half-
century ago, he was a self-described “technological radical.” He wrote, “I believe
that, in our time, computers will be able to do anything a man can do.” (p. xii-xiii) At
the same time, he was not what I will call an accelerationist, holding that “computers
and automation will contribute to a continuing, but not greatly accelerated, rise in
productivity.” (p. xiii) As we show below, it seems likely that if, as Simon believed,
computers can duplicate humans, then productivity would greatly accelerate.


                                           6
       Simon’s analysis was very simple, relying on what is known as the “factor
price frontier.” This is the concept that, under highly stylized conditions, factor
rewards can be summarized by the equation:

       waL  (1  r ) aK = 1

In Simon’s analysis (similar to the second model used below), output is produced by
labor and capital, there are constant returns to scale, there is one good that can be
used for either consumption or new capital. In this equation,
 w  wage rate, aL = labor input coefficient, aK = capital input coefficient, and r = real
interest rate. The price of goods is normalized to one.

       Simon correctly argues that technological change affects unit inputs by
lowering the labor and/or capital input coefficients so that at existing factor prices,
the cost of production with the new technology is less than 1. Using the notation of
the factor-price equation (where subscripts 0 are original factor prices, and
asterisks denote the new technology) with an innovation, w0 aL  (1  r0 ) aL < 1.
                                                             *              *


Under competition, factor prices will rise until the cost will be equal to the price at 1,
so in equilibrium, an innovative technology will raise either wage rates or interest
rates or both.

       Simon does not deploy a formal model for his critical next step. He argues that
labor is inelastically supplied while capital is elastically supplied (so r is close to
constant). This leads him to conclude that future changes in technology from
automation will lead to nearly constant interest rates. He further argues
(mistakenly) for a near-constant share of capital in national income, which then
implies that “almost all the increased productivity will go to labor.” (p. 15)

       Simon’s pathbreaking analysis pointed to an important result about factor
prices – that it impossible in the neoclassical framework to have both a falling rate
of profit and immiseration of the working classes (a formal analysis is in Samuelson
1957). But his analysis was unable to deal with the potential of rapidly growing
capital productivity in the case where the share of capital in national output is rising
rather than stable.

     There is remarkably little writing on Singularity in the modern
macroeconomic literature. While trend productivity growth has clearly risen from


                                            7
the period before the Industrial Revolution, the workhorse models today assume
steady productivity and real income growth into the future.

      The potential for accelerating economic growth has arisen occasionally as a
curiosity in the economic literature. Explosive growth was explored in studies on
endogenous technological change. (Similar but less explosive results are found in
the “AK model,” but those are not examined here.) The key feature of the
endogenous technology models is that knowledge is a produced input. One
formulation would be that knowledge growth is proportional to the inputs into the
production process. Here At is technological knowledge, Yt is output, a fraction λ of
output is devoted to inventive inputs, dAt / dt is knowledge growth, and its growth is
a function of inventive inputs, as in dAt / dt   (Yt )  . To simplify this greatly,
assume that output is produced with labor, and that labor grows at a constant
growth rate n. If β > 1, which corresponds to increasing returns to inventive inputs,
then the growth rate of output tends to infinity (see particularly Romer 1986, 1990).

      The prospect of unbounded growth rates has not been taken seriously in the
empirical growth literature for both technical and empirical reasons. The empirical
reasons are that productivity growth has not accelerated in recent years. The
technical reason is that it has unattractive assumptions about the knowledge-
generation function, particularly the lack of diminishing returns to inventive inputs.
For useful discussions of the shortcomings of the model, see Jones (1995, 1995a).

       A final potential source of rising productivity growth comes from the benign
version of Baumol’s cost disease. Baumol and his co-authors emphasized the
potential for low-productivity-growth industries to have rising costs, and potentially
to slow aggregate economic growth (see Baumol and Bowen 1965, Baumol 1967,
Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff 1985). However, depending upon the substitution
parameters, the impact could be to raise rather than lower aggregate productivity
growth. This might be called Baumol’s cost euphoria and will be examined below.


IV. Singularity from the demand and the supply side

       To begin with, I emphasize that rapid growth in the productivity of computers
or information technology such as shown in Figure 1 has no necessary implication
for aggregate economic growth. The reason is that the economy does not run on bits
alone, either on the demand side or the supply side. Consumers may love their

                                               8
iPhones, but they cannot eat the electronic output. Similarly, at least with today’s
technologies, production requires scarce inputs (“stuff”) in the form of labor, energy,
and natural resources as well as information for most goods and services.

      The question for the long run is the substitution properties between
information and other stuff such as conventional, non-informational inputs or
outputs. Here is the general result:

      Major insight: If information and conventional stuff are elastic substitutes
      either in consumption or in production, then growth will rise, perhaps
      extremely rapidly. However, if information and conventional stuff are
      inelastic in production and consumption, then rapid improvements in
      information technology will eventually be irrelevant to the economy.

       Put more precisely, and as will be developed below, Singularity can arise from
either the demand or the supply side. Both are the results of substitution toward
high-growth inputs or outputs and away from stagnant inputs or outputs. On the
demand side, Singularity would occur if preferences are such that consumer
spending move increasingly toward high-productivity-growth industries as relative
prices change. This is Baumol’s cost euphoria. On the supply side, Singularity would
occur if production has sufficient substitutability that the input bundle moves
toward rapidly improving information capital as growth proceeds. Both, as we will
see, will lead to rapid growth over time. I begin with the demand side and then move
to the supply side.

V. The Baumol effect and demand-side Singularity

      I begin by describing the forces from the demand side that might lead to rapid
growth. These are the mirror image of Baumol’s cost disease, and will be called
Baumol’s cost euphoria. The idea at the simplest level is that sectors with relatively
rapid productivity growth have relatively rapid price declines and will therefore
generally experience a rise in relative consumption levels. The key question for the
growth in aggregate consumption is whether those sectors with relatively rapid
productivity growth have rising or falling shares in nominal expenditures.




                                          9
      Baumol and his co-authors appeared to hold that the trend pointed toward
stagnationism because of rising expenditure shares of stagnant sectors. For
example, Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff (1985), p. 815-816 concluded as follows: 4

          The [real] output shares of the progressive and stagnant sectors have in fact
          remained fairly constant in the postwar period, so that with rising relative
          prices, the share of total expenditures on the (stagnant) services and their
          share of the labor force have risen dramatically.…

Unfortunately, their analysis was made with old-style (Laspeyres) output indexes,
so the calculations using real output shares were biased.

       We can use a two-sector example to understand Baumol-type Singularity.
Assume that the economy has two sectors– call them information and handicrafts –
produced by a single composite input. The rates of productivity growth are very
high and very low, respectively. According to the Baumol mechanism, the relatively
prices will be changing rapidly in favor of information.

       If demand substitution is inelastic (technically, if the elasticity of substitution
in demand between to two goods is less than one and the income elasticities are
unity), then handicrafts eventually dominate expenditures, and the rate of growth of
consumption will approach the rate of growth of productivity in the handicrafts
sector. By contrast, if substitution is elastic (the elasticity of substitution in demand
between to two goods is greater than one with unit income elasticities), then
information dominates consumption, and the growth in consumption tends to the
growth rate in the information sector. So here the critical parameter is the elasticity
of substitution in the demand between the two kinds of goods.

          Analysis of the Baumol effect

       A more rigorous statement is as follows for the two-sector example. Assume
that there are two consumption goods (C1 and C2) that are information and
handicrafts, respectively. Outputs are competitively produced with a single
exogenously growing composite input, L. Productivity growth is assumed constant
in each industry (at rates h1 and h2). Preferences are homothetic with a constant
elasticity of substitution between the two goods, σ. Given these assumptions, prices
in the two sectors are falling at rate h1 and h2 relative to wages. Total consumption

4   Op. cit., p. 815-816.


                                             10
as measured by an ideal index (such as the Tornqvist index) will be growing at rate
 1 h1   2 h2 , where 1 and 2 are the relative expenditure shares of the two goods.
With some work we can show that the ratio of the shares of the two industries is
changing at the logarithmic rate of (h 1h 2 )(  1).

       So for example, if σ = 1.25, h1 = 10% per year and h2 =0% per year, then the
share of information will be rising at approximately 10  0.25 = 2.5% per year
(percent, not percentage points). Or to take a specific example of computers
(formally, Information processing equipment), the relative price decrease over the
last decade has been about 10% per year relative to other consumption. The share
of computers in 2000 was approximately 2.0%. If the elasticity of substitution
between computers and other goods was 1.25, then the share would grow to 2.6%
after a decade. This is almost exactly the actual pattern over this period.

      We can also easily calculate the Baumol effect for the two sector example. The
growth in consumption (in the superlatively measured Tornqvist index) equals the
weighted growth of consumption,  1 (t )h1 (t )   2 (t )h2 (t ) . Under the assumptions in
the last paragraph, the growth in the index of consumption over the decade would
increase from 1.20% to 1.26% per year, or an increase of 0.006% per year per year.
This is equal to the change in shares times the difference in the growth rates
(change in shares = 0.06 %-points per year  growth rate difference of 10% per
year). Note that with elastic substitution the growth rate in this model tends toward
the growth in the high-productivity-growth industry. The share of computers tends
to one, so the weighted growth rate tends toward 10% per year in the simple
example.

       If we move to a multi-sector example, the analysis is analogous but more
complicated. The analysis is laid out in Nordhaus (2008) and will be summarized
here. Assume the growth rate of the ideal index of consumption is given by an
almost ideal demand system in which consumption growth in each sector is a
function of the growth in relative prices of the good and an income effect. If we
assume that the income elasticities are uncorrelated with the changes in relative
prices, then the average change in shares for each good will be determined by the
average change in the relative price of that good times the price-elasticity of demand
minus 1 times the relative price movement. So this is the analog of the two-sector
example where the price-elasticity replaces the elasticity of substitution. The


                                            11
aggregate effect is then the weighted average of this term plus errors due to
exogenous growth rates plus income effects.


VI. Empirical tests of demand-side Singularity

       We can test for the Baumol or demand-side Singularity by looking at the
relationship between the shares of different goods in total consumption and the
trends in relative prices.

       In a prior study of trends of major industries for the U.S., I determined that
there was a tendency for industries with falling relative productivity and rising
relative prices to have rising nominal shares and shares of employment. This was
consistent with the trend identified by Baumol and his colleagues cited above of the
cost disease. I concluded, “There is a negative association of productivity growth
with the growth in nominal output. In other words, stagnant industries tend to take
a rising share of nominal output; however, the relationship is only marginally
statistically significant.”

       An alternative approach for this study focuses on consumption as that seems
a more natural place to examine substitution patterns. We can test the impact of the
composition by examining whether those sectors that have the most rapid decline in
prices tend to have rising or declining shares in expenditures.

       The BEA has developed long-term data on consumption expenditures and
prices starting in 1929. These data include 89 distinct sectors ranging in size from
owner-occupied housing to food provided on the farm. In our analysis, we take a
simple regression of the log of expenditure change on the log of price change for
different periods. The results are shown in Table 1, which looks at both sub-periods
and the total period over the 1929-2012 record.

       While there is no consistent and significant sign, the general pattern is for
positive coefficients, indicating inelasticity of substitution. If we examine the entire
period from 1929 to 2012 or pooled sub-periods of the total period, there is a clear
indication of inelasticity. There are no sub-periods with significant coefficients that
indicate elasticity, although the last period shows elasticity with marginal
significance. These results are consistent with the analysis in Nordhaus (2008),
which focuses on production patterns.


                                           12
       An alternative would be to look at major information-technology sectors,
shown in Table 2. These are elusive to define, but for this purpose I included
telecommunications, video services, information equipment, internet services,
telephone, and photographic services. This new economy group shows a different
pattern from the totality of industries. The prices of the new economy services in
total have been declining steadily, and the shares have risen during all subperiods.
However, a statistical analysis of the 6 new-economy sectors along the lines of Table
1 does not show a consistent pattern of elastic demand.




Period                      Coefficient         t-statistic       Observations   P-value

1929-1948                             0.25               1.10               48        0.012
1948-1969                             0.90               2.59               54        0.012
1969-1990                             0.06               0.37               83        0.714
1990-2013                            -0.17              -1.58               90        0.118
1929-1969                             0.15               0.50               48        0.617
1969-2012                            -0.02              -0.26               83        0.796
1929-2012                             0.44               2.04               48        0.047

Pooled, all subperiods                0.19               2.10              246        0.037

Table 1. Coefficient of log price in expenditure equation
This table reports a regression of following:
  Δln[expendi (t)]  0  1Δln[pricei (t)/pricei (t)]+ i (t).
Note that a positive price indicates that a rising relative price increases the
expenditures share and is therefore an indication of inelasticity of demand.




                                                13
                                                     Change in     Change in
                                                      prices         share


                  Telecommunications                      -2.9%           -1.3%
                  Video equipment                        -11.1%           -1.8%
                  Information equipment                  -21.1%            4.7%
                  Internet                                -5.4%           24.7%
                  Telecommunications                      -6.3%            3.3%
                  Photographic equipment                  -3.2%           -6.1%

Table 2. Share and price change for new economy sectors
This table shows the average change in relative prices and in the shares of six
information-technology sectors.



       The size of the Baumol stagnation effect is small for the estimates that are
provided here. We show in Figure 2 a calculation of the Baumol effect for selected
well-measured industries.5 This is the sum of the changes in shares times the
logarithmic price change. A positive number indicates a cost disease. For these
industries, the Baumol effect subtracts 0.098% per year from aggregate
consumption growth if gasoline is included, and subtracts 0.015% per year without
gasoline. In both cases the effect is small, but in neither case is the effect to increase
economic growth. The dominant effect of gasoline arises because it not only has a
large share but is extremely price-inelastic in the short run.




5 These are selected both because the price indexes and real output measures are reliable and
because they show a relatively large composition effect with large differences in output growth. The
industries are Food, Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing, Electricity,
Pharmaceutical products, New motor vehicles, Motor vehicle fuels, Telecommunication services,
Internet access, Video and audio equipment, Information processing equipment, Magazines,
newspapers, books, and stationery, and Tobacco. They comprise about one-third of GDP in 2012.


                                                14
                       Baumol effect for selected industries
     1.2%

     1.0%
                            All      Without gasoline
     0.8%

     0.6%

     0.4%

     0.2%

     0.0%
             1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
     -0.2%


Figure 2. Baumol effect for selected well-measured industries
This shows the net effect of changing shares on growth in consumption (measured
as a Tornqvist index). A positive number indicates in this graph indicates reduced
overall growth. This signifies that on average industries with rising relative prices
have rising shares of expenditures. Therefore, a positive number is a stagnationist
force.



       These results indicate that the Baumol effect of changing shares in
consumption is a force for stagnation rather than acceleration. In plain English, the
sectors that are experiencing the most rapid price declines are also experiencing
slight declines in expenditure shares. This tendency means that growth in aggregate
consumption would slow over time if the underlying technological trends were
stable within individual industries. However, the impact of changing shares on the
aggregate growth in consumption has historically been extremely small – in the
order of minus 0.1% per year. The reason is that the shares of high- and low-
productivity-growth industries have not changed appreciably over the last two
decades. So this first test indicates no sign of demand-side Singularity.

                                          15
VII.   Supply-side Singularity

       A second accelerationist mechanism involves substitution in production. We
can again start with a two-sector model, similar to that of Simon above, to motivate
the analysis. In this model, there are two factors of production and a single
composite output that can be used for either consumption or investment. One input
is either fixed or slowly growing, and it is usefully thought of as labor. The other is
produced capital, which is produced by a rapidly improving technology. The natural
produced input to consider is information technology, and will be identified in
practice as “information capital.”

       In the simple two-input model, analogous to the Baumol effect, the key
parameter is the elasticity of substitution in production. If the elasticity of
substitution is greater than one, then information capital takes an increasing share
of inputs, and the growth of productivity rises. If the elasticity of substitution is less
than one, then information capital’s share in production declines over time, and the
growth in aggregate productivity tends toward the growth of the relatively fixed
factor, labor. In the unit-elastic Cobb-Douglas case, productivity growth tends to a
constant rate.

       There are clearly other cases as well, such as multiple goods and multiple
inputs, which are discussed below. However, the analysis is extremely simple in the
one-good/two-input case. And the empirical tests are relatively clean. So it seems
best to start here and see what we find.

       To develop the model further, we use a standard closed-economy neoclassical
growth model with a constant savings rate and with a particular modification.
Assume that labor is growing at a constant rate n and that all technological change is
capital-augmenting at a constant and rapid rate. In effect, we consider only
information capital as an endogenous variable and sweep all other capital into labor.

       The model is straightforward. Output and capital growth are given by

(1) Yt  F ( At Kt , Lt )
(2) Kt / t  sYt   Kt

So the growth of output is:


                                            16
(3)    g (Yt )  t [ g ( At )  g ( Kt )]  (1  t ) g ( Lt )

Here,  t is the elasticity of output with respect to capital, which would equal
capital’s share of national income in a perfectly competitive economy. Combining
the equations, we get:

(4)       g (Yt )  t [ g ( At )  sYt / Kt   ]  (1  t )n

          For a Cobb-Douglas economy, t    constant , which implies that

(5)    g (Yt )  n  [ / (1   )]g ( At )

This is a straightforward balanced growth path.

       For our purposes, the more interesting cases are where the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor ( ) is bounded away from one. In the case of
inelastic production (    1) , the competitive share of capital tends to zero, and
the growth rate tends to the stagnationist case of zero growth in per capita output:

(6)       g (Yt )  (1   )n  n

      The accelerationist case is where the elasticity of substitution is bounded
above one (    1) . The algebra in the general case is complicated, so simplify by
assuming that the rate of growth in information productivity is a constant h.
Because production shows elastic substitution, the elasticity of output with respect
to capital (or the competitive share of capital) tends to one. As   1, production
becomes linear in capital, or Yt  cAt Kt , so Yt / Kt  ceht . This leads to the Singularity
result:

 (7)      g (Yt )  h  sYt / Kt    h  s(YT / KT ) eh (t T )    .

       The surprise here is that the growth of output is unbounded. In effect, the
economy is just information produced by information capital, which is produced by
information, which in turn is producing information ever faster every year. We don’t
need to push this result to the absurd limit. Rather the three key points are (1) the
value share of information capital in the input bundle is tending toward unity, (2) as
a result the contribution of information capital is rising, and finally (3) because
information capital is a produced input, the growth rate of output is accelerating.
                                                     17
A numerical example

       This result is so surprising that we can perform numerical analyses to make
sure it is not a mistake or a possibility for distant millennia. To get a flavor for the
dynamics, perform a simple simulation. Assume that labor is constant, that all
technological change is capital-augmenting at 10% per year, and that the elasticity
of substitution between labor and information capital is 1.25. Figure 3 shows a
typical simulation of the share of capital and the growth rates of output and wages.
Growth goes off the charts after about 70 years.


                                         200%
                                                    Share of capital
                                         180%       Growth rate of output
      Growth rate of output and wages,




                                         160%       Wage growth
             share capital (%)




                                         140%

                                         120%

                                         100%

                                         80%

                                         60%

                                         40%

                                         20%

                                          0%
                                                0    20           40               60   80   100
                                                                            Year

Figure 3. Simulation of a growth model with rapid technological change in capital
and elastic substitution between labor and capital.



   A second surprising result concerns the impact of rapidly growing growth on
wages. Wages grow increasingly rapidly in this specification: wage growth reaches
200% per year in year 80. Capital eventually gets virtually all the cake, but the
crumbs left for labor – which are really small parts of the increasingly large
mountains of cake –are still growing at a phenomenal rate. The exact timing

                                                                       18
depends upon the parameters, but with elastic production and rapid capital
productivity, the pattern always looks like Figure 3.

VIII. Tests for Supply-Side Singularity

   Are we heading for the Singularity? If so, how far off is our rendezvous?
Optimists believe that superintelligence could be achieved by the middle of the 21st
century based on the progress in computing power. We can apply the economic
models developed above to examine observable economic variables that can
distinguish supply-side accelerationism from stagnation or steady growth.

   The Simon-style growth model has several predictions that are consistent with a
Singularity in economic growth. Among the most salient are the following six
diagnostic signals.

   1. The most important implication of the accelerationist growth model is that
      output growth is rising. This will show up as either rising labor productivity
      (LP) growth or rising total factor productivity (TFP) growth. While this is
      clearly a central prediction, it does not provide a strong differential diagnosis
      because the rising productivity growth could come from other sources.
   2. A second important and cleaner differential diagnosis concerns the share of
      information capital in inputs. The clear prediction of the accelerationist view
      is that the nominal capital share in the value of inputs is rising, and should
      eventually rise to one.
   3. A third prediction is that the relative prices of investment and capital goods
      are falling relative to output. Indeed, the price decline of total capital should
      trend toward the price decline of information capital as information capital
      gradually invades the entire economy.
   4. A further prediction is that the real capital-output ratio should be rising at a
      very rapid rate.
   5. The share of information capital in total capital in the accelerationist
      economy will be growing toward one.
   6. The rise in wages will depend upon the elasticity of substitution between
      capital and labor. In cases of plausible elasticities, wage growth becomes
      extremely rapid.

   We will discuss below measurement issues that may cloud the data in a fashion
that hides the accelerating growth of productivity. While the discussion suggests
that this is to date empirically relatively small for information-based output, this

                                          19
criticism would apply primarily to test 1 and 6. Tests 2 and 5 are based on nominal
measures and are largely unaffected by errors in price and output measurement.
Tests 3 and 4 both require that the price of investment (or capital) relative to output
is accurately measured. This is similar to the reliability of tests 2 and 5 but is
probably less open to bias because some of the output-price bias will be offset by
investment-price bias since these are the same goods. In any case, at least two of the
tests (2 and 5), and perhaps the most useful ones, are largely immune to
measurement problems.

Test 1: Accelerating productivity growth?

      A first question is whether productivity growth is accelerating. Figure 4
shows an estimate of multi-factor productivity for the U.S. private business sector.
The 1949-2014 period shows an average MFP growth rate of 1.3% per year. MFP
growth has been on a slight declining trend over the period. The period since 1990
saw a rise in productivity until the mid-2000s, but then growth has declined. The
average MFP growth over the 1990-2012 period is slightly below (-0.03 + 0.03 %
per year) the earlier period.

      The summary on MFP growth is that there is no sign of any acceleration of
multifactor productivity as of the most recent data for the U.S. Even with the
potential biases discussed in the next section, it would be difficult to discern any
noticeable upturn in TFP growth.




                                            20
                                                    Multifactor productivity growth
                            4



                            3
        Percent per year




                            2



                            1



                            0



                           -1
                                1950      1960        1970         1980        1990        2000   2010
                           Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. Five-year moving average.


Figure 4. Multifactor productivity growth, 1949-2014
Multifactor productivity measures total output growth minus total input growth
using a Tornqvist index.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics at www.bls.gov.



Test 2: Rising share of capital?

      A central diagnostic forecast of Singularity is a rising share of capital in
national income. (Note that the “share” in the growth model is the elasticity of
output with respect to capital. That parameter is not observable, so we use the
income share, which would equal the elasticity under competitive conditions.)

        Figure 5 shows the trend in the income share of capital (strictly speaking, all
income other than labor compensation) over the period 1948-2013. One sectoral
concept is the entire economy, while the other is the non-farm business sector. The
latter is better measured and provides a cleaner definition of capital income than
the former, which includes a large component in owner-occupied housing as well as
government capital. Note that capital income in the data include many elements

                                                                 21
other than the net return to capital, such as depreciation, royalties on minerals,
interest income, income of proprietors, and some labor income. Some analysts
suspect that a substantial part of the increase in capital’s share is either
mismeasurement or is due to housing, so the estimates here are probably an upper
bound on the share change (Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin 2103 and Rognlie 2015).

             .42
                                                 Capital share: Entire economy
                                                 Capital share: Non-farm business
             .40


             .38


             .36


             .34


             .32


             .30
                   45   50   55   60   65   70   75    80   85    90   95    00     05   10   15




Figure 5. Trend in share of capital for US in overall economy and non-farm business
sector
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics



       Table 3 shows regressions of the shares in the two sectors with and without
breaks in trend in 1990 and 2000. Both show a small upward trend of about 0.2
percentage points per year since 1990 and close to 0.5 percentage points per year
since 2000. This trend is supportive of the accelerationist hypothesis at the raw
data level. However, since we do not have a good understanding of the reasons for
the rise in capital’s share, further research would be necessary to determine
whether there is a link between this rise and a rapid rise in capital productivity, and
particularly in information capital.

      Projecting future trends such as those of capital’s share in Figure 5 is clearly a
primitive exercise. However, projections are useful to give some perspective on
when the Singularity might become more apparent. Our simulation model shown in

                                                      22
Figure 2 indicates that the acceleration in output becomes quite apparent (with the
growth rate crossing the 20% per year threshold) when capital’s share crosses the
80% level. At the rate of increase from a forecast using the regression model
underlying the last set of estimates in Table 3 (+0.47% per year), the 80% rate will
not be reached until 2100 (plus or minus 20 years depending on the sample period
of the regression). So while the test is positive, Singularity is apparently many
decades in the future using this diagnostic test.

                                    Trend    Trend since 1990 Trend since 2000
           Non-farm business
                Coefficient        -0.04%
                t-statistic         -3.71

                 Coefficient       -0.15%         0.21%
                 t-statistic        12.33         12.33
                 Coefficient       -0.10%                         0.42%
                 t-statistic        -9.66                          8.59

           Overall economy
                Coefficient         0.03%
                t-statistic          2.84

                 Coefficient       -0.03%         0.19%
                 t-statistic        -2.40          5.77

                 Coefficient       -0.02%                         0.47%
                 t-statistic        -2.20                          8.98

Table 3. Regression coefficients for equation with share of capital as dependent
variable and time and breaks in the trends in 1990 and 2000. Number under
coefficient is t-statistic.

Source: Data from sources in Figure 5.



Test 3: Accelerating decline in capital goods prices?

      The prices of investment and capital goods have been falling relative to
output (GDP), consumption, and labor for most of the last half-century. Since the
accelerationist hypothesis holds that the price of capital goods will be falling ever

                                            23
more rapidly, we examine the price of various definitions of capital goods. To
calculate the price index, I take the ratio of the current-cost capital stock to the
quantity index of capital developed by the BEA.6

        Figure 6 shows the rate of decline for seven important series. This shows the
decline in the price of the capital stock relative to labor’s wages, this being the
important variable for the production function in the growth model. While capital
prices have continued to decline, there has been no significant change in the last
decade; indeed all six sectors show either the same or slower relative price declines
in the last period.

       From the point of view of the accelerationist hypothesis, the key variable to
look at is the decline in the price of all capital goods relative to wages. For this
purpose, we examine all “private fixed assets,” which include business structures
and equipment, residential structures, and intellectual property. The relative price
decline here (shown as the first set of bars in Figure 6) has been 1.4, 1.5, and 0.5
percent per year for the periods 1960-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2012. Clearly,
these are not only small declines but not accelerationist at all.




6Current-cost estimates of capital stocks are derived by converting the constant-dollar estimates of
stocks to the prices of the current period. Chain-type quantity indexes are computed using the
Fisher quantity index formula. The ratio should be the Fisher ideal price index under the self-
reflexive property of Fisher indexes. See BEA (2003).




                                                24
               25%
                          1960-1990
               20%        1990-2000
                          2000-2012
               15%

               10%

                5%

                0%




Figure 6. Rate of decline of capital prices relative to labor’s wage rate.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis.



Test 4: Rapidly rising capital-output ratio?

       Another important diagnostic concerns the real capital-output ratio. As is
seen in the growth model sketched above, the rapidly rising quality of capital
implies that the capital stock (in efficiency units) will rise increasingly rapidly
relative to output. The rise will come because informational capital grows rapidly,
and also because informational capital takes a larger share of the capital stock. 7

       Table 4 shows the trends in the real capital-output ratio since 1960. The
capital stocks shown are different components of private capital corrected for
quality by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and other government agencies. The
output measure is gross business product. The first line shows that the overall

7The relationship between tests 3 and 4 is the following. Let pK = the price of capital goods, V =
current-cost value of capital, K = quantity of capital, pY = the price of output, Y = quantity of output,
and Q = nominal value of output. Quantities in both cases are measured as nominal values divided
by price indexes. The real capital output ratio in test 4 is K/Y = (pKK/pYY)/(pK/pY), while the price
relatives in test 3 are pK/pY. So the difference is the share of capital in national output.


                                                   25
capital-output ratio has been falling slowly over this period, although it has been
close to constant in the last subperiod. Looking at the information capital
components, these have been rising relative to output, but only at modest rates. In
any case, the overall contribution of informational capital has been too small to lead
to a rising capital-output ratio.


   Sector                                           1960-1990   1990-2000   2000-2012

   Private fixed assets                                 -0.5%       -1.2%       -0.2%
   Equipment                                             0.7%        0.4%        0.6%
    Nonresidential equipment                             0.6%        0.4%        0.6%
     Information processing equipment                    6.4%        5.5%        3.9%
      Computers and peripheral equipment                   na       21.1%        6.3%
   Intellectual property products                        4.3%        4.4%        4.1%
    Nonresidential intellectual property products        2.0%        2.1%        1.8%
     Software                                           18.2%       10.2%        3.2%
     Research and development                            2.5%        0.4%        1.4%

Table 4. Growth rates of the real capital output ratio, different sectors

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis.



Test 5: Share of information capital rising?

       A further test is that informational capital should be a rising share of the
capital stock. Indeed, as the economy approaches the Singularity, the share of
informational capital should approach 100%.

      Table 5 shows the shares of informational capital in total private assets.
(These are the current-cost net stock of private fixed assets.) It is clear that
informational capital is becoming a more important part of the capital stock. The
growth is particularly strong in intellectual property products. Surprisingly,
computers and information processing equipment have seen a declining share over



                                               26
the latest period. So this test would appear to conform to the Singularity view,
although there is still a long way to go before these sectors dominate investment.

       To determine whether an inflection point is in the near future, we project the
share of informational capital into the future at the growth rate for the 1960-2012
period. Our numerical example suggests that the growth rate begins to accelerate
when the capital share exceeds 80% of income. Our extrapolation of Table 5
indicates that this would not occur within the next century, so the Singularity
appears at best distant by this test.


      Sector                                           1960      1990     2012

      Equipment                                          17.6%    19.2%    15.7%
       Nonresidential equipment                          17.3%    19.0%    15.5%
        Information processing equipment                 1.8%      4.5%     3.7%
         Computers and peripheral equipment              0.0%      0.7%     0.5%
      Intellectual property products                     2.8%      4.6%     6.4%
       Nonresidential intellectual property products     2.8%      4.6%     6.4%
        Software                                         0.0%      0.7%     1.6%
        Research and development                         1.5%      2.8%     3.6%

Table 5. Share of information capital in total capital

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis



Test 6: Rising wage growth?

       A final test is that wages should be growing more rapidly. The extent of
acceleration of wages will depend upon the elasticity of substitution, but as long as
the elasticity is not too high, wages will grow at a rate close to that of output per
hour worked.

      Table 6 shows trend for two alternative measures of real compensation, for
the entire economy and for the private business sector. (Note that this divides by
the output price index rather than the consumer price index, so the results differ

                                              27
from those usually cited. Additionally, this measure is compensation including
fringes rather than just wages or wages and salaries.) Real wages accelerated
slightly in the first decade of the new economy (1990-2000), but growth then
slowed over the subsequent period. So the real wage test clearly fails to show any
signs of Singularity.


              Increase in real wages (annual average % per year)

                                    Total economy      Private business
              Period
              1960-1990                  1.8%                2.3%
              1990-2000                  2.0%                2.6%
              2000-2013                  1.1%                1.5%

Table 6. Increase in real product wages, different periods
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of Labor Statistics




IX. Summary of Tests for Singularity

       Table 7 shows a summary of tests of Singularity. Five of the seven tests are
negative for Singularity while two are positive. We can also calculate for the two
positive tests how far we are from the point of Singularity. I define Singularity as a
time when the economic growth rate crosses 20% per year. Using simple
extrapolation for the two positive tests, the time at which the economy might
plausibly cross the Singularity is 100 years or more.




                                           28
                                                    Result of   Time until
           Source                                     test      singularity
           Demand side
               Baumol effect on shares of high-
               productivity industries              Negative          x

           Supple side
              Test 1: Accelerating
              productivity growth                   Negative          x

               Test 2: Rising share of capital                  100 years + 20
                                                    Positive        years
               Test 3: Increasing decline of
               capital goods prices                 Negative          x
               Test 4: Rapidly rising capital-
               output ratio                         Negative          x
               Test 5: Share of information
               capital rising                       Positive     > 100 years
               Test 6: Rising wage growth           Negative          x

Table 7. Results of the Singularity tests and time to Singularity

Source: Earlier figures and tables.




                                               29
X. Interpretations and Elaborations

   The tests and theory above raise several issues of interpretation. I consider the
question of minimal resource inputs, heterogeneous labor, measurement problems,
the social structure of a Singular economy, and concerns about evil agents.

         a. Violations of basic physical laws

   An objection to all of this analysis that immediately comes to mind is whether
accelerationism violates basic laws of nature. All processes need minimal energy,
and energy is limited if superabundant. Other potential limiting resources are fresh
and clean water, oxygen, and exotic minerals to build machines. Some would invoke
the second law of thermodynamics, which holds that increasing order must be offset
by increasing disorder elsewhere.

    The issues here are too deep to be adequately treated in the present study. While
some resources are indeed needed for all production processes, the inputs can in
theory be reduced sharply, and potentially as rapidly as production increases. This
is vividly illustrated for computation. An early computer was the ENIAC (shown at
the upper left in Figure 1). It required about 150 kW to operate, or approximately
55 watts per floating point operation (flop). A desktop computer today requires
about 75 watts to produce 1013 flops. While this is only an approximation, this
calculation indicates that the energy requirement for computation has declined by a
factor of 10,000,000,000,000. In recent years, the energy use has declined at
approximately the rate of improvement of computers.

   So the bottom line on resources is that at least in theory improvements in
material use and miniaturization can overcome the physical limitations on
accelerating growth. As Richard Feynman said, “There is plenty of room at the
bottom.”

         b. Heterogeneous labor in the growth model

   The Simon-type growth model of information and productivity analyzed above
has the shortcoming that it assumes heterogeneous capital and labor.
Heterogeneous output is considered in the Baumol example. We consider in this
section the interesting implications of adding heterogeneous labor to the analysis.



                                         30
   Economists have generally found that skilled workers are more adaptable to
rapid changes in information technology than middle-skilled, manual, or unskilled
workers. The process is summarized nicely by Autor (2014):

   “Routine tasks” [are ones] that follow an exhaustive set of rules and hence are
   readily amenable to computerization. Routine tasks characteristic of many
   middle-skilled cognitive and manual activities, such as bookkeeping, clerical
   work and repetitive production tasks. Because the core tasks of these
   occupations follow precise, well-understood procedures, they are increasingly
   codified in computer software and performed by machines. This force has led to
   a substantial decline in employment in clerical, administrative support and, to a
   lesser degree, production and operative employment… [135]

    We can extend the Simon model to include heterogeneous labor by considering
some polar cases. Assume as one example that unskilled labor is a perfect substitute
for informational capital, while the other input is skilled labor. As above, skilled
labor has high but imperfect substitutability with capital. We then directly apply the
analysis above. The marginal product and wage of unskilled labor fall proportionally
with capital prices. More realistically, if there is a reservation wage for unskilled
labor, say because of income support, the unemployment rate of unskilled labor
rises to unity, and the employment of unskilled labor approaches zero.

    As a historical analog, consider the fate of human adding machines of the
nineteenth century. As explained in Nordhaus (2007), there was a revolution in the
employment of human calculators around 1900. In his book on calculation, Orton
writes, “To be able to add two, three or four columns of figures at once, is deemed by
many to be a Herculean task, and only to be accomplished by the gifted few, or in
other words, by mathematical prodigies.” (Orton 1866, p. v) “Lightning calculators,”
the prodigies who could add up columns of numbers rapidly, were at a premium.
Indeed, John D. Rockefeller was a champion lightning calculator before he turned to
being a champion monopolist. The advent of calculators changed all that. Aside from
quiz shows, there is zero demand today for lightning calculators. Such would be the
fate of unskilled labor in this simple two-labor model as we approached the
Singularity.

    What of skilled labor? In the simple two-labor-input model described here,
skilled labor would have the same future as labor in the one-labor Simon model. Its
share in national income would tend to zero as capital took over the economy. But

                                         31
skilled labor would be fully employed, and its wages would begin to rise rapidly as
shown in Figure 1. We would see social and economic polarization with a
vengeance.

   Perhaps the pattern of impacts would be reversed, as is suggested by Autor
(2014). Perhaps the work of skilled labor would be substituted by information
technology while unskilled labor would be the only group not susceptible to
substitution by information technology. Perhaps, patients would be diagnosed and
treated by computers rather than doctors. Classes would be taught online by
computerized instructors and virtual teaching assistants rather than Ph. Ds. Central
banks would finally, in Milton Friedman’s vision, be run by a computerized rule
rather than imperfect discretion. Workers just hook up the monitors, plug in the
machines, and make sure that the Fed has the latest operating system. Since the skill
ladder is a two-way street, skilled workers would abandon their professional
degrees as the skilled jobs disappear and all humanity becomes unskilled
apprentices to computers. We are then back to the Simon model, but in this case
with the one factor being unskilled labor. Surprisingly, there is much greater labor-
market equality than in the first example.

         c. Measurement issues

   One concern about the empirical tests of accelerationism is that the major
increases in productivity are hidden by poor measurement. Hal Varian, the chief
economist at Google, argues that there is an explosion of productivity underway
because of the devices, apps, and other digital innovations coming out of Silicon
Valley. “There is a lack of appreciation for what’s happening in Silicon Valley
because we don’t have a good way to measure it.” (WSJ 2015).

   The issues involved in measuring the contribution of new and improved goods
and services have been carefully studied and raise several thorny issues. The most
important shortcomings arise from improper measurement of the prices for goods
that are either new or show rapid improvement. (Recall that “real output” growth is
nominal output growth less the rate of change of the price of the good. So if price
increases are overstated, as is the case with improper quality adjustment, then real
output increases will be understated.) Additional questions arise when goods are
free.

   We can illustrate the issue for the case of cell phones. At the beginning, these
involved a new good, so it would not be possible to have an accurate comparison of

                                         32
how much the price of “cell phone service” was falling. If cell phones are introduced
late in the product cycle, the increases in consumer welfare from the falling prices
will be missed. A second issue involves quality change. It is difficult to measure the
improvement in quality (which implies a fall in price of a standardized good)
because of the rapid improvements in cell phone design along with the many
bundled applications. A third issue arises because many of the services provided on
a smartphone (such as having a flashlight, map, weather forecast, and the like) have
zero prices. Under the conventions of national output accounting, the value of those
services is also zero because goods are valued at their market prices. The presence
of these factors lies behind the contention of Varian and others that actual (as
opposed to measured) productivity is actually growing rapidly.

    Business v consumer uses

    What are we to make of these contentions? We can quickly dispose of one part of
the issue, which involves the use of IT by companies. To the extent that IT is
increasing the productivity of companies as an incorrectly measured intermediate
good, then that would show up as productivity for the industry. If for example free
Internet services vastly increased the ability of airlines to utilize their fleet more
efficiently, then measured productivity growth of airlines would rise. So the IT going
as intermediate products or capital services to business would not lead to
underestimated aggregate productivity growth.

    What are the proportions of consumer versus business in information
technology? We can look at detailed input-output tables to get an idea of the
magnitudes. Taking the major eleven IT sectors,8 we can divide gross output into
that part going to consumers and that going to businesses. The former are included
as personal consumption expenditures, while the latter are investment or
intermediate purchases. Looking at the input-output structure for 2002, there were
$1,217 billion in domestically purchased IT goods and services (about 11% of GDP).
Of these, 77% were purchased by businesses, 23% were by consumers. The major
consumer service was telecommunications, where consumers purchased about half


8The sectors were Computer and peripheral equipment, Audio, video, and communications
equipment, Semiconductors and electronic components, Electronic instruments, Software
publishers, Cable networks and program distribution, Internet publishing and broadcasting,
Telecommunications, Data processing services, Other information services, and Computer systems
design and related services. Data are from www.bea.gov.


                                              33
of total output. Given these numbers, it seems likely that most of the productivity
impacts of IT will be captured in either business output or business productivity.

   Considering the IT purchases by consumers, these comprise about 2½ percent of
GDP. If productivity growth for these products were underestimated by 10 % per
year (surely an upper bound on the number), aggregate productivity would be
underestimated by 0.025 % per year. This hardly makes a dent on the productivity
slowdown over the last decade.

    Measurement of consumer surplus

    A second issue is the provision of free services to consumers (free services to
businesses are covered by the last section and can be excluded). Perhaps the
consumer surplus from provision of these services is enormous. This is an ancient
problem in national income accounting. If the price is zero, then the marginal value
to consumers is zero, and that is the customary valuation. But perhaps there is great
value to the inframarginal units, and these were not available in earlier periods.

   Two issues arise here. First, we should ask how the value of the unmeasured
value of IT compares with the new products and services of earlier periods. Gordon
(2012, 2015) persuasively argues that the unmeasured value of inventions of the
19th and 20th century dwarfs the value of IT. We might point to examples like indoor
plumbing, anesthetics, electricity, radio, motor vehicles, lighting, photography,
antibiotics, and even the lowly zipper as examples of goods with vast unmeasured
consumer surplus.

   Second, the issue of including consumer surplus raises insuperable obstacles of
measurement. If we follow this road, we run into the “zero problem” that arises
when we attempt to measure total utility or happiness rather than value using
marginal values. Here is an explanation of the issue using the example of the
consumer surplus of water.9 Suppose that we want to measure the total value of
consumption of water services in the national accounts. We then need to integrate
the marginal surpluses between some “zero” level and current consumption. But
what do we mean by zero? Is it literally zero water consumption in which case
consumer surplus is equal to the value of life itself and is infinite? Or is it the level of

9This is drawn from William Nordhaus, “Principles of National Accounting for Nonmarket
Accounts,” in Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven Landefeld, and William D. Nordhaus, Eds., A New
Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2006, pp. 143-160.


                                                 34
consumption in pre-industrial times? If so, should pre-industrial times relate to the
1700s, when water in the U.S. was plentiful? Or to the time when humans first
crossed the Bering land bridge, when ice was plentiful but water was scarce? If we
attempt to measure total surpluses for necessities in too many areas with low
“zeroes,” we will undoubtedly find ourselves with multiple infinities of the value of
critical goods and services. Once we travel even a few thoughts down this road, we
rapidly come to the conclusion that, for purposes of measuring output and income,
we had best rely on the standard approach of using marginal valuations in all
sectors.

   Time use as a complement for free goods and services

   A final way of looking at the role of IT as unmeasured output is to examine the
time spent on information activities (this approach was pioneered by Goolsbee and
Klenow 2005). We might employ this approach to estimate consumer surplus
(despite our reservations), or more appropriately in our context it might be used to
estimate the errors introduced by mismeasurement of prices and outputs of these
services.

    There are comprehensive data on time use by Americans collected since 2003.
While it includes email use, it does not include total Internet use. Figure 7 shows the
history of household use for televisions (reduced by a factor of 20), telephone, and
email. This does not include a comprehensive survey on Internet use, unfortunately.
Two points are striking. One is that popular culture has a vastly exaggerated notion
of how much time on average Americans spend on email. The figure here is 0.03
hours per day, orders of magnitude less than the 3 hours a day watching television.
A second striking feature is that the time spent on email is actually declining over
the last decade, while TV time has been slightly rising.




                                          35
                             0.20
                             0.18          Watching TV/20          Telephone      Email
                             0.16
           Minutes per day
                             0.14
                             0.12
                             0.10
                             0.08
                             0.06
                             0.04
                             0.02
                             0.00
                                    2003   2005      2007        2009      2011    2013



Figure 7. Time use of electronic media by US household

Source: American Time Use Survey (atus.bea.gov)

 _______________________

    Based on other less comprehensive data, these numbers are likely to be seriously
biased underestimates of Internet use. Data from Nielson (2015) adjusted for over-
reporting suggests that people spend slightly under two hours a day on the Internet,
roughly equally divided between computers and smartphones. Here is an
illustrative calculation. Assume the average person spends 1.5 hours a day on the
Internet. Further suppose that time is valued at the marginal post-tax hourly
compensation of $18 per hour, and that it replaced other time valued at half of that
value (say watching TV or housework). Further assume that one-third of the
Internet time is for personal rather than business or instrumental purposes. Then
for the 245 million persons in the adult population, the total unmeasured value
would be slightly above $135 billion in 2015, or about 0.7% of GDP. If this
unmeasured value started at zero in 1995, then productivity growth over this
period would be underestimated by 0.04% per year. While these numbers are just
suggestive, they indicate that compared to other goods and services, the




                                                            36
unmeasured value of “apps and gadgets” is unlikely to make a substantial dent on
overall growth of national output and productivity.10

           d. The euthanasia of the laboring classes

   As growth accelerates with superintelligent capital, the rate of return on capital
and real interest rates fall to zero. This was an outcome envisioned by J.M. Keynes in
a chapter from The General Theory (Keynes 1935).

     [There would be an] increase the stock of capital up to a point where its
     [marginal product] had fallen to a very low figure…. Now, [this] would mean the
     euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative
     oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital. Interest
     today rewards no genuine sacrifice, any more than does the rent of land.

      I see, therefore, the rentier aspect of capitalism as a transitional phase which
     will disappear when it has done its work. And with the disappearance of its
     rentier aspect much else in it besides will suffer a sea-change. It will be,
     moreover, a great advantage of the order of events which I am advocating, that
     the euthanasia of the rentier, of the functionless investor, will be nothing sudden,
     merely a gradual but prolonged continuance of what we have seen recently …
     and will need no revolution.

   Keynes’s analysis predated the pioneering work on production functions that
clarified the key role of the elasticity of substitution on factor shares, and as a result
he saw only one of several possible outcomes. Keynes’s scenario described a growth
path in which the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital is less than
one; accumulation in the inelastic case therefore drives not only the rate of return to
zero but also the share of capital to zero.

    However, the accelerationist case leads to the opposite outcome, where the share
of capital goes to unity. In this outcome, we thus would see the euthanasia of the
laboring classes in the sense that all of income eventually goes to the owners of

10 Goolsbee and Klenow (2005) have substantially higher numbers because they estimate a non-
linear demand curve for Internet services, which has a much higher intercept and higher
inframarginal values. They also do not correct for business usage. If their estimate is corrected for
non-consumption usage, the estimate here is about one-half of their linear estimate. The Nielson
estimate is reduced by about one-third to reflect the higher estimate of TV usage in the Nielson
compared to the ATUS estimate of time spend watching TV.


                                                  37
capital. Workers would be well-paid but would control a vanishing part of national
output through the fruits of their labor. However, as long as corporations own most
of the capital, and people or human institutions (including governments through
taxation) own corporations, capital income will indirectly flow through to humans.
Since national income equals national output, average income will be growing
increasingly rapidly.

    How this will play out in terms of individual equality or inequality goes beyond
economics to politics, tax and benefit systems, and the nature of dynastic savings. It
is clear that the Piketty condition for growing inequality (that r > g) definitely will
not hold, but beyond that little is clear. Will the incomes be captured by the
Schumpeterian classes – the innovators who design machines and write software
for them? Or by the wealthy who subvert institutions to increase their wealth? By
those who are the last humans who are complements rather than substitutes for
information, perhaps as gardeners or butlers? Perhaps by those who control the
intelligent machines before they take over?

   Fortunately, the euthanasia of the laboring classes is far off and will flash
sufficient warning signals so that, if it does occur, humans will have time to
contemplate the social structures of such an era.

          e. Autonomous agents in warfare

    The sector which has invested most heavily and is most advanced in substitution
of information technology for conventional inputs (outside of IT itself) is in warfare.
There are very powerful incentives to develop autonomous and robotic activities
because of the winner-take-all nature of military technologies and because the
dangers of war make nations averse to risking lives.

   The key word in the last paragraph is autonomous. The US Department of
Defense defined these as “weapon systems that, once activated, can select and
engage targets without further intervention by a human operator.” This definition
suggests the ability of such systems to assess the situational context on a battlefield
and to decide on the required attack according to pre-programmed rules and
battlefield information.

   Some of the key developments in IT warfare are the following. Drone aircraft
such as the Predator have the capability to identify targets and fire missiles. Daksh is
a battery-operated remote-controlled robot on wheels that can recover and defuse

                                           38
bombs. Guardium is a small Israeli tank-like surveillance vehicle that operates
completely autonomously to guard the Gaza border. PackBots are a series of small
robots used to identify bombs, collect air samples in hazardous sites, and sniff for
explosives. SWORDS is a small American tank-like vehicle that is remote controlled
at this time. The Samsung SGR-A1 is a South Korean military robot sentry, armed
with sensors and a machine gun, that can operate autonomously and is designed to
replace human counterparts in the demilitarized zone at the South and North Korea
border. More advanced versions of these are under development. It is possible to
envision that a rogue nation will develop genetically engineered super-humans to
fight alongside robots.

    While the automation of warfare is only in its infancy, we can examine the impact
to date. The share of compensation in total output for US defense spending has risen
slightly over the last two decades, so on that test the accelerationist hypothesis is
not supported. Battle deaths in recent wars (in Iraq and Afghanistan) are down
sharply from earlier wars (Vietnam and Korea), and this is undoubtedly in part due
to better information and smart weapons. The success of cyberweapons is (as far as
we can tell from public sources) minimal, perhaps setting back Iran’s nuclear
program by a year or so. So the bottom line on the role of IT in military technologies
is that it has not moved substantially toward replacing human labor.

         f. The complication of evil agents

       The discussion up to now has ignored one major specter haunting
information technology – the presence of increasingly powerful and dangerous
hacking, cybercrime, and evil agents in cyberspace. The parallel here is to the game-
theoretic dynamics of the development of more powerful weaponry in warfare.
Even though the innovators (of bows and arrows, machine guns, tanks, and nuclear
weapons) have an initial advantage over their adversaries, the advantage is
temporary. Even the most closely held technological secret slowly diffuses around
the world.
       We must therefore assume that those who develop the engines of
superintelligence will eventually find they are sharing them with evil agents – with
their military, commercial, and political adversaries. And as we have learned
through the Snowden leaks, our own governments are likely to be in the vanguard of
use and potential abuse of advancing computational powers. The issues concerning



                                         39
the ethics and law of armed conflict with autonomous agents (discussed in the last
section) have been extensively debated (see for example Singer 2009).

       A further complication is this: The development of superintelligence raises a
new concern not contemplated before in the development of political and military
spying and weapons. We must be concerned that to the list of adversaries will be
added the superintelligent machines themselves. If we are to take seriously Good’s
description above of superintelligence, we must consider that superintelligent
machines will develop their own ethical systems, laws, sanctions, and governance.
       If we consider how much moral, legal, and economic systems have evolved
over the last millennium at the slow pace of human thinking, then we would have to
believe that superintelligent reasoning would evolve many times more rapidly once
it began to tackle the thorny issues that human struggle with. Just as theologians
worry whether a powerful God is just by our primitive human standards, we should
also worry about whether superintelligent machines will be just – or more
accurately, whether their sense of justice will resemble our own. If they become
irritated with humans, what will they do? Will the superintelligent treat us as flies to
wonton boys?
       So the point here is that the approaching Singularity is not one of
unambiguous economic and social improvement. This was appreciated by nuclear
weapons developer John von Neumann (1955):

      Useful and harmful techniques lie everywhere so close together that it is
      never possible to separate the lions from the lambs. This is known to all who
      have so laboriously tried to separate secret, classified science or technology
      (military) from the open kind; success is never more nor intended to be more
      than transient, lasting perhaps half a decade. Similarly, a separation into
      useful and harmful subjects in any technological sphere would probably
      diffuse into nothing in a decade.




                                          40
XI. Concluding Comments on Singularity

       So the conclusion as of today is that “the Singularity is not near.” This
conclusion is based on several tests that place the theory of the Singularity within
the context of economic growth theory. Much of the computer science literature on
the Singularity examines the growth in specific sectors or processes (such as flops
or storage), but the economic perspective insists that the growth must be weighted
by the economic valuation of the good or service.

       The major insight of economics is to emphasize the heterogeneity of both
inputs and outputs of the economic system. It is surely true that technological
change in production of raw computation has been phenomenal over the last
century. We can process information at a speed that is millions of billions times
faster and cheaper than was possible for the fastest lightning calculators of the
nineteenth century.

        Suppose that trend continues indefinitely, including the ability to devise ever
more ingenious software and artificial intelligence (AI). For increasing capabilities
of computers to lead to the Singularity would require that AI could encompass all
human activities, not just add numbers, solve equations, play chess, and interpret
speech; but also lay hands on patients, read bedtime stories to children, and change
flat tires.

       Whereas computerized AI might do many routine tasks, the non-routine tasks
are less easily programmed, and they evolve over time in response to the economic
environment, including the environment of artificial intelligence itself. Particularly if
we view the world with potential superintelligence as a competition between
humans and machines, then we definitely would need a team of humans to consider
how to protect humans from machines. We routinely spend 5% of output on
defense, and this might rise to a much larger number when faced with a more
powerful enemies like superintelligent machines. So one occupation at least would
survive into the Era of Singularity.

       Whether other sectors and tasks would be immune to the rise of
superintelligence is an open question. The empirical question is the degree of
substitutability between information and human labor. Given the complexity of both
humans and jobs, it is unlikely that the question can be decided a priori. The
analysis above indicates that information and computers will come to dominate the

                                           41
economy only if the information inputs or outputs take a rising share of
consumption or inputs. This requires that the expenditure shares or input cost
shares of information rise over time, which in turn requires that the volume of
expenditures or inputs rise more rapidly than the relative prices fall. We can call
these the “substitution tests” to be concise.

       There are six tests on the supply side and one test on the demand side. The
conclusions from the empirical tests proposed here is that the substitution tests fail
for five of seven tests and succeed for two of the five tests. However, the growth
trajectories of the variables which pass the test (the share of capital in total income
and the share of informational capital in total capital) are relatively slow. Projecting
the trends of the last decade or more, it would be in the order of a century before
these variables would reach the level associated with the growth Singularity.

       The conclusion is therefore that the growth Singularity is not near. However,
this conclusion is tentative and is based on economic trends to date. Those who are
concerned about the coming Singularity can use these tests on an ongoing basis to
test whether the trends are changing in a favorable or unfavorable direction.




                                           42
References

Autor, Davis (2014). “Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth,”
Proceedings of a conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Re-
Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics, 129-177, available at
https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2014/2014autor.
pdf?la=en.

Barrat, James (2013). Our Final Invention: Artificial Intelligence and the End of the
Human Era, St. Martin's Press. Kindle Edition.

Baumol, William J. and William G. Bowen (1965). “On the Performing Arts: The
Anatomy of their Economic Problems.” The American Economic Review, 55 (2), 495-
502.

Baumol, William J. (1967). “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy
of Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, 57 (3), 419-420.

Baumol, William J. Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff (1985).
“Unbalanced Growth Revisited: Asymptotic Stagnancy and New Evidence,” The
American Economic Review, 75 (4), 806-817.

BEA (2003). U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Fixed
Assets and Consumer Durable Goods in the United States, 1925–99. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, September, available at
http://bea.gov/national/pdf/Fixed_Assets_1925_97.pdf.

Bostrom, Nick (2006). “How long before superintelligence?” Linguistic and
Philosophical Investigations, 5 (1): 11–30.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee (2014). The Second Machine Age: Work,
Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. WW Norton & Company,
New York.

Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2013). “The Decline of the U.S.
Labor Share,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 1-52.



                                           43
Good, Irving J. (1965). “Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine,”
Advances in Computers, (6) 99, 31-83.

Gordon, Robert J. (2012). “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation
Confronts the Six Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper No. 18315, August.

Gordon, Robert J. (2015). “Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View.” American
Economic Review, 105 (5), 54-59.

Jones, Charles I. (1995). “R &D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of
Political Economy, 103 (4), 759-784.

Jones, Charles I. (1995a). “Time Series Tests of Endogenous Growth Models,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2), 495-525

Goolsbee, Austan and Peter J. Klenow (2005). “Valuing Consumer Products by the
Time Spent Using Them: An Application to the Internet,” American Economic Review,
96 (2), 108-113.

Keynes, J. M. (1933). “Economic possibilities for our grandchildren,” in Essays in
Persuasion, W.W. Norton, New York, 358-73.

Keynes, J. M. (1935). General theory of employment, interest and money. Macmillan,
London.

Kurzweil, Ray (2000). The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human
Intelligence. Penguin Group, US. Kindle Edition.

Kurzweil, Ray (2005). The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology,
Penguin Group, US. Kindle Edition.

Malthus, T. R. (1817). An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. Johnson,
Fifth Edition.

Meadows, Donella et al. (1972). The Limits to Growth. Potomac, Washington, DC.

Meadows, Donella H., Dennis L. Meadows, and Jørgen Randers (1992). Beyond the
Limits. Post Mills, Vermont: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.

Moravec, Hans (1988). Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.


                                          44
Nielson (2015). Nielsen, “More Time On Internet Through Smartphones Than PCs,”
downloaded from http://marketingland.com/nielsen-time-accessing-internet-
smartphones-pcs-73683.

Nordhaus, William D. (2007). “Two centuries of productivity growth in computing.”
The Journal of Economic History, 67 (1), 128-159.

Nordhaus, William D. (2008). “Baumol's diseases: a macroeconomic perspective.”
The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 8 (1), 1 – 39.

Orton, Hoy D. (1866). Lightning Calculator and Accountant’s Assistant, accessed
through Google Books at
https://books.google.com/books?id=kinZAAAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=%2
2lightning+calculator%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CC4QuwUwAGoVChMIwcPcyMfJxwI
VRVs-Ch38Lwn3#v=onepage&q=%22lightning%20calculator%22&f=false.

Rognlie, Matthew (2015). “Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, March, forthcoming.

Romer, Paul M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of
Political Economy, 94 (5), 1002-37.

Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political
Economy. 98 (5), S71-S102.

Samuelson, Paul A. (1957). “Wages and Interest: A Modern Dissection of Marxian
Economic Models,” The American Economic Review, 47 (6), 884-912.

Schmidt, Eric and Cohen, Jared (2013). The New Digital Age: Transforming Nations,
Businesses, and Our Lives, Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition.

Simon, Herbert A. (1965). The Shape of Automation for Men and Management,
Harper and Row, New York.

Singer, Peter (2009). Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the 21st
Century, Penguin, New York.

Summers, Lawrence (2014). “Low Equilibrium Real Rates, Financial Crisis, and
Secular Stagnation,” in Martin Neil Baily and John B. Taylor, eds. Across the Great
Divide: New Perspectives on the Financial Crisis, Hoover Institution Press.



                                          45
Jones, Charles I. and Paul M. Romer (2010). “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas,
Institutions, Population, and Human Capital, “American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2 (1), 224-245.

Top500 (2014). Top 500 Supercomputers, online at http://www.top500.org/.

Ulam, Stanislaw (1958).”Tribute to John von Neumann, 1903-1957,” Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 64 (3), part 2, 1-49.

WSJ (2015). Wall Street Journal, Timothy Aeppel, “Silicon Valley Doesn’t Believe U.S.
Productivity Is Down,” July 16, accessed only at
http://www.wsj.com/articles/silicon-valley-doesnt-believe-u-s-productivity-is-
down-1437100700.




                                         46
