                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DARK COSTS, MISSING DATA:
                        SHEDDING SOME LIGHT ON SERVICES TRADE

                                            James E. Anderson
                                               Ingo Borchert
                                              Aaditya Mattoo
                                              Yoto V. Yotov

                                          Working Paper 21546
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21546


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2015




Research for this paper has been supported in part by the governments of Norway, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom through the Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development, and by the UK Department
for International Development (DFID). The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of
the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent, or any of the aforementioned
individuals or institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by James E. Anderson, Ingo Borchert, Aaditya Mattoo, and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dark Costs, Missing Data: Shedding Some Light on Services Trade
James E. Anderson, Ingo Borchert, Aaditya Mattoo, and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 21546
September 2015
JEL No. F10,F14

                                            ABSTRACT

A structural gravity model is used to estimate barriers to services trade across many sectors, countries
and time. Since the disaggregated output data needed to flexibly infer border barriers are often missing
for services, we derive a novel methodology for projecting output data. The empirical implementation
sheds light on the role of institutions, geography, size and digital infrastructure as determinants of
border barriers. We find that border barriers have generally fallen over time but there are differences
across sectors and countries. Notably, border effects for the smallest economies have remained stable,
giving rise to a divergent pattern across countries.


James E. Anderson                                  Aaditya Mattoo
Department of Economics                            The World Bank
Boston College                                     amattoo@worldbank.org
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER                                           Yoto V. Yotov
james.anderson.1@bc.edu                            School of Economics
                                                   Drexel University
Ingo Borchert                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104
Department of Economics                            and ERI-BAS
University of Sussex                               yotov@drexel.edu
Brighton, BN1 9SL, United Kingdom
I.Borchert@sussex.ac.uk
1         Introduction

Given the economic importance of services trade, surprisingly little is known about trade
costs in services. Transparent border measures like tariﬀs are less important in services than
relatively opaque regulations that aﬀect trade, for example, in professional and financial
services. In addition, transport costs do not take the form of well-defined freight rates but
hard-to-measure forms such as the costs of electronically delivering business services. The

absence of explicit measures of either protection or transport costs suggests that an analytical
model of trade flows can help reveal information about barriers to services trade.
        We use the structural gravity model and a newly constructed dataset on production and
trade in services to provide much new information about inferred services trade barriers.

The paper makes three principal contributions. First, we estimate a rich pattern of border

barriers at an unprecedented level of detail, varying by country, sector and over time. Such

elaborate estimates of border barriers are predicated on the availability of services output

data at a correspondingly disaggregated level. Second, since such services output data are not
typically available outside the developed country realm, we develop a projection method that

can, in principle, generate the required information, thereby facilitating the estimation of

trade costs in services when key underlying data are missing or suspect. Third, the structural

gravity theory employed for this procedure also helps us decompose border barriers. The
empirical results are of interest in their own right as they shed light on the role of domestic
institutions, geography, size, and digital infrastructure as determinants of border barriers
and international trade of services.
        We start by estimating a gravity model, described in Section 2, for 12 service sectors and
28 countries. For that purpose, we construct of a database combining information on services
trade and production, respectively, covering the period 2000 to 2007. The broad sectoral
and geographical coverage as well as the inclusion of intra-national trade flows sets this
dataset apart from previous gravity estimations.1 The data are described in Section 3. The
    1
        The gravity model has previously been used to explain the pattern of services trade. For instance, to


                                                       1
results oﬀer benchmark gravity estimates for sectoral cross-border services trade, alongside a
detailed set of border eﬀects.2 Gravity works well with sectoral services data: most estimates
are significant with expected signs and reasonable magnitudes. We document important
diﬀerences in estimated coeﬃcients of standard gravity variables between goods and services

and across services sectors, respectively. For example, we obtain highly non-linear eﬀects of
distance on services trade with strong negative eﬀects for short distances and insignificant
eﬀects for long distances. In addition, our estimates reveal that contiguity and colonial ties—
traditionally strong predictors for goods trade—have more nuanced eﬀects, with the eﬀect

of contiguity depending strongly on the particular sector and colonial ties being generally
insignificant. In contrast, language eﬀects are much stronger for services trade than for goods
trade. We also demonstrate empirically that accounting properly for internal trade costs is

important for proper estimation of international trade costs. These results are presented in

Section 4.2.

    A key output of this analysis is a multi-dimensional set of relative border barrier estimates
by sector, country and year for cross-border services trade. Border barriers in services

trade are large, significant, and vary widely. (i) Across countries, our estimates reveal that

economic size reduces border barriers in services trade. (ii) Across sectors, border barriers

vary in an intuitive way. (iii) Over time, border barriers in services trade have fallen, even

though the decrease varies considerably across sectors and across countries. Border barriers
have fallen in all sectors but more so in sectors with lower initial borders. Thus, border barrier
estimate the determinants of services trade compared to those of goods trade (Kimura and Lee, 2006; Lejour
and de Paiva Verheijden, 2004; Tharakan et al., 2005), to estimate the time trend in distance eﬀects (Head
et al., 2008) or the eﬀect of Internet penetration in partner countries on US services imports (Freund and
Weinhold, 2004). Miroudot et al. (2012) provide evidence linking lower international trade costs with higher
productivity in services sectors.
   2
     Following the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), it has become customary to take a broad
view of trade in services to include not just cross-border trade but also international transactions through
foreign investment or the movement of people. This paper, however, focuses only on trade costs associated
with cross-border services trade and travel (i.e. people travelling abroad as consumers of services) because
these are the only international transactions covered in trade statistics available for a significant number
of countries. The focus on cross-border services trade, driven by data availability, also implies that we are
abstracting from any potential correlation of cross-border trade with the ease of trading a particular service
via other modes, in particular via establishing commercial presence abroad. On the interdependence of modes
see eg. Christen and Francois (2010). Our estimates of trade barriers should be interpreted accordingly.


                                                      2
heterogeneity across sectors has actually increased. Across countries, larger economies in our
sample have enjoyed a fall in border barriers whereas smaller and less developed economies
have suﬀered an increase in services borders barriers. Thus globalization eﬀects (in this
sense) are convergent within a set of larger economies and divergent between the smallest

countries and the rest. These findings, as well as patterns of convergence and divergence
in individual sectors, are described in Section 4.3. To the best of our knowledge, these
phenomena have not been documented in the literature before.
   Widespread data deficiencies in services prevent comparable estimation of border barriers—

and potentially other trade cost measures—for a wider set of countries. Hence, our second
principal contribution is to derive and implement a novel procedure to recover missing out-
put data based on the strong performance of structural gravity in combination with recently

uncovered properties of the PPML estimator. The theory underpinning this method is in-

troduced in Section 5.1.

   A key step in this procedure is the analysis of determinants of border barriers, estimated
earlier as gravity model fixed eﬀects. Structural gravity theory suggests that border barriers

consist of three principal components: country-specific internal trade costs, country-specific

border barriers, and an average (across countries) border eﬀect. Empirically, we project

border barriers onto observable country characteristics by employing suitable proxies for

each of the three constituent elements. The econometric results of that regression, which we
call ‘border estimation,’ are a successful first attempt at separating cross-national variation

in internal trade costs from variation in pure border-crossing costs. The coeﬃcient estimates
appear to be intuitive with expected signs, reasonable magnitudes, and a solid model fit. For
instance, we find that internal distance lowers inferred border barriers as it raises internal
trade costs. Conversely, business-friendly domestic regulations that lower internal trade costs
result in higher inferred border barriers. We also find evidence for the positive eﬀect on pure
border-crossing costs of advanced digital infrastructure, which facilitates services trade and
thus is associated with lower border barriers.


                                                 3
    These results oﬀer new insights on factors determining the size of border eﬀects, some
of which are potentially amenable to policy reform and, therefore, unveil channels that
may translate unilateral policy intervention at the national level into changes in the volume
of international services trade. In terms of the projection method, however, we exploit

in particular the good model fit (R2 = 0.86) for satisfactory out-of-sample predictions of
border estimates. Indeed, the ability to consistently predict border eﬀects is a necessary and
suﬃcient condition for successfully recovering potentially missing output data. This analysis
is presented in Section 5.2.

    The availability of disaggregated output information in our dataset enables us to conduct
various benchmarking exercises to evaluate the novel procedure’s accuracy. We conclude that
the projection method works well, and we are able to characterize in detail the accuracy of

predictions across countries and sectors (Section 5.4). The procedure’s good performance in a

situation in which no production data are available at all is particularly appealing since this is

going to be the norm if trade costs were to be estimated for economies beyond the developed
country realm. While the current analysis focuses on services trade, our methods can be

applied similarly to goods trade with potentially large payoﬀs. We leave such extensions for

future work.



2     Structural Gravity Model
We start with a brief review of the structural gravity model. Assuming product diﬀerentia-
tion by place of origin Armington (1969) and globally common CES preferences, Anderson
(1979) develops a gravity theory of trade. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003, 2004) refine
the gravity model to derive the following sectoral gravity system that applies to trade in any




                                                4
goods or services sector:3
                                                    (          )1−σk
                                            Yik Ejk     tkij
                                   Xijk   =                            ∀i, j;                     (1)
                                              Yk       Πki Pjk
                                                ( )1−σk
                                            ∑ tkij              Ejk
                             (Πki )1−σk   =                         , ∀i;                         (2)
                                             j
                                                   Pjk          Yk
                                                ( )1−σk
                                            ∑ tkij              Yik
                             (Pjk )1−σk   =                         , ∀j.                         (3)
                                               i
                                                   Πki          Yk


Let Xijk denote the value of shipments at destination prices from origin i to destination j in
services class k. Ejk is the expenditure on services k at destination j from all origins. Yik

denotes the sales of services k at destination prices from i to all destinations, while Y k is the
total output of services k at delivered prices. tkij ≥ 1 denotes the variable trade cost factor on

shipments of k from i to j. σk is the trade elasticity of substitution across origin countries i in

services class k. Πki and Pjk are theoretical constructs that capture general equilibrium trade

cost eﬀects. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) refer to these terms as outward multilateral
resistance (OMR) and inward multilateral resistance (IMR), respectively. Anderson and

Yotov (2010a) refine the interpretation of the multilateral resistances as sellers’ and buyers’

incidence of all trade costs. The outward multilateral resistance Πki consistently aggregates

the incidence of trade costs on the producers of services k in origin i as if they shipped to

a unified world market. The inward multilateral resistance Pjk consistently aggregates the
incidence of trade costs on the consumers of services k in destination j as if they consumed
from a unified world market.
      The structural gravity system (1)-(3) translates into a simple econometric specification.

Following now standard practice, we assume that bilateral trade data follow a Poisson dis-
tribution (see Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006, 2011) with its conditional mean taking the
  3
    The demand-side gravity theory that we present here has alternative theoretical foundations on the
supply side, e.g. Eaton and Kortum (2002). Anderson (2011) and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014)
review the literature on the theoretical foundations and extensions of gravity.




                                                    5
exponential form (for a generic sector):

                                                                     (             )1−σ
                                                   Yi Ej
                                                      ′                  tij (β)
                            E(Xij |Z) ≡ exp(Z β) =                                        ,                        (4)
                                                    Y                    Πi Pj

which leads directly to an estimable equation of the form


                                    Xijk = χk xki mkj τijk + ϵij ,       ∀i, j,                                    (5)


Here, χk denotes a constant term; xki is an exporter fixed eﬀect for country i, mkj is an
importer fixed eﬀect for destination j, and τijk ≤ 1 is a trade cost factor representing the

eﬀect of gravity forces that reduce bilateral trade between i and j, Xij . ϵij is an error term
explained below. An important issue is whether suﬃcient data are available to distinguish

between internal and external trade, i.e. within and between countries. When such data

are available, which is the case in this study, it is possible to include and identify τii , the

intra-country trade cost. Its relationship to τij , i ̸= j is a component reflecting the relative
cost of crossing a border. An important contribution of our work is that we construct a

multi-dimensional (country-sector-year) database of such relative border cost estimates and

we study their determinants.

   The final step in obtaining an econometric gravity specification is to model the unob-

servable bilateral trade frictions τijk from equation (5). Following the vast gravity literature
                                                                                     1−σ
for goods trade, the volume eﬀect of bilateral trade costs τijk ≡ tkij                        for services are approx-
imated by a set of observables:

                              ∑2         k ln DIST        k            k           k            k
       τijk = e(1−SM CT RYij )[   m=1   βm         ij,m +β3 CN T Gij +β4 LAN Gij +β5 CLN Yij ]+β6 SM CT RYij
                                                                                                               .   (6)


Here, ln DISTij,m is the logarithm of bilateral distance between trading partners i and j.
Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), we decompose the distance eﬀects into 2 intervals
based on the median distance in our sample (about 2,551 km) in order to allow for non-


                                                          6
linear eﬀects of distance on services trade. CN T Gij captures the presence of a contiguous
border between partners i and j. LAN Gij and CLN Yij account for common language and
colonial ties, respectively. Finally, SM CT RYij is an indicator variable equal to 1 for i = j
and zero otherwise. SM CT RYij has the advantage of being an exogenous variable that picks

up all the relevant forces that discriminate between internal and international trade. We will
define the SM CT RY variable in two alternative ways. First, we will restrict SM CT RY to
a common eﬀect across countries and years for each sector, in which case β6k is identified
oﬀ variation over time and across countries. Second, we use a very flexible specification in
                                                                 k
which we allow for country-year-sector specific SM CT RY eﬀects βit,6 . The advantage of
this approach is that it delivers a rich database of border estimates that will enable us to
study their determinants.

       In order to obtain econometrically sound gravity estimates for each service category in

our sample, we adopt the latest developments in the empirical gravity literature. In par-

ticular, first, we account for the unobservable multilateral resistance terms with directional
(source and destination), country-specific, time-varying dummy variables.4 These country

fixed eﬀects also control for output and expenditures, as is apparent from equations (9) and

(10). Second, our choice of estimation technique is the Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood

(PPML) estimator which, as shown in Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006, 2011), successfully

addresses the prominent issues of heteroskedasticity and zeroes in bilateral trade flows. Im-
portantly, the PPML estimator is perfectly consistent with the structural gravity model of

Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), which serves as a theoretical foundation for our analy-
sis. Finally, in order to address the critique from Cheng and Wall (2005) that the dependent
variable in gravity estimations with fixed eﬀects cannot fully adjust in a single year’s time,
we use panel data with 2-year intervals to obtain our most preferred gravity estimates.5
   4
     Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) use custom programming to account for the multilateral resistances
in a static setting. Feenstra (2004) advocates the directional, country-specific fixed eﬀects approach in a
cross-section setting. Olivero and Yotov (2012) demonstrate that the MR terms should be accounted for
with exporter-time and importer-time fixed eﬀects in a dynamic gravity setting.
   5
     This is consistent with the three-year intervals used in Trefler (2004), who also criticizes trade estimations
pooled over consecutive years. Cheng and Wall (2005) and Baier and Bergstrand (2007) use 5-year intervals,


                                                        7
3     Data Description

For our analyses, we construct a novel integrated dataset of services trade and production
data at the sectoral level for 28 countries and 12 services sectors over the period 2000-2007.6
The limiting factor in our data is the availability of sectoral services production statistics.
Table 1 lists the range of services sectors covered and the complete dataset is available upon
request. We briefly discuss each data component; more detailed information is contained in

Appendix A.
    The primary source of data on cross-border services trade flows are the “OECD Statistics
on International Trade in Services: Volume II - Detailed Tables by Partner Country” (Com-
plete Edition as obtained from OECD.Stat, henceforth “TiSP”). The database provides

information on international trade in services by partner country for 32 reporting OECD

countries plus the Russian Federation and Hong Kong China, which is in the top twenty

service exporters in the world. In addition to the partner dimension, TiSP trade data are

also broken down by type of service according to the Extended Balance of Payments Services
(EBOPS) classification, i.e. standard components according to the fifth edition of the IMF’s

Balance of Payments Manual. The level of sectoral detail reported varies across countries.

    We focus on export flows as a more reliable measure of trade flows due to stronger

reporting incentives for the exporting firms. Using TiSP’s import entries as mirror export
flows allows us to recover additional export flows, thereby increasing the number of non-
zero observations substantially.7 We also use mirroring to recover services trade flows of
two additional countries (Latvia and Lithuania) for which disaggregated output information
while Eichengreen and Irwin (1996) use 5- and 10-year intervals in gravity estimations. Finally, Olivero and
Yotov (2012) experiment with various intervals to check the robustness of their dynamic gravity results.
They find that the yearly estimates indeed produce suspicious gravity parameters. We chose 2-year intervals
due to the short time-coverage of our data.
   6
     The 28 countries with trade and production data are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, South Korea, Sweden,
United Kingdom, United States. Trade information is available for another eight countries.
   7
     For within-OECD trade, the original export flow is always retained even if a matching mirror flow would
be found to exist.



                                                     8
exists in EUKLEMS but which do not report cross-border trade flows as part of OECD’s
TiSP dataset. Additional checks ensure that trade flows are consistent across diﬀerent levels
of the classification.
      Even though the majority of OECD countries already accounts for a large share of global

cross-border service trade8 , we attempt to maximize coverage of global trade flows by aug-
menting the OECD TiSP data with information from the “United Nations International
Trade in Services Database” as published by the United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Aﬀairs, Statistics Division. Since OECD’s TiSP constitutes our preferred data

source, UN data serve to augment the dataset only in instance when the corresponding
OECD observation is missing.9 An additional 120,000 observations can be gained by updat-
ing OECD data with UN data, which underscore the usefulness of drawing on both datasets.

      Annual production data for services sectors are obtained from the “EU KLEMS Growth

and Productivity Accounts: November 2009 Release” as updated in March 2011. The EU

KLEMS Database provides for one of the most detailed sectoral breakdowns available. Cov-
erage comprises mostly of OECD members which corresponds closely to the source for cross-

border services trade. The raw data consist of “gross output at current basic prices” in

millions of local currency units. We use data covering 2000-2007 as EU KLEMS series cur-

rently extend only up to 2007. As noted above, availability of services production data

predetermines the dimensions of our sample to 28 countries, 12 sectors, and 8 years over the
period 2000-2007, even though the gravity model estimations in section 4 use trade data for

an additional eight countries.10

      Production data is reported according to the NACE Rev.1 classification. In order to
estimate the gravity model, NACE output data need to be concorded to the trade clas-
sification for services, which was done on the basis of the “Correspondence between ISIC
  8
     In 2007, the 28 OECD members accounted for 74 percent of world exports and 69 percent of world
imports.
   9
     This implies that mirror OECD flows take precedence over original UN exports even if an exact match
exists, and no mirroring is performed on UN data.
  10
     These countries are Chile, Hong Kong China, Israel, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, the Russian Feder-
ation and Turkey.


                                                   9
Categories for Foreign Aﬃliates (ICFA) and Extended Balance of Payments Services Classifi-
cation (EBOPS)” as published in Annex IV of the UN’s Manual on Statistics of International
Trade in Services, with some modifications. Table 1 displays the 12 sectors that could suc-
cessfully be concorded. Internal trade and expenditure are calculated from production data

in the usual way, ie. a country’s internal trade for any given sector is obtained by subtracting
sectoral exports from gross output. A country’s sectoral expenditure data is backed out as
the sum of imports from all origin countries including itself or, equivalently, gross output
less exports plus imports from abroad.

       Standard gravity variables such as distance, common language, contiguity and colonial
ties are taken from CEPII’s Distances Database (see Mayer and Zignago, 2006; Head and
Mayer, 2000). An important advantage of that source is its provision of population-weighted

distances, which can be used to calculate consistently both bilateral distances as well as

internal distances. We use the former in the gravity estimations of international services

trade and the latter in our study of the determinants of borders.



4        Gravity Estimation and Border Eﬀects

This section oﬀers partial equilibrium estimates and a discussion of the eﬀects of standard

trade cost variables (e.g. distance, common language, contiguity, etc.) on services trade for

each of the sectors in our sample. An important contribution of our work is the treatment
and analysis of international borders in services trade. Initially, we estimate the eﬀects
of international borders on services trade with an indicator variable that takes a value of

one for trade flows within the same country (“SM CT RY ”) and zero otherwise, to capture
the diﬀerence between internal and international trade. This approach is not new to the
literature.11 However, we make several contributions and extensions to this literature.
       Unlike existing studies that focus on specific countries and obtain single border estimates
  11
    See for example McCallum (1995); Anderson and van Wincoop (2003); Hillberry and Hummels (2003);
Millimet and Osang (2007); Mayer and Head (2002); Anderson and Yotov (2010a,b); Coughlin and Novy
(2013); Nitsch and Wolf (2013).


                                                 10
at a given point of time, our estimates are multi-dimensional. First of all, we obtain country-
specific border estimates for all countries in our sample. This is an important departure from
the existing trade literature that treats countries as point masses, an assumption that our
estimates reveal is clearly rejected by the data. Second, we obtain time-varying border

eﬀects which enables us to study patterns over time. Our estimates reveal that, by and
large, border barriers in services trade have fallen over time. Thus, we contribute to the
literature by demonstrating that the eﬀects of globalization are actually present and strong
in gravity estimations of services trade. Combining country and time variation enables us

to draw inferences about the diﬀerential eﬀects of globalization. Third, we obtain border
eﬀects at the sectoral level. Our estimates reveal wide but intuitive variation across the
service categories in our sample with potentially important policy implications. Finally, we

are the first to analyze the determinants of international trade border eﬀects. Our analysis

focuses on services trade but our methods could be applied similarly to goods trade with

potential for large payoﬀs. We leave such extensions for future work.
   In order to emphasize the advantages of our methods, first we obtain and report results

from a baseline model in which the SM CT RY coeﬃcient for each sector is restricted to be

the same across all countries and years. This specification is consistent with the current

treatment of domestic trade costs in the literature as equal (and equal to zero) for each

country, i.e. treating countries as point masses. In Section 4.3 we present and discuss re-
sults from our preferred and more flexible specification, in which SM CT RY coeﬃcients are

allowed to vary across countries and over time. These results reveal that proper account of
internal trade costs has significant quantitative implications for the eﬀects of the standard
variables used to proxy for trade costs in empirical gravity models.




                                              11
4.1        Gravity Estimates for Services Trade

We start with a specification of the gravity model that imposes the standard assumption of
equal internal trade costs.12 Table 2 reports gravity estimates for each service category in our
sample13 which, as discussed above, are obtained with 2-year lagged panel data, the PPML
estimator, and time-varying, directional, country-specific fixed eﬀects from the following

econometric model:
                                           (                                                                     )
                    [                          ∑
                                               2
       Xij,t   = exp (1 − SM CT RYij )                k
                                                     βm ln DISTij,m + β3k CN T Gij + β4k LAN Gij + β5k CLN Yij
                                               m=1                                                                   (7)
                                                         ]
                     +   β6k SM CT RYij   + ηi,t + θj,t + ϵij,t ,     ∀ k.

Here SM CT RYij is the Kronecker delta, β6k is the common (across countries and over time)

SM CT RY coeﬃcient, ηi,t denotes the set of time-varying exporter dummies, which control
for outward multilateral resistances and countries’ output shares, and θj,t denote time-varying

importer dummies that account for inward multilateral resistances and expenditure shares,
respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country pair.14

       Overall, we find that the disaggregated gravity model works well with services data.

Estimated coeﬃcients on standard trade cost variables in Table 2 almost always exhibit ex-

pected signs and reasonable magnitudes. We discuss the eﬀects of standard gravity variables
in greater detail below when SM CT RY coeﬃcients are allowed to vary across countries,

sectors and time as this constitutes our preferred econometric specification. For now, the
results in Table 2 reveal that, all else equal, international borders reduce services trade sub-
stantially. Ten of the twelve possible estimates on SM CT RY are positive and six of them

are large and highly significant. The border eﬀects in services vary widely across sectors.
This motivates our preferred specification that allows for country-year -specific estimates of
  12
     Since the gravity model can only ever identify relative trade costs, our specification is equivalent to
imposing the constraint of internal trade costs being equal and equal to zero.
  13
     In Table 2 trade in ‘research and development’ services (RSRCH) is listed as a separate sector even
though the EBOPS taxonomy treats it as a part of ‘miscellaneous business services’ (BUSIN). We think,
though, that the results for both categories are of distinct economic interest. Our empirical results oﬀer
evidence for heterogeneous trade cost estimates in these two categories.
  14
     Comparison between estimates obtained with and without clustering reveal that the clustered standard
errors are a bit larger. This suggests positive intra-cluster correlations, as expected.


                                                                12
the border eﬀects βitk for each sector in our sample according to:
                                        (                                                                                 )
                [                           ∑
                                            2
   Xij,t   = exp (1 − SM CT RYij )                 k
                                                  βm   ln DISTij,m +   β3k CN T Gij   +   β4k LAN Gij   +   β5k CLN Yij
                                            m=1                                                                               (8)
                                                         ]
                 +    k
                     βit,6 SM CT RYij   + ηi,t + θj,t + ϵij,t ,        ∀ k.

We start with a discussion of trade cost estimates from standard gravity variables in Section
4.2, then we analyse in detail estimated border eﬀects in Section 4.3.


4.2    Results on Standard Gravity Variables and Services Trade

Estimates of the eﬀects of standard gravity variables on services trade are reported in Table 3.
We note first of all that the eﬀects that we capture in Table 3 and the corresponding numbers

in Table 2 are qualitatively similar. At the same time, there are also diﬀerences in terms
of statistical significance and economic magnitude which underscore the importance of a

flexible specification of border barriers. The price of this flexibility is that the associated

coeﬃcients are ‘estimated’ with zero degrees of freedom. Yet an auxiliary regression finds

meaningful patterns in the flexible fixed eﬀects estimates.

   Distance is a significant impediment to trade in services, though its eﬀect varies widely
across sectors and depends on the distance interval. In many sectors such as Transportation,

Travel, Communication, Construction, Merchanting and Audiovisual services, distance ef-

fects are large and highly significant only over short intervals. It appears intuitive that Travel

services exhibit the largest distance eﬀect. In Financial and Computer services, respectively,
we obtain insignificant short-distance eﬀects but negative and significant (though small)
eﬀects over long distances. Finally, distance does not exert any trade-impeding eﬀect in
Insurance services, Operational Leasing, Business services, and Research and Development.
The highly non-linear eﬀects of distance on services trade and the insignificant estimates that
we obtain for one third of the sectors in our sample reveal important diﬀerences between the
eﬀects of distance for goods and for services trade and point to the need for further research.
   We estimate positive and significant contiguity coeﬃcients for only five out of twelve
service categories. The rationale for significant eﬀects in Transportation, Travel, and Com-

                                                              13
munication services is straightforward; the explanation in the case of Operational Leasing
is less obvious but could be related to the particular spatial location of lessors and lessees,
respectively. In general, the role of contiguity in promoting cross-border services trade does
not appear to be strong. This is in sharp contrast to the estimated eﬀects of common borders

on manufacturing trade (see e.g. Anderson and Yotov, 2010b).
       As expected, sharing a common oﬃcial language facilitates bilateral services trade. The
largest eﬀects are found in Insurance, Audiovisual and R&D services, which we attribute to
the need for precise communication in these sectors. Business, Financial, and Merchanting

services encompass a host of presumably coordination-/communication-intensive ‘business
process outsourcing’ services, thus it is intuitive that the coeﬃcients are of similar magnitude
as the one in Communications.15 Overall, language appears to exert a stronger eﬀect on

services trade than on manufacturing goods trade (Anderson and Yotov, 2010b), which is

consistent with the higher requirement for personal interaction and communication in most

services.
       In contrast, colonial ties do not generally have much explanatory power for services

trade. We conjecture that this is due to services trade being a relatively recent phenomenon,

which is consistent with the results from Anderson and Yotov (2010b, 2011) who find the

eﬀects of colonial ties on manufacturing trade to have waned during the 1990s. The strongly

negative and significant eﬀects of colonial ties in Business and Research services, respectively,
may reflect the fact that such services are increasingly being exchanged between highly

industrialized economies that never had colonial relationships with each other. From a
sampling perspective, it is probably also true that an indicator variable for colonial ties does
not belong in the set of gravity covariates for a sample of OECD countries.
       In sum, the estimates from this section reveal that the structural gravity model performs
quite well with services data. Many of the standard gravity covariates are significant and
  15
    The absence of a language eﬀect e.g. in categories such as Computer services could point to the need
for an alternative construction of language-related variables that go beyond common oﬃcial language, see
Melitz and Toubal (2014).



                                                  14
their estimates make good economic sense. At the same time, we document important
diﬀerences in the eﬀects of standard gravity covariates between goods and services trade.
Our benchmark results point to avenues for further research in modeling trade costs in
services, which we leave for future work. Instead, we now focus attention on estimated

border eﬀects.


4.3       Results on International Border Eﬀects in Services Trade

Equation (8) delivers a multi-dimensional data set of sector-country-time estimates of the
border eﬀects in services trade. Due to the large number of SM CT RY estimates, we first
display the overall distribution of border eﬀects across countries, sectors and years. Then we

characterize border eﬀects separately along each of the three dimensions of our new database
(and their interactions whenever possible).

      Figure 1 shows the full distribution of SM CT RY estimates across all 12 sectors, 28

countries and 4 years. Our data enabled us to estimate 1,231 (out of 1,344 possible) border

eﬀects. The median coeﬃcient estimate is 5.35, which points to substantial border eﬀects in

services trade. To get a sense of the magnitude of the border barriers, note that the median
border eﬀect (exp{5.35} − 1) × 100 = 20, 961, which suggests that the border enormously

deflects international trade in services. We attribute the large estimates of border eﬀects in

services trade to the fact that consumption of services is highly localized.
      Figure 1 also reveals that there exist some negative SM CT RY estimates, suggesting that
internal trade is smaller than international trade. The negative estimates are concentrated
primarily in Travel services16 and/or are obtained for large developed countries such as
Germany and the United States. Thus the distribution of SMCTRY estimates for Travel
services is shown separately in light gray in Figure 1. The largest border estimates in Figure
1 are for smaller and less developed economies such as Slovakia, Estonia, and Lithuania,
and are concentrated in sectors such as Finance services, Insurance services and Research
 16
      To a lesser extent also in Transportation services.



                                                       15
and Development services. Next we focus on the distribution of SM CT RY estimates across
sectors and across countries.
   Figure 2 depicts the variation of the average (across countries) estimates of the SM CT RY
coeﬃcients by sector. Border eﬀects in services vary widely across sectors, which we believe

owes much to the high concentration of some service categories in certain developed parts
of the world. The largest border eﬀects are observed in Finance services, Insurance services,
and Research and Development services, respectively. The large estimates for Finance and
Insurance services correspond to the fact that an overwhelming share of banking and insur-

ance services are produced and consumed domestically. Our findings for Finance services
are consistent with the results from Jensen and Lori Kletzer (2005) about the tradability of
services based on sectors’ geographic concentration within the United States. For instance,

banking activities exhibit very low geographic concentration, suggesting low tradability due

to the need for face-to-face interaction. It is also interesting to see that the Research and De-

velopment sector has a noticeably higher average SM CT RY coeﬃcient than miscellaneous
Business services (in terms of the EBOPS classification the former is part of the latter, see

Note 13 above). Here, disentangling both sectors brings to the fore how business process

outsourcing and related developments have lowered revealed border eﬀects whereas R&D is

still predominantly produced locally (possibly within the confines of the firm). At the other

extreme, consistent with our priors, by far the lowest border barriers exist in the Travel,
Transportation, and Communications sectors, respectively.

   Figure 3 depicts the distribution across sectors of SM CT RY estimates by country. The
figure suggests that, on average, the border barriers in services trade are appreciably higher
for smaller and less developed economies than for large industrialized countries. Slovakia,
Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia and Slovenia exhibit the sample’s largest average SM CT RY
coeﬃcients, whereas the coeﬃcients associated with Great Britain, Holland, Canada, Ger-
many, and Austria are the smallest in the sample. The United States is the only country
that exhibits negative average border eﬀects. The inverse relationship between openness to


                                               16
international trade in services and country size is confirmed in Figure 4 in which average
border estimates per country are plotted against real GDP. The negative relationship be-
tween the two variables is clear and the correlation index ρ = −.76 is large and statistically
significant. The result that richer/more developed countries face lower barriers in services

trade is consistent with, and complements, the findings of Waugh (2010) who shows that less
developed countries face larger aggregate trade costs. Next, we extend Waugh’s analysis by
studying the evolution of services borders over time.
   Table 4 shows the evolution of average (across countries) SM CT RY estimates over time

for each sector. The main finding is that services borders have fallen significantly during the
period of investigation (2000-2006) in all sectors and without exception. Our interpretation of
the magnitude of the decrease in border barriers is that it reflects the eﬀects of globalization

on sectoral services trade. Our estimates also reveal that sectors with higher initial borders

were subject to smaller eﬀects of globalization, while the opposite is true for the sectors with

lower initial borders. The correlation between the initial level of the border and decrease (in
absolute value) is a remarkable -0.88. Thus, the order of sectors in terms of estimated border

barriers is, in general, fairly stable over the period considered here, but the gap between the

sectors with high and low borders has widened. This finding has potentially important policy

implications.

   We view the variation of the eﬀects of globalization on services borders across sectors
as intuitive. For instance, we find that sectors that experienced the largest decrease in

borders include Travel services (120% decrease), Transportation services (61% decrease), and
Communication services (36% decrease). Anecdotal evidence suggests that these are exactly
the sectors where the eﬀects of improved communications and technology should be the
strongest. On the opposite side of the spectrum we find sectors such as Audiovisual services
(4% decrease) and Operational Leasing services (7% decrease). Interestingly, Insurance
services (8% decrease) and Finance services (12% decrease) are also on the lower end of
the distribution, suggesting that these categories have not been aﬀected by globalization


                                              17
as much as other sectors in our sample. The highly localized consumption of financial and
insurance services is a possible explanation for these results. Finally, we note that Research
and Development services (12% decrease) is another category that is not very much aﬀected
by globalization.

       Table 5 depicts the evolution of average (across sectors) SM CT RY estimates over time
for each country. The average change across all countries in our sample is a decrease of
14%; however, the fall is not across-the-board and the eﬀects vary widely across countries.
Border barriers in services trade have decreased for about two-thirds of the countries in

our sample and they have increased for the rest of the countries.17 Based on the change in
the border eﬀects, we classify the countries in our sample in four groups. The first group
includes countries that experienced a significant fall in services borders. These countries are

relatively richer and include most of the more developed European economies (e.g. Great

Britain, Belgium, Holland, and Denmark, among others), some smaller European countries

that have developed relatively fast (e.g. Poland and Hungary), and Korea.
       The second group of countries also experience decrease in services borders but the

change is significantly smaller in magnitude. This group consists of relatively less devel-

oped economies including some European countries that are behind the European economic

powers (e.g. Sweden, Spain and Portugal), some economies that were in transition (e.g. Slove-

nia and Slovakia), and Canada and Japan. The third group includes countries that actually
suﬀered an increase in the borders for services trade. These countries include struggling

and less developed economies such as Greece, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Finally, we
put Germany and the United States in a separate group because these are two developed
economies for which we observe an increase in the borders to services trade, however, these
are also the two countries with the lowest borders in the initial and in the final year of our
sample.
       In order to check whether the eﬀects of globalization are indeed related to country size
  17
    We remind the reader that we measure relative border barriers, so increase means relative to the average
which itself is decreasing.


                                                    18
and economic development, we split the countries in our sample into quintiles according to
real GDP and we plot the evolution of the corresponding SMCTRY estimates in Figure 5.
As before, motivated by the fact that Germany and the US are the only large developed
economies that experience a small increase in the SMCTRY estimates over time and are

also the two countries with the smallest borders to start with, we put those two countries
in a separate group. Figure 5 captures several interesting features. First, as established
before, smaller countries face higher borders in services trade. Second, it reveals that the
border estimates for the countries in the lowest quintile have remained stable (or increased

a bit) over the period of investigation. Third, we observe a decrease over time for the border
estimates for the countries in the four upper quartiles in our sample. Our interpretation
of this result as a reflection of globalization forces contributes to the extensive literature

concerned with the “missing globalization” puzzle.18 Specifically, we demonstrate that, in

the case of services, globalization is an active force that is captured by the gravity model of

trade.
       Fourth, the decrease in the border eﬀects on services trade has been faster for the countries

in the second and third lowest quintiles as compared to the larger countries which, as noted

before, face lower border barriers to begin with. This points to a convergence story among

the countries in four upper quartiles. In contrast, over the period of inspection border eﬀects

for the smallest economies (first quintile) remained stable. Altogether this implies divergence
between the smallest countries and the rest of the countries in our sample. Thus, in addition

to complementing the finding from Waugh (2010) that less developed countries face larger
resistance in the case of services trade as compared to richer countries, we also find that the
group of smallest economies has not been reached by globalization forces. To the best of
  18
    Coe et al. (2002) coin the term “missing globalization” and Disdier and Head (2008) provide a survey of
the robust evidence for stable gravity estimates of distance over time. Our findings are in accordance with
the results for goods trade from Yotov (2012) and Bergstrand et al. (2015). Yotov (2012) uses manufacturing
goods data and demonstrates that the “distance puzzle” is resolved once the eﬀects of international distance
are measured properly relative to the corresponding eﬀects of internal distance. Bergstrand et al. (2015)
generalize this result to resolve the “missing globalization puzzle” with both sectoral goods data as well as
with aggregate data.



                                                     19
our knowledge, the phenomenon of divergence in border barriers has not been documented
before. Finally, it is worth noting that the SM CT RY estimates for the first and the second
quintiles in our sample have increased between 2000 and 2002, while the estimates for the
rest of the countries during this period have been stable. A possible explanation for these

results is the recession in the early 2000s which may have raised protectionism and slowed
down globalization forces, perhaps more so in poorer economies.
   In order to further explore the convergence or divergence eﬀects of globalization, we con-
struct figures that capture the evolution of border eﬀects across small and large countries,

in terms of relative output shares in world supply, for each sector in our sample. Based
on individual sectoral figures, we identify three groups of sectors. The first group includes
sectors for which we observe convergence between the small and the large countries in our

sample. The categories in this group include Transportation services, Travel services, and

Merchandize services. Figure 6 illustrates for the case of Transportation services. The sec-

ond group includes sectors in which the border barriers fell but in a way that rendered the
gap between large and small countries largely stable. Here, we find sectors such as Con-

struction services, Communication services, and Business and Professional services. Figure

7 illustrates for the case of Construction services. Finally, the third group includes sectors

where there has been divergence in the eﬀects of borders between small and large countries.

This group includes Financial services, Insurance services, Operational Leasing, Research
and Development services, and Audiovisual services. Figure 8 illustrates using Research and

Development services.
   The descriptive analysis of border eﬀects in services trade that we oﬀer in this section can
be summarized as follows. First we find that, for the most part, border barriers in services
trade are large and significant. Second, we obtain heterogeneous border estimates across
sectors that vary in an intuitive way. Third, our country-specific estimates reveal that smaller
and less developed countries face larger resistance to international services trade. Fourth, we
find that border eﬀects in services trade have fallen over the period of investigation for all


                                              20
sectors in our sample. Finally, our estimates reveal that the more developed countries in our
sample have enjoyed a fall in the borders in services trade, while smaller and less developed
economies have suﬀered from an increase in services border barriers.



5      Recovering Missing Output Information

This section derives and empirically implements a procedure for recovering output infor-

mation. Sectoral output data or, equivalently, internal trade flows observed in addition to
border-crossing trade flows, are a necessary precondition for estimating border barriers as
defined in the trade cost function (equation 6).19 Whenever such statistical information for

services sectors is not available at the desired level of disaggregation, this methodology can

provide a way forward in instances in which trade costs could otherwise not be estimated.
The fact that for the 28 OECD countries in our sample output information is available from

the EUKLEMS database (cf. Section 3) allows us to assess the accuracy of our procedure.


5.1     Structural Gravity with Missing Data

Following on from Section 2, equation (4) admits a structural interpretation of the exporter

and importer fixed eﬀects, respectively, for any generic sector:


                                    exp(xi ) = Πσ−1
                                                i   Yi ,       ∀i > 0,                                  (9)

                                   exp(mj ) = Pjσ−1 Ej ,        ∀j > 0,                                (10)


As defined before, Yi denotes output (total sales at end user prices) and Ej denotes total
expenditure, while Πi and Pj denote outward and inward multilateral resistances. In practice,
the fixed eﬀects are estimated relative to a base country so, for example, m0 and x0 are not
  19
    That information is generally required for making full use of structural gravity, eg. estimating general
equilibrium trade costs indices, which we do not further pursue in this paper.




                                                    21
estimated, allowing for a standard constant term χ.20 For the base country, we assume that
Y0 is observed, from which E0 is inferred as ‘apparent consumption’ deducting exports and
adding imports to Y0 . A normalization of the set of P ’s and Π’s is required in any case, so
it is natural to choose P0 = 1 (see Anderson and Yotov, 2010a).21

       Limited data on sectoral output constitutes an important problem, for unfettered use of
the structural gravity model requires the full set of output and trade data for all countries.
An important contribution of this study is therefore to show how the gravity model can
be used to project output information. Our methodology imposes the theoretical identity

between the estimated importer and exporter country fixed eﬀects with their structural
gravity expressions in order to recover the required information. Fally (2015) shows that the
fixed eﬀects estimated with PPML are exactly consistent with the theoretical values from

(9)-(10). Specifically, the importer fixed eﬀect is equal to the product of regional expenditure

and the power transform of inward multilateral resistance, whereas the exporter fixed eﬀect

is equal to the product of regional output and the power transform of outward multilateral
resistance. Combining equations (5), (9) and (10) thus implies:

                                                        x i mj
                                   Pjσ−1 Πσ−1
                                          i   = kY                     ∀ i, j.                          (11)
                                                        Ej Yi

The MR system from structural gravity is:

                                          ∑                       Ej
                                  1 =           τij Pjσ−1 Πiσ−1            ∀ i,                         (12)
                                           j
                                                                  Y
                                          ∑                       Yi
                                  1 =           τij Pjσ−1 Πσ−1
                                                           i              ∀ j.                          (13)
                                            i
                                                                  Y
  20
     Structural gravity in theory has a scaling term equal to the inverse of worldwide sales times the mean
measurement error in the bilateral trade data, data that are notoriously rife with measurement error. The
practice in (5) combines the importer 0 and exporter 0 fixed eﬀects with the worldwide scaling eﬀect.
Regression cannot identify both terms because the full set of fixed eﬀects regressors are perfectly collinear
when the constant vector is also included. (Perfect collinearity also arises if x0 or m0 is attempted to be
estimated.)                                                                        ∑
  21
    ∑This normalisation implies m0 = E0 whilst x0 is identified from x0 = Y0 /k j τ0j mj . Then Πσ−1  0    =
1/k j τ0j mj completes the identification of multilateral resistances from observed and inferred variables.



                                                      22
Substitute (11) into (12) and (13) to obtain:

                                                         ∑
                                          Yei = kxi               τij mj    ∀i                                     (14)
                                                          j
                                                          ∑
                                         ej = kmj
                                         E                         τij xi   ∀ j.                                   (15)
                                                              i


System (14)-(15) yields fitted values for output and expenditures, respectively. World output
      ∑       ∑
Ye = k i>0 xi j τij mj + Y0 is obtained by summing over all countries i ∈ I in equation (14).
       Notice that there is no problem at a theoretical level if some output in a particular sector
and year were zero. The corresponding market clearing equation is dropped from the system,

all demands Xij for goods by destinations j from origin i are equal to zero, and outward

multilateral resistance Πi is not defined. Understanding that we have Yi = 0 in equation
(9), all the steps from equations (11)-(15) remain valid, and we can understand that where
Πi appears in (11) we may as well set Πi = 0 because the equation for seller i does not hold

due to there being no trade. However, the procedure for recovering output described in this

section is all about our suspicion that there is some trade and output data even though it

is not observed. In this case, rather than dropping the exporter-year fixed eﬀect of i and

setting Ŷi = 0, we exploit the panel structure and the properties of the PPML estimator to
generate consistent estimates of output.

       Taking the very strong stand that structural gravity generates the true data, these gen-
erated activity variables {Yei , E
                                 ej } are perfectly consistent with the theory. Their expected

value (asymptotically) is the true value. In reality, both the fitted values Yei and the observed

values Yi∗ are measured with error, and the measurement error of the observed values might
contaminate the estimates of the τij ’s such that the fitted values of (14) and (15) are not
asymptotically unbiased.22
  22
    Considering the potentially most problematic contamination   ∑ issue       is somewhat reassuring. The internal
trade flows are typically generated as a residual Xii∗ = Yi∗ − j̸=i Xij   ∗
                                                                            . The econometric model assumes that
                                                                                   ∗
the observed bilateral trade flow value is related to the true value by Xij           = Xij ϵij where ϵij is a random
error term. The gravity estimation would apply this assumption     ∑to  all  trade   flows, internal and international.
                                                       ∗       ∗             ∗
When would this
              ∑   assumption  be  met?  Generating  X  ii = Y i  −   j̸=i X ij  is consistent  with Xii∗ = Xii ϵii if and
          ∗
only if Yi = j Xij ϵij ; that is, there is no additional source of measurement error in the output variables.


                                                          23
    The primary challenge to implementing the system of equations (14)-(15) lies in the
                                                   k
fact that, by definition, one crucial component (β̂it,6 ) of the trade cost function τij cannot
be estimated when output is missing or suspect. To see this, recall that the indicator for
internal trade is the only variable that carries direct information on output. Thus we now

turn to the issue of estimating border eﬀects in the next section, in which we capitalize on
the newly-created multi-dimensional database of border estimates from Section 4.3 to study
their determinants.


5.2     On the Determinants of Border Eﬀects in Services Trade

The wide variability across border estimates in each dimension (across countries, sectors, and

time) sets the stage for meaningful econometric analysis. The contributions of this section
are twofold. First, the empirical results from ‘border estimations’ add to our understanding

of the forces behind the wedge between internal and border-crossing trade. This is an

interesting question in itself because, as we demonstrated earlier, border eﬀects in services

trade are substantial while, at the same time, services now represent a larger share of GDP

in the developed world compared to goods. Second, as discussed in the theoretical section,
the ability to consistently predict border eﬀects is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for

successfully recovering missing output data.
                                                                         k
    The dummy variable nature of SM CT RYij implies that the coeﬃcient β̂it,6 is interpreted

as a relative border eﬀect:

                                         (                  )1−σk
                                             tkii,t /bkit
                             k
                           β̂it,6 = ln                                    k
                                                                    = ln Xii,t − η̂i,t
                                                                                   k
                                                                                       − θ̂i,t
                                                                                           k
                                                                                                      (16)
                                                  b̄kt

                                                                                      k
The middle expression captures the fact that for each sector the SM CT RY estimates β̂it,6
account for, and consist of, three components that include country-specific internal trade
costs, tkii,t , and country-specific border barriers, bkit , which push in opposite directions and are
This is a plausible assumption because statistical practice would normally include such consistency checks.
But it is not guaranteed.


                                                              24
identified relative to the third component, which is an average border b̄kt . The terms on the
right-hand side express the fitted value of the relative border cost as a deviation of observed
internal trade from the importer and exporter fixed eﬀects.
   Our goal in this section is to find empirical proxies for the components of internal trade
                                         k
costs and border barriers that comprise βit,6 . However, before we do so, we find it instructive
to rearrange the preceding equation to transform it into the following estimating equation:


                                          k        k       k       k
                                      ln Xii,t = η̂i,t + θ̂i,t + β̂it,6 .                    (17)


Equation (17) represents a gravity model for internal trade and holds as an equality by
construction. This is confirmed in column (1) of Table 6, where we regress the logarithm of
                                                                                  k
internal trade on three covariates including the collection of border estimates β̂it,6 , exporter-
                    k                                    k
time fixed eﬀects η̂i,t and importer-time fixed eﬀects θ̂i,t , respectively. As expected, the
coeﬃcient estimates on each of these variables is equal to unity. The perfect model fit merely

reflects the fact that the SM CT RY coeﬃcients embody all information about internal trade

in gravity estimations when total output is known.

   The idea in subsequent specifications (columns 2 and 3) is then to replace the SM CT RY
coeﬃcient—as if it were unobservable—with observable country characteristics and gauge the

explanatory power thereof. Equation (18) defines the empirical specification for decomposing
                                 k
the international border eﬀect β̂it,6 :


                        k           k          k
                    ln Xii,t = γ1 η̂i,t + γ2 θ̂i,t + Wi δ1 + Zi,t δ2 + ν k + µt +εkii,t ,    (18)
                                                     | {z } | {z } | {z }
                                                      tii,t      bi,t       b̄kt



Guided by the structural interpretation of SM CT RY estimates from equation (16), we par-
tition covariates into three groups. First, we chose the variables in vector Wi under the
assumption that they primarily aﬀect internal trade costs tii,t . These variables include inter-
nal distance, the domestic distribution/concentration of economic activity, an institutional



                                                     25
index from the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) as it relates to ‘policies and regula-
tions that permit and promote private sector development’ (Kaufmann et al., 2010), and—at
the cost of losing some observations—the OECD’s Product Market Regulation (PMR) in-
dex (Koske et al., 2014). Guided by specification (17) we define (γ1 − 1) and (γ2 − 1) as
                                                                                         k
size elasticities giving the eﬀect on relative cross-border trade costs of variation in ηi,t and
 k
θi,t respectively. The structural interpretation of these fixed eﬀects is of eﬀective demand
             k σk −1
      k
size Ei,t (Pi,t )    and eﬀective supply size Yi,tk (Πki,t )σk −1 respectively. Notice that the size is
defined at the sector level for each country i, anticipating heterogeneity across sectors for

given countries.
   The variables in the second group (Zi,t ) are chosen based on the assumption that they
predominantly aﬀect the size of the border barrier bi,t . The vector of variables includes

economic size (current GDP in PPP terms and population), the ‘Rule of Law’ index taken

from the Worldwide Governance Indicators, the number of procedures it takes to enforce

contracts (from the World Development Indicators), and measures of digital infrastructure
assumed to facilitate cross-border services trade (the number of secure Internet servers, fixed-

line teledensity, and the number of mobile subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, all taken from

the WDI). Finally, we include sector and year fixed eﬀects (ν k and µt , respectively) in order

to capture the fact that the border estimates are identified relative to an average border b̄t .

The change in the overall fit of the model when we move from the perfect-fit specification
of column (1) in Table 6 to the specification described by equation (18) will be informative

about how well these proxies do in terms of explaining the variability of border eﬀects and
in predicting internal trade.
   Our main findings are presented in column (2) of Table 6. With 86% of variation explained
the model fit is fairly high.23 Hence, the observable characteristics do well in controlling for
unobservable internal trade costs (tii ) and border barriers (bi ). In terms of predicted signs,
factors that increase internal trade costs (Wi variables) will lead to lower internal trade, so we
  23
     The majority of explanatory power is in fact due to observable country characteristics, as sector and
year fixed eﬀects alone explain only 28.7% of the variation in log internal trade.


                                                   26
expect a negative relationship. Factors that increase the border barrier (Zi,t variables) would,
ceteris paribus, be associated with higher internal trade so we expect a positive coeﬃcient.
    The set of explanatory variables fits these priors very well; for instance, internal dis-
tance raises trade costs and thus comes in negative whereas business-friendly regulations

lower trade costs and therefore exhibit a positive coeﬃcient. Good digital infrastructure, in
turn, reduces the deflective force of border barriers and leads to lower internal trade, thus
coeﬃcients of these variables generally exhibit a negative sign.
    In column (3) we also consider the OECD’s Product Market Regulation (PMR) indicator,

which has been widely used and enables us to account for the eﬀects on trade flows of domestic
regulatory barriers in service sectors. Consistent with expectations, we find that higher
PMR values are associated with lower internal trade. Indeed, the negative coeﬃcient on the

PMR indicator is driven by the PMR subindex that captures (i) more complex regulatory

procedures, (ii) administrative burdens and (iii) barriers in network sectors, all of which

are relevant for internal trade costs. As such, we think that these results oﬀer important
insights. They are reported in separate models, though, as PMR inclusion comes at the cost

of losing some observations.24

    The pooled regression is convenient for a quick insight into performance, but there is

good reason to suspect that much heterogeneity obtains across sectors. Table 7 confirms this

suspicion, but the main insights remain the same: negative size elasticities that are large
in absolute value, not significantly diﬀerent for exporter or importer size, negative distance

elasticities, positive GDP per capita elasticities, large negative eﬀects of the rule of law,
etc.25 One sector that performs relatively poorly is Travel, with a positive distance elasticity
and notably poorer goodness of fit (at an adjusted R2 of 0.736, low in the context of the
other sectors).26
  24
     The PMR indicators for the period under consideration are not available for Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia
and Slovenia. PMR indices are only available at some discrete points in time; we take the 2003 values and
exploit the variation in regulatory stringency across countries.
  25
     Output projections of similar accuracy can be based on a more parsimonious model of national charac-
teristics featuring only area, GDP, population and a governance index.
  26
     The positive distance elasticity could reflect some idiosyncratic features of travel services. For instance,


                                                       27
    Overall, we view our analysis of the determinants of international borders in services
trade as a successful first attempt to study this matter. The estimates appear to be intuitive
with expected signs, reasonable magnitudes and a remarkable model fit. Importantly, none
of the regressors employed in our specifications relies on sectoral production data. The high

R2 = 0.86 in the main specification (column 2) is an encouraging and essential precondition
for satisfactory out-of-sample predictions of border estimates, which in turn are crucial for
the success of our methods to recover missing output. In the following section, we capitalize
on the ability to predict internal trade and on the strong performance of the structural

gravity model to test our new methods for recovering missing output data.


5.3     Econometric Approach

We use equation (18) as an empirical strategy for predicting internal trade and, in combina-
                                                                                          k
tion with observed international trade, to reconstruct output based on fitted values of X̂ii,t .

In so doing we focus on the ‘worst’ case when no disaggregated production information is

available at all for a given country and sector. Output predictions are then generated in
four steps: (i) obtain a full set of country-sector-year specific SM CT RY coeﬃcients from

estimating a gravity model; (ii) one particular country’s internal trade flow is discarded (and

so is the associated SM CT RY coeﬃcient) as if no output were available in this case; then
use equation (18) to project the remaining internal trade flows onto observables as in the

previous Section 5.2; (iii) predict out-of-sample so as to recover unobserved internal trade
based on the particular country’s observable characteristics; (iv) repeat steps (ii)-(iii) for
each country and for each sector in our sample, collecting fitted values in each case. As a
it is not implausible that the substitution elasticity for domestic travel is substantially lower (below unity)
than for international trips as many domestic trips rather resemble “necessities.” We have experimented with
including ‘receipts from international tourism’ as an additional control variable in the travel sector regression,
the eﬀect of which is positive and highly significant and renders the distance elasticity insignificant. This
finding is consistent with two (not mutually exclusive) eﬀects: it could either reflect mis-measurement in
the sense that a good deal of internal travel might actually originate from international customers which,
however, would be recorded in our setting as internal trade. There might also be a relative price eﬀect at
work such that a country’s relative attractiveness as a tourist destination (as evidenced by large receipts) is
observationally equivalent to a high barrier of going abroad for domestic residents. A larger share of residents
in such countries would thus vacation at home, thereby giving rise to the positive correlation.


                                                       28
last step, we combine estimated internal trade with a country’s total exports to obtain total
output (or with total imports to obtain total expenditure, respectively) and evaluate these
predictions against their true values.


5.4       Results on Predicted Output

We start by juxtaposing the overall distribution of actual log output (across all countries,

sectors and years) and its estimated equivalent (Figure 9). Reassuringly, the kernel density
estimates of the two distributions are fairly close, even though the novel procedure exhibits a
slight tendency to overpredict output, and the representation in logs tends to de-emphasize

large values. Therefore, we go on to evaluate the accuracy of our method in greater detail

(i) by comparing the procedure’s predictions to ones arising from a naı̈ve benchmark, and
(ii) by expressing imputed output as a percentage deviation from its true value. The former

provides a sense to what extent the novel imputations outperform an agnostic benchmark,

obtained directly as the simple average of output across those countries retained for fitting the

auxiliary regression. The latter set of results then quantifies how closely the predictions come

to their true values. Both exercises are based upon 1,215 output prediction that obtain from
running out-of-sample estimations for each sector and country (each combination containing

four years), as set out in section 5.2.

      Upon computing the absolute deviation from a perfect prediction for both our procedure

and the agnostic benchmark, respectively, we find that in 963 cases out of 1,215 country-
sector-year estimates of output, equivalent to 79.3%, our method delivers more accurate

predictions. The binary count measure comparison can be broken down by sector (Figure
10) and by country (Figure 11). Clearly, the accuracy of predictions is more varied in the
country dimension. Nonetheless, it is reassuring to see structural gravity based imputations
outperform an agnostic benchmark in nearly 80% of cases.27
      We proceed to characterize the percentage deviation of predicted to actual output, again
 27
      If the agnostic benchmark is taken to be median output, the share of better predictions is still 65.4%.



                                                      29
by sector (Table 8) and by country (Table 10). By construction, 100% corresponds to a
perfect prediction. Across all countries, sectors and years, median predicted output equals
108.9% of actual output. The interquartile range (columns 4-5) is also reasonably tight con-
sidering that all production information has been dropped before making these imputations.

That said, it is true that the distribution of predictions is skewed upward as a result of
a few very large numbers that obtain when the base on which the percentage deviation is
calculated (actual output) is a small number. Thus the mean prediction (148%) exceeds the
median prediction.

       The disaggregation of results indicates that the consistency of predictions as well as their
dispersion is fairly homogeneous across diﬀerent services sectors, while there exists appre-
ciably more variation across countries. Hence, the prediction accuracy is mostly aﬀected

by outliers for individual countries in certain sectors. We suspect that such mis-predictions

occur when a country’s international services trade is minuscule relative to its internal trade,

which leads to very large estimated border eﬀects that in turn produce outlier predictions.
Indeed, when partitioning the sample of predictions according to countries’ supply shares

in a given sector, we find that predictions tend to be worse, and exhibit a larger variance,

when supply shares are low (Table 9). It is also true, as conjectured, that predictions are

less accurate when a smaller share of production is exported abroad (ie. the share of internal

trade is high).28
       We conclude from this benchmarking exercise that the novel procedure of recovering miss-
ing output data based on structural gravity restrictions delivers reasonable results. Output

figures thus estimated are robust to the specification of the auxiliary regression. The pro-
cedure’s good performance in a situation in which no production data at all is available is
particularly appealing because outside OECD countries, almost no measures but projected
measures exist. At the same time, it is clear that the precision of the estimated quanti-
ties depends on how much actual output information is available for estimating equation
  28
   A full break-down by sector and country (as in Tables 8 or 10) for either type of partitioning is available
upon request.


                                                     30
(18). Thus we conduct a sensitivity check to illustrate how output predictions depend on
the relative share of inferred to actual information, which demonstrates two regularities:
first, median inferred output (as a percentage deviation from its true value) is stable as it is
consistently estimated even as less information is used to predict it. Second, the confidence

interval widens as the auxiliary regression is based upon less and less countries. The pattern
of loss in accuracy is qualitatively similar across countries, and does also not vary across
years. The results of this robustness exercise are obviously noisy due to small sample size
in combination with influential data; however, they do support the notion that the method

proposed in section 5.2 is not particularly sensitive to either the amount of data available or
individual countries used for out-of-sample prediction. More details and figures are oﬀered
in Appendix B.



6     Conclusion

Structural gravity is applied to model barriers to services trade across many sectors, countries

and time based on development of an integrated dataset for services production and trade.

Border barriers are flexibly inferred relative to internal costs. An important regularity is
that relative border barriers are declining in the size of sectoral activity. The cause of this

external scale economy merits further investigation. We also find that border barriers have

generally fallen over time but also identify diﬀerences across services sectors and countries;
in particular, border eﬀects for the smallest economies have remained stable, giving rise to
a divergent pattern across countries.
    The good fit and intuitive interpretation of the results encouraged development of a
projection model whereby services production and trade data can be generated believably.
A crucial step in this procedure decomposes border barriers according to their structural
components, and the empirical estimation of the resultant model sheds light on the role of
institutions, geography, size and digital infrastructure as determinants of border barriers.



                                              31
The success of the projection method suggests that it could be usefully applied to analyse
developing countries’ services trade. More generally, beyond services trade, for which the
missing data problem is especially severe, our projection method may be useful when other
trade or production data quality is suspect.

   The full general equilibrium eﬀect of border barriers in services trade includes their eﬀect
on multilateral resistances (see Agnosteva et al., 2014). We leave this extension for future
work. Such general equilibrium analyses may also combine goods and services trade, for
which the methods and results developed in this paper would be useful.




                                               32
References

Agnosteva, D., Anderson, J. and Yotov, Y. (2014). ‘Intra-national trade costs: Measurement
  and aggregation’, NBER Working Paper No. 19872.

Anderson, J. (1979). ‘A theoretical foundation for the gravity equation’, American Economic
  Review, vol. 69(1), pp. 106–116.

Anderson, J. (2011). ‘The gravity model’, Annual Review of Economics, vol. 3, pp. 133–160.

Anderson, J. and van Wincoop, E. (2003). ‘Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border
  puzzle’, American Economic Review, vol. 93(1), pp. 170–192.

Anderson, J. and van Wincoop, E. (2004). ‘Trade costs’, Journal of Economic Literature,

  vol. 42(3), pp. 691–751.

Anderson, J. and Yotov, Y. (2010a). ‘The changing incidence of geography’, American Eco-
  nomic Review, vol. 100(5), pp. 2157–2186.

Anderson, J. and Yotov, Y. (2010b). ‘Specialization: Pro- and anti-globalizing, 1990-2002’,

  NBER Working Paper No. 16301.

Anderson, J. and Yotov, Y. (2011). ‘Terms of trade and global eﬃciency eﬀects of free trade

  agreements, 1990-2002’, NBER Working Paper No. 17003.

Armington, P. (1969). ‘A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of produc-

  tion’, IMF Staﬀ Papers, vol. 16, pp. 159–176.

Baier, S. and Bergstrand, J. (2007). ‘Do free trade agreements actually increase members’
  international trade?’, Journal of International Economics, vol. 71(1), pp. 72–95.

Baldwin, R. and Taglioni, D. (2006). ‘Gravity for dummies and dummies for gravity equa-
  tions’, NBER Working Paper No. 12516.



                                              33
Bergstrand, J., Larch, M. and Yotov, Y. (2015). ‘Economic integration agreements, bor-
  der eﬀects, and distance elasticities in the gravity equation’, European Economic Review,
  forthcoming.

Cheng, I. and Wall, H. (2005). ‘Controlling for heterogeneity in gravity models of trade and
  integration’, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 87(1), pp. 49–63.

Christen, E. and Francois, J. (2010). ‘Modes of delivery in services’, Centre for Economic
  Policy Research.

Coe, D., Subramanian, A., Tamirisa, N. and Bhavnani, R. (2002). ‘The missing globalization

  puzzle’, IMF Working Paper No. 171.

Costinot, A. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (2014). ‘Trade theory with numbers: Quantifying the
  consequences of globalization’, Chapter 4 in the Handbook of International Economics Vol.

  4, eds. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ, Elsevier Ltd., Oxford.

Coughlin, C.C. and Novy, D. (2013). ‘Is the International Border Eﬀect Larger than the

  Domestic Border Eﬀect? Evidence from US Trade’, CESifo Economic Studies, vol. 59(2),

  pp. 249–276.

Disdier, A. and Head, K. (2008). ‘The puzzling persistence of the distance eﬀect on bilateral
  trade’, The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90(1), pp. 37–48.

Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (2002). ‘Technology, geography and trade’, Econometrica,
  vol. 70(5), pp. 1741–1779.

Eichengreen, B. and Irwin, D.A. (1996). ‘The Role of History in Bilateral Trade Flows’,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Fally, T. (2015). ‘Structural gravity and fixed eﬀects’, Journal of International Economics,
  forthcoming, doi:10.1016/j.jinteco.2015.05.005.



                                             34
Feenstra, R. (2004). Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton, New
  Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Freund, C.L. and Weinhold, D. (2004). ‘The eﬀect of the internet on international trade’,
  Journal of International Economics, vol. 62, pp. 171–189.

Head, K. and Mayer, T. (2000). ‘Non-Europe: The magnitude and causes of market fragmen-
  tation in the EU’, Review of World Economics (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), vol. 136(2),
  pp. 284–314.

Head, K., Mayer, T. and Ries, J. (2008). ‘How remote is the oﬀshoring threat?’, European
  Economic Review, vol. 53(4), pp. 429–444.

Hillberry, R. and Hummels, D. (2003). ‘Intranational Home Bias: Some Explanations’, The

  Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85(4), pp. 1089–1092.

Jensen, B.J. and Lori Kletzer, L. (2005). ‘Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope and

  Impact of Services Outsourcing’, Institute for International Economics Working Paper,

  vol. 05-9.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A. and Mastruzzi, M. (2010). ‘The worldwide governance indicators:

  A summary of methodology, data and analytical issues’, World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper, No. 5430.

Kimura, F. and Lee, H.H. (2006). ‘The gravity equation in international trade in services’,
  Review of World Economics, vol. 142(1), pp. 92–121.

Koske, I., I.Wanner, Bitetti, R. and Barbiero, O. (2014). ‘The 2013 update of the OECD
  product market regulation indicators: policy insights for OECD and non-OECD coun-
  tries”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers.

Lejour, A. and de Paiva Verheijden, J. (2004). ‘Services trade with canada and the european
  union’, CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis.

                                            35
Mayer, T. and Head, K. (2002). ‘Illusory border eﬀects: Distance mismeasurement inflates
  estimates of home bias in trade’, (2002-01).

Mayer, T. and Zignago, S. (2006). ‘Notes on CEPII’s distance measures’, CEPII.

McCallum, J. (1995). ‘National borders matter’, American Economic Review, vol. 85(3), pp.
  615–623.

Melitz, J. and Toubal, F. (2014). ‘Native language, spoken language, translation and trade’,
  Journal of International Economics, vol. 93(2), pp. 351–363.

Millimet, D.L. and Osang, T. (2007). ‘Do state borders matter for U.S. intranational trade?
  The role of history and internal migration’, Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 40(1),

  pp. 93–126.

Miroudot, S., Sauvage, J. and Shepherd, B. (2012). ‘Trade costs and productivity in services
  sectors’, Economics Letters, vol. 114(1), pp. 36–38.

Nitsch, V. and Wolf, N. (2013). ‘Tear down this wall: on the persistence of borders in trade’,

  Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 46(1), pp. 154–179.

Olivero, M. and Yotov, Y. (2012). ‘Dynamic gravity: Endogenous country size and asset

  accumulation’, Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 45(1), pp. 64–92.

Santos Silva, J. and Tenreyro, S. (2006). ‘The log of gravity’, Review of Economics and
  Statistics, vol. 88(4), pp. 641–658.

Santos Silva, J. and Tenreyro, S. (2011). ‘Further simulation evidence on the performance
  of the poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimator’, Economics Letters, vol. 112(2), pp.
  220–222.

Tharakan, P., Van Beveren, I. and Van Ourti, T. (2005). ‘The determinants of india’s software
  exports and goods exports’, The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87(4), pp. 776–
  780.

                                             36
Trefler, D. (2004). ‘The long and short of the canada-u.s. free trade agreement’, American
  Economic Review, vol. 94(4), pp. 870–895.

Waugh, M.E. (2010). ‘International trade and income diﬀerences’, American Economic Re-
  view, vol. 100(5), pp. 2093–2124.

Yotov, Y.V. (2012). ‘A simple solution to the distance puzzle in international trade’, Eco-
  nomics Letters, vol. 117(3), pp. 794–798.




                                              37
Tables and Figures

                        Table 1: Sector Description.
                                                       EBOPS   EBOPS
     ID Description                       LABEL         code   level
      1   Transportation                   TRNSP        205    1
     2    Travel                           TRAVL        236    2
     3    Communications services          CMMCN        245    3
     4    Construction services            CSTRN        249    4
     5    Insurance services                INSUR       253    5
     6    Financial services                FINCE       260    6
     7    Computer services                CMPTR        263    7.1
     8    Merchanting/trade-rel services   TRADE        269    9.1
     9    Operational leasing services     OPRNL        272    9.2
     10   Business/prof/tech services       BUSIN       273    9.3
     11   Research and development         RSRCH        279    9.3.3
     12   Audiovisual and related services AUDIO        288    10.1




                                    38
          Table 2: Panel PPML Gravity Estimates: Services, 2000-2006.
                          (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
                       TRNSP        TRAVL      CMMCN         CSTRN           INSUR          FINCE
Distance (< med)        -0.330        -0.411      -0.100       -0.596         -0.055          -0.690
                     (0.125)∗∗∗   (0.102)∗∗∗     (0.115)    (0.128)∗∗∗       (0.240)       (0.259)∗∗∗
Distance (> med)         0.047        -0.049      -0.028        0.023         -0.097           0.070
                       (0.030)     (0.023)∗∗     (0.031)      (0.036)       (0.041)∗∗        (0.045)
Contiguity               0.733        0.877       1.214        0.705          0.481           -0.201
                     (0.177)∗∗∗   (0.141)∗∗∗   (0.200)∗∗∗   (0.227)∗∗∗       (0.366)         (0.350)
Same Language            0.432        0.798       1.014        0.249          1.462           1.311
                     (0.131)∗∗∗   (0.139)∗∗∗   (0.147)∗∗∗     (0.301)      (0.300)∗∗∗      (0.172)∗∗∗
Colony                   0.382        0.282       -0.288       -0.049         0.482            0.110
                      (0.156)∗∗     (0.164)∗     (0.198)      (0.355)       (0.241)∗∗        (0.215)
SMCTRY                   2.824        0.966       6.440        4.135          6.355           2.215
                     (0.901)∗∗∗      (0.757)   (0.860)∗∗∗   (0.944)∗∗∗     (1.744)∗∗∗        (1.886)
Observations             5151          5139        5151         5151           5000            4969



                           (7)           (8)          (9)          (10)        (11)            (12)
                       CMPTR        TRADE         OPRNL          BUSIN      RSRCH            AUDIO
Distance (< med)         -0.983        -0.451       -0.603        -0.832      -1.210          -0.775
                      (0.190)∗∗∗ (0.138)∗∗∗ (0.180)∗∗∗ (0.164)∗∗∗          (0.277)∗∗∗      (0.300)∗∗∗
Distance (> med)          0.013         0.030        0.020        0.047       0.165           -0.003
                        (0.042)       (0.041)      (0.038)      (0.028)∗   (0.052)∗∗∗        (0.055)
Contiguity                0.236        0.498        1.363         0.225       0.099           0.486
                        (0.311)      (0.276)∗    (0.273)∗∗∗      (0.338)     (0.475)         (0.450)
Same Language             0.173        0.672        -0.708        0.525       0.952           0.705
                        (0.340)     (0.311)∗∗ (0.251)∗∗∗ (0.208)∗∗         (0.294)∗∗∗       (0.296)∗∗
Colony                   -0.346        -0.019       -0.264        -0.525      -1.572           0.252
                        (0.293)       (0.491)      (0.404)     (0.242)∗∗   (0.250)∗∗∗        (0.265)
SMCTRY                   -0.467         4.844        3.147        0.277       -3.033           2.884
                        (1.356)    (0.996)∗∗∗ (1.265)∗∗          (1.248)     (1.976)         (2.165)
Observations              5001          5151         4461          5140        4933            4694
                                 ∗            ∗∗           ∗∗∗
Standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.10,         p < .05,     p < .01
Dependent variable: service exports.
Poisson estimation with std.err. clustered at country-pair level.
Full sets of exporter-year and importer-year fixed eﬀects included but     not reported.




                                               39
Table 3: Panel PPML Gravity Estimates: Services, Trade cost coeﬃcients, 2000-06.
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                       TRNSP        TRAVL       CMMCN         CSTRN        INSUR        FINCE
 Distance (< med)        -0.678       -0.938       -0.732       -0.694       -0.119        0.028
                      (0.094)∗∗∗   (0.110)∗∗∗   (0.159)∗∗∗   (0.186)∗∗∗     (0.326)     (0.186)
 Distance (> med)         0.015       -0.024       -0.043       -0.047       -0.090       -0.130
                        (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.028)      (0.043)      (0.062)    (0.041)∗∗∗
 Contiguity               0.355       0.427        0.416        -0.094       0.565        0.313
                      (0.118)∗∗∗   (0.120)∗∗∗    (0.175)∗∗     (0.227)     (0.305)∗      (0.306)
 Same Language            0.143       0.540        0.356        0.282        1.052        0.526
                        (0.101)    (0.126)∗∗∗    (0.148)∗∗     (0.255)    (0.233)∗∗∗   (0.174)∗∗∗
 Colony                   0.204       0.303        -0.097        0.402       -0.081       0.195
                        (0.127)     (0.171)∗      (0.132)      (0.294)      (0.331)      (0.228)
 Observations             5151         5139         5151         5151         5000         4969



                             (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)      (11)       (12)
                         CMPTR        TRADE         OPRNL          BUSIN    RSRCH       AUDIO
  Distance (< med)         -0.205       -0.694        -0.299        -0.239    -0.044     -0.609
                          (0.245)    (0.201)∗∗∗      (0.269)       (0.171)   (0.300)   (0.292)∗∗
  Distance (> med)         -0.147       -0.000        -0.007        -0.047     0.003     -0.018
                        (0.041)∗∗∗     (0.045)       (0.044)       (0.032)   (0.052)    (0.050)
  Contiguity                0.248       -0.186         1.324         0.230     0.536     0.455
                          (0.245)      (0.229)     (0.303)∗∗∗      (0.192)   (0.358)    (0.341)
  Same Language            -0.203        0.365        -0.470         0.556     1.070     1.061
                          (0.265)     (0.219)∗      (0.281)∗     (0.231)∗∗ (0.275)∗∗∗ (0.320)∗∗∗
  Colony                    0.418       0.344         -0.061        -0.521    -1.407     0.120
                         (0.248)∗      (0.257)       (0.334)      (0.280)∗ (0.316)∗∗∗   (0.219)
  Observations              5001         5151          4461          5140      4933       4694
                                   ∗            ∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.10,         p < .05,     p < .01
  Dependent variable: service exports.
  Poisson estimation with std.err. clustered at country-pair level.
  Full sets of exporter-year, importer-year and country-year-SMCTRY fixed eﬀects
        included but not reported.




                                                40
                                       Figure 1: Overall Distribution of SMCTRY Coeﬃcients
         150
         100
Frequency
         50
         0




                         -5                     0                           5                      10                         15            20

                                                                        Border estimates
                   Notes:
                   Distribution based on 1231 SMCTRY coefficient estimates across all sectors, countries and years;
                   Travel sector coefficients depicted separately in light grey. Median border estimate = 5.35




                                                         Figure 2: Border Eﬀects across Sectors
        10
Border estimates
        0
        -2  5

                        E


                                   R


                                            H


                                                     R


                                                               IO



                                                                         L


                                                                                     N


                                                                                              E


                                                                                                        N


                                                                                                                    N


                                                                                                                             SP



                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                        N




                                                                                                                                    AV
                     C




                                                                                          AD
                               SU



                                           C


                                                    PT




                                                                                 SI




                                                                                                       R


                                                                                                                C
                                                           D


                                                                    PR




                                                                                                                         N
                    N




                                       SR




                                                                                                   ST



                                                                                                                M
                                                                                BU
                                                          AU




                                                                                                                                   TR
                                                M




                                                                                         TR




                                                                                                                        TR
                   FI


                              IN




                                                                                                            M
                                                                    O




                                                                                                   C
                                       R


                                                C




                                                                                                            C




                   Note: Average SMCTRY coefficient per sector across countries and years.




                                                                                              41
                                                  Figure 3: Border Eﬀects across Countries
         10
Border estimates
         0
         -25

                          K
                          T
                         U
                          A
                         N
                          T
                          X
                          L
                          R
                         N
                          K
                          P
                        ZE

                          C
                          L
                          N
                          A
                          L
                          N
                          T
                          A
                          E
                        BR
                        LD
                        AN
                        EU

                          S
                        SA
                     PO




                      BE




                       IR
                     ES




                     PR




                     AU
                     SV




                      LV



                     LU




                        N
                     ES




                       IT




                     FR
                     SW




                     AU
                      LT


                     SV




                     KO

                       FI




                       R


                       U



                      JP
                     C




                     N




                     U
                     D




                     G


                     C
                     D
                     G


                     H




                     Note: Average SMCTRY coefficient per country across sectors and years.




                                                 Figure 4: Border Eﬀects and Country Size
         12
         10




                                          SVK
                 8




                       ESTLVA LTU
                               SVN
Border estimates




                                                         PRT
                             LUX                                   POL
                                                                               KOR
           6




                                                    FIN
                                                      DNK
                                                       CZE                      ESP
                                                         GRC
                                                    HUN     BEL
                                                   IRL    AUT                         ITA       JPN
    4




                                                          SWE                          FRA
                                                                     NLD                GBR

                                                                               CAN
         2




                                                                                          DEU
                                                                         AUS
         0




                                                                                                           USA
         -2




                        24                          26                          28                    30

                                                      Size (log GDP, const PPP)
                     Note: Correlation coefficient = -.76 (p-value: 0)




                                                                                  42
Table 4: Sectoral “SMCTRY” Estimates
   (1)  (2)   (3)   (4)   (5)
Sector  2000 2002 2004 2006
TRNSP   1.68 1.15 0.93 0.66
TRAVL  -1.25 -2.44 -2.74 -2.76
CMMCN 3.39 3.52 2.54 2.17
CSTRN   5.06 4.92 4.18 4.28
INSUR   7.85 9.18 7.30 7.22
FINCE  10.24 11.19 9.35 9.03
CMPTR   7.61 8.15 6.65 6.01
TRADE   5.64 5.51 4.13 3.85
OPRNL   6.45 7.29 6.09 5.97
BUSIN   7.10 6.89 5.56 5.48
RSRCH   7.93 8.51 7.73 7.01
AUDIO   6.49 7.98 6.31 6.20
Note: Average “SMCTRY” coeﬃcient
      estimates per sector.




                 43
Table 5: “SMCTRY” Estimates by Country
    (1)    (2)   (3)   (4)   (5)
  Country 2000 2002 2004 2006
  AUS      1.48 1.12 1.42 0.97
  AUT      4.42 4.42 3.55 3.58
  BEL      6.86 5.28 3.33 3.44
  CAN      2.02 2.09 1.88        .
  CZE      6.20 6.28 5.37 4.86
  DEU      1.41 1.33 1.94 1.85
  DNK      7.67 7.51 4.76 3.58
  ESP      6.08 6.08 5.45 5.15
  EST      5.67 9.59 7.51 6.98
  FIN      6.67 7.08 5.09 4.89
  FRA      4.18 4.23 3.48 3.38
  GBR      4.16 3.78 3.32 2.71
  GRC      4.95 5.76 4.83 5.07
  HUN      5.40 5.65 3.89 3.85
  IRL      4.49 5.57 3.12 2.95
  ITA      4.76 4.94 3.54 3.40
  JPN      4.21 4.18 4.17 3.60
  KOR      6.60 6.74 5.94 4.72
  LTU      5.35 10.04 7.11 7.61
  LUX      7.57 7.42 5.49 5.71
  LVA      5.93 8.92 7.28 7.37
  NLD      3.73 3.89 2.94 2.69
  POL      7.34 7.97 5.35 4.72
  PRT      7.17 8.35 6.40 6.46
  SVK     11.41 10.01 9.77 9.37
  SVN      8.00 6.51 7.67 7.44
  SWE      4.12 4.15 3.27 3.45
  USA     -2.16 -1.87 -1.50 -1.26
  Note: Average “SMCTRY” coeﬃcient
        estimates per country.




                   44
                                      Figure 5: Border Eﬀects over Time, by GDP Quintile
        9
Border estimates
   3    0      6




                   2000                          2002                             2004                    2006

                                    1st quintile                   2nd quintile            3rd quintile
                                    4th quintile                   5th quintile            USA + DEU

                    Notes: Border effect by quantile of countries' log GDP in 2000.
                    USA and Germany shown separately.




                   Figure 6: Border Eﬀects over Time: Transportation Sector, by Output Share
        3
Border estimates
 1      0     2




                   2000                          2002                             2004                    2006

                                                Border effect below median output share
                                                Border effect above median output share

                    Notes: Transportation sector. Median output share evaluated in 2000.




                                                                              45
                     Figure 7: Border Eﬀects over Time: Construction Sector, by Output Share
        6
Border estimates
 4      3     5




                   2000                         2002                           2004                  2006

                                               Border effect below median output share
                                               Border effect above median output share

                    Notes: Construction sector. Median output share evaluated in 2000.




    Figure 8: Border Eﬀects over Time: Research/Development Sector, by Output Share
        9
Border estimates
 7      6     8




                   2000                         2002                           2004                  2006

                                               Border effect below median output share
                                               Border effect above median output share

                    Notes: Research and Development sector. Median output share evaluated in 2000.
                    Countries AUS, CAN, EST and USA omitted (no sectoral output data).




                                                                            46
Table 6: Home Bias Estimates (OLS), pooled estimation, 2000-06
                                      (1)               (2)           (3)
  Gravity exporter FE                1.0000            1.0000        1.0000
                                    (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)
  Gravity importer FE                1.0000            1.0000        1.0000
                                    (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)
  Gravity SM CT RY coeﬀ              1.0000
                                    (0.000)
  Size elasticity (exporter)         1.0000           -0.9442∗∗∗    -0.9380∗∗∗
                                    (0.000)           (0.026)       (0.027)
  Size elasticity (importer)         1.0000           -0.8885∗∗∗    -0.9319∗∗∗
                                    (0.000)           (0.033)       (0.033)

  Determinants of Internal Trade Costs, tii,t
  Log internal distance                               -0.4205∗∗∗    -0.3325∗∗∗
                                                      (0.060)       (0.054)
  Dom distr econ activity                              0.3920∗∗∗     0.3733∗∗∗
                                                      (0.059)       (0.060)
  Priv Sector Develop (WGI)                            0.6505∗∗∗     0.3391∗∗
                                                      (0.158)       (0.148)
  OECD PMR Index                                                    -1.2956∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.194)

  Border Barriers, bi,t
  Log GDP (PPP, curr)                                  2.3294∗∗∗     1.3739∗∗∗
                                                      (0.133)       (0.168)
  Log Population                                      -1.5352∗∗∗    -0.7218∗∗∗
                                                      (0.134)       (0.159)
  Contract enforc (# proc)                             0.0238∗∗∗     0.0210∗∗∗
                                                      (0.006)       (0.007)
  Rule of Law (WGI)                                   -0.7320∗∗∗    -1.0670∗∗∗
                                                      (0.132)       (0.149)
  Secure Internet servers                              0.0365       -0.0509
                                                      (0.052)       (0.087)
  Fixed-line teledensity                              -0.0241∗∗∗     0.0013
                                                      (0.003)       (0.004)
  Mobile phone teledensity                            -0.0205∗∗∗    -0.0201∗∗∗
                                                      (0.002)       (0.002)

  Average Border, b̄t
  Sector Fixed Eﬀects, ν k                               Yes           Yes
  Year Fixed Eﬀects, µt                                  Yes           Yes

  Observations                          1215             1215          1051
  Adjusted R2                          1.000            0.860         0.819
  Dependent variable: ln Xii
  Sector and year fixed eﬀects included in models (2)-(3) but not reported.
  Least squares estimation with bootstrapped std.err. (500 replications).
                                       47
                                                            Table 7: Home Bias Estimates (OLS), by sector, 2000-06.
                                            (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                                         TRNSP         TRAVL         CMMCN          CSTRN        INSUR        FINCE        CMPTR        TRADE        OPRNL        BUSIN        RSRCH        AUDIO
     Gravity exporter FE                 1.0000        1.0000         1.0000        1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000
                                        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
     Gravity importer FE                 1.0000        1.0000         1.0000        1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000       1.0000
                                        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
     Size elasticity (exporter)         -0.8803∗∗∗    -1.3706∗∗∗     -1.0721∗∗∗    -1.1509∗∗∗   -0.8763∗∗∗   -0.9154∗∗∗   -1.1589∗∗∗   -0.9533∗∗∗   -0.9953∗∗∗   -1.0065∗∗∗   -1.2355∗∗∗   -1.0803∗∗∗
                                        (0.228)       (0.225)        (0.111)       (0.091)      (0.086)      (0.072)      (0.116)      (0.058)      (0.107)      (0.115)      (0.205)      (0.048)
     Size elasticity (importer)         -0.7802∗∗∗    -0.3076        -0.8044∗∗∗    -0.7964∗∗∗   -0.8761∗∗∗   -0.7924∗∗∗   -0.8715∗∗∗   -0.9511∗∗∗   -0.8163∗∗∗   -0.6626∗∗∗   -0.8001∗∗∗   -0.9600∗∗∗
                                        (0.235)       (0.288)        (0.126)       (0.146)      (0.118)      (0.093)      (0.140)      (0.087)      (0.144)      (0.138)      (0.166)      (0.061)

     Determinants of Internal Trade Costs, tii,t
     Log internal distance        -0.5728∗∗∗ 0.6398∗                 -0.2891∗∗     -0.2911∗∗    -0.7953∗∗∗   -0.4051∗∗    -0.0813      -0.2844∗∗     0.0835      -0.7470∗∗∗   -0.8927∗     -0.0415
                                  (0.134)       (0.361)              (0.122)       (0.135)      (0.202)      (0.161)      (0.220)      (0.128)      (0.357)      (0.210)      (0.488)      (0.182)
     Dom distr econ activity       1.0354∗∗∗ -0.6101∗∗                0.2219∗       0.1788       0.4432∗∗     0.1971       0.8417∗∗∗    0.2799∗      0.0909       0.6982∗∗∗    0.9369∗∗∗    0.4833∗∗∗
                                  (0.186)       (0.302)              (0.131)       (0.127)      (0.182)      (0.143)      (0.168)      (0.146)      (0.297)      (0.153)      (0.304)      (0.179)
     Priv Sector Develop (WGI) 0.2939            1.2902               0.7910∗       0.5161       0.9691∗∗     0.9174∗∗     0.9802∗      0.5793       1.7756∗∗     0.6557       0.1674       1.3019∗∗
                                  (0.546)       (0.983)              (0.459)       (0.484)      (0.490)      (0.453)      (0.579)      (0.469)      (0.853)      (0.537)      (0.991)      (0.632)

     Border Barriers, bi,t




48
     Log GDP (PPP, curr)                 1.7498∗∗∗     4.1521∗∗∗      1.8159∗∗∗     2.2260∗∗∗    2.9444∗∗∗    2.5036∗∗∗    3.5073∗∗∗    1.8994∗∗∗    2.5614∗∗∗    1.9905∗∗∗    2.4210∗∗     2.7892∗∗∗
                                        (0.395)       (0.791)        (0.334)       (0.350)      (0.543)      (0.468)      (0.459)      (0.400)      (0.601)      (0.513)      (0.956)      (0.563)
     Log Population                     -1.2049∗∗∗    -2.6250∗∗∗     -0.8885∗∗∗    -1.1849∗∗∗   -2.1426∗∗∗   -1.7471∗∗∗   -2.9804∗∗∗   -0.9770∗∗∗   -1.6621∗∗    -1.2820∗∗    -1.6215      -2.0656∗∗∗
                                        (0.423)       (0.713)        (0.334)       (0.384)      (0.566)      (0.507)      (0.483)      (0.351)      (0.711)      (0.551)      (1.014)      (0.557)
     Contract enforc (# proc)            0.0102        0.0296         0.0132        0.0170∗      0.0172       0.0470∗∗    -0.0050       0.0218∗     -0.0045       0.0456∗∗∗    0.0579       0.0249
                                        (0.012)       (0.032)        (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.022)      (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.013)      (0.025)      (0.017)      (0.054)      (0.016)
     Rule of Law (WGI)                  -0.3245       -1.2957∗∗      -0.5410∗∗     -0.3449      -0.8773∗∗    -0.9244∗∗    -1.3118∗∗∗   -0.5016∗     -1.1027      -0.6418      -0.6512      -1.6351∗∗∗
                                        (0.360)       (0.636)        (0.259)       (0.339)      (0.433)      (0.431)      (0.461)      (0.281)      (0.725)      (0.476)      (1.005)      (0.561)
     Secure Internet servers            -0.0187       -0.7950        -0.0746       -0.1398       0.0675      -0.1067       0.2814∗     -0.0283       0.1050       0.0141       0.1662       0.1237
                                        (0.169)       (0.484)        (0.152)       (0.167)      (0.153)      (0.167)      (0.160)      (0.157)      (0.268)      (0.147)      (0.320)      (0.188)
     Fixed-line teledensity             -0.0350∗∗∗    -0.0167        -0.0243∗∗∗    -0.0319∗∗∗   -0.0359∗∗∗   -0.0180∗∗    -0.0316∗∗∗   -0.0312∗∗∗   -0.0333∗     -0.0235∗∗     0.0034      -0.0116
                                        (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.013)      (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.017)      (0.010)      (0.020)      (0.009)
     Mobile phone teledensity           -0.0135∗∗     -0.0150        -0.0177∗∗∗    -0.0206∗∗∗   -0.0275∗∗∗   -0.0212∗∗∗   -0.0275∗∗∗   -0.0165∗∗∗   -0.0224∗∗    -0.0260∗∗∗   -0.0305∗∗    -0.0252∗∗∗
                                        (0.006)       (0.012)        (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.007)      (0.013)      (0.008)

     Average Border, b̄t
     Year Fixed Eﬀects, µt                  Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

     Observations                           111             99           111          111           96           97           98          111           94          100           96           91
     Adjusted R2                          0.856          0.736         0.899        0.881        0.877        0.879        0.881        0.885        0.819        0.895        0.605        0.862
                              k
     Dependent variable: ln Xii,t . Year fixed eﬀects included but not reported.
     Least squares estimation with bootstrapped std.err. (500 replications).
.2
.15
.1
.05
0                                  Figure 9: Accuracy of Output Estimation




      0                              5                             10                        15
                                                Log Output

                                  Predicted output                      Actual output
      Notes: Densities based on 1332 observations across all sectors, countries and years.




                                                                 49
                                                          Figure 10: Accuracy of Output Estimation (II), by sector
                                   100
Number of better/worse predictions
  20      40      600     80

                                              N


                                                      N


                                                            SP



                                                                       E


                                                                                R


                                                                                         N



                                                                                                  L


                                                                                                           L


                                                                                                                    E


                                                                                                                             IO



                                                                                                                                     R


                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                              AV



                                                                                                          N
                                                                   AD




                                                                                                                C
                                              C


                                                    R




                                                                               PT



                                                                                     SI




                                                                                                                                   SU



                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                      PR
                                                           N




                                                                                                               N
                                             M


                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                         SR
                                                                                    BU




                                                                                                                        AU
                                                                                             TR
                                                                           M
                                                          TR


                                                                  TR




                                                                                                               FI




                                                                                                                                  IN
                                         M




                                                                                                      O
                                                  C




                                                                           C




                                                                                                                                         R
                                         C




                                                                 Superior prediction                           Inferior prediction
                                         Note: superior prediction denotes instances in which novel procedure delivers output estimates
                                           that are closer to true value than naive benchmark.




                                                        Figure 11: Accuracy of Output Estimation (II), by country
                                   50
Number of better/worse predictions
 10      20       300      40

                                              N
                                              K
                                            ZE

                                              T
                                              L
                                              T
                                             C
                                           EU

                                              N
                                              A
                                              X
                                              A
                                             N
                                              E
                                             U
                                             N
                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                        BR

                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                        LD

                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                          K
                                                                                                        SA
                                                                                                        AN
                                         PO




                                                                                                       IR



                                                                                                      BE
                                         PR


                                         AU




                                                                                                      ES
                                           N




                                          LV
                                         LU
                                         FR


                                         SW




                                                                                                       IT



                                                                                                      AU
                                                                                                      ES
                                                                                                      SV
                                           U




                                           R


                                           FI




                                         SV


                                          LT
                                          JP




                                                                                                      KO
                                         C




                                                                                                      N




                                                                                                      U
                                         D




                                         D




                                                                                                      G




                                                                                                      C
                                         H




                                         G




                                                               Superior performance                            Inferior performance
                                         Note: superior prediction denotes instances in which novel procedure delivers output estimates
                                           that are closer to true value than naive benchmark.




                                                                                                          50
       Table 8: Y prediction (percentage deviation)
            Obs Median Mean P25    P75
     TRNSP  111  104.3 161.5 65.9 312.5
     TRAVL   99  114.1 229.8 67.6 304.2
     CMMCN 111   128.5 122.0 76.3 151.8
     CSTRN  111  130.8 170.0 72.4 306.7
     INSUR   96  103.9 128.4 48.1 171.9
     FINCE   97  107.1 117.2 59.5 156.4
     CMPTR   98   94.3  99.4 42.8 118.1
     TRADE  111  119.2 143.4 65.0 225.4
     OPRNL   94   67.0 105.3 37.9 108.7
     BUSIN  100   95.9 106.4 62.0 134.7
     RSRCH   96   72.9 185.1 26.7 146.9
     AUDIO   91   75.7 104.6 43.0 133.7
     Total 1215  108.9 148.0 64.5 217.7



        Table 9: Output predictions by subsamples
               Obs     Median       Mean SD         P25     P75
Full sample    1215     108.9       148.0 140.6     64.5   217.7
Sample partitioned by median supply share:
 below        581    127.7   158.3 307.2 75.7 191.9
 above        634    107.6   147.4 123.2 62.9 225.4
Sample partitioned by median trade concentration:
 below        589     95.0   121.2 157.5 68.0 142.0
 above        626    125.1   158.1 132.3 59.2 239.7
Notes:
Threshold median calculated for country-sector combinations.
Trade concentration means share of internal to total trade.




                               51
Table 10: Y prediction (percentage deviation)
       Obs Median Mean   P25   P75
AUS     20   45.7  56.9 38.9 60.9
AUT     47  119.0 121.6 99.3 139.7
BEL     48  149.0 187.0 133.2 217.6
CAN     15  241.1 265.6 237.8 248.2
CZE     48  203.3 210.9 176.7 244.7
DEU     48   68.0  70.2 60.5 71.5
DNK     48   84.2 115.1 76.3 147.3
ESP     48  141.3 170.3 89.4 217.7
EST     38  152.7 148.8 122.1 171.0
FIN     48  164.6 173.8 132.3 199.2
FRA     48  107.0 101.7 76.8 128.5
GBR     48   46.1  50.1 43.1 53.5
GRC     48  104.3 134.8 42.2 166.1
HUN     48  332.8 373.5 309.4 443.8
IRL     46  118.4 164.2 79.2 205.6
ITA     44   79.3  99.9 73.1 107.6
JPN     48   89.4  99.3 64.9 131.4
KOR     47  125.1 186.2 118.2 270.9
LTU     41  192.0 204.8 190.3 233.1
LUX     45   47.3  84.5 34.8 96.5
LVA     43  152.6 160.9 145.2 171.0
NLD     48  169.5 191.7 159.1 200.8
POL     48  176.6 193.4 158.2 233.3
PRT     47   54.7  55.1 49.3 72.5
SVK     48    3.5   3.8   3.3   4.1
SVN     42  197.0 207.7 152.6 219.5
SWE     48   64.3  70.0 53.5 78.4
USA     20  255.3 288.7 225.4 338.6
Total 1215  108.9 148.0 64.5 217.7




                     52
Supplementary Material

Appendix A: Data Description

Supplementing Section 3, this appendix oﬀers more detailed information on data sources and

construction of variables.
    Trade Data. Our primary source of data on cross-border services trade flows are the
“OECD Statistics on International Trade in Services: Volume II - Detailed Tables by Part-

ner Country” (Complete Edition as obtained from OECD.Stat, henceforth “TiSP”).29 The
database provides information on international trade in services by partner country for 32
reporting OECD countries plus the Russian Federation and Hong Kong China, which is a

non-member Special Administrative Region of China that is in the top twenty service ex-

porters in the world. For each reporting country, data for at least the main trading partners

are provided. We use data covering the period from 2000-2007. All values are in millions of
US dollars.30 In addition to the partner dimension, TiSP trade data are also broken down

by type of service according to the Extended Balance of Payments Services (EBOPS) clas-

sification, i.e. standard components and possibly sub-items according to the fifth edition of

the IMF’s Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5); the BMP5’s core recommendation calls on
countries to report trade in 11 main categories of services and, as far as possible, the full
detail of EBOPS sub-items. Thus, not surprisingly, the level of detail reported varies across

countries.

    We focus on export flows as a more reliable measure of trade flows due to stronger
   29
      The data capture trade between residents and non-residents of countries and are reported within the
framework of the Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services.
   30
      Baldwin and Taglioni (2006) discuss the implications of inappropriate deflation of nominal trade val-
ues, which they call “the bronze-medal mistake” in gravity estimations. Their most preferred econometric
specification is one with un-deflated trade values, bilateral fixed eﬀects, and time-varying country dummies,
which, in addition to accounting for the multilateral resistances in a dynamic setting, will “also eliminate any
problems arising from the incorrect deflation of trade.” As mentioned above, the structural interpretation
of the time-varying, country-specific, directional fixed eﬀects (FEs) in our setting is a combination of the
multilateral resistance terms and the trading partners output and expenditures. It is easy to see how the
FEs would also absorb any deflator indexes, exchange rates, etc. Thus, the real- and nominal-trade estimates
should be identical.


                                                      53
reporting incentives for the exporting firms. The initial dataset consists of some 400,000 non-
missing OECD export flows across all country pairs, years and sectors; about half of these
entries are zeros. After balancing the dataset with respect to sectors (EBOPS categories),
missing values arise in the dataset for two reasons. On the one hand, if there is trade for

any given country pair and any given service category in at least one year, then we assign
missing values in all years in which no trade is observed. If no trade is observed in any
year, a zero is instead assigned. On the other hand, the TiSP dataset flags “non-publishable
and confidential value” entries, signifying that the original value is positive but undisclosed.

There are about 144,000 such non-publishable observations. Using the TiSP dataset’s import
entries as mirror export flows allows us to recover an additional 130,000 non-missing export
flows, thereby increasing the number of non-zero observations by about 70 percent.31 We

use this step to also recover services trade flows of two additional countries (Latvia and

Lithuania) for which disaggregated output information exists in EUKLEMS but which do

not report cross-border trade flows as part of OECD’s TiSP dataset.
       We perform additional checks to ensure that the trade data are consistent across all levels

of service categories. Since EBOPS is a hierarchical classification, it is a logical requirement

to ensure that any value reported at the heading level corresponds to the sum of its con-

stituent subheadings. Starting at the most disaggregated level and working upwards, heading

entries are imputed from subheading sums either (i) when the higher-level entry is missing
while the lower-level sum is not, or (ii) whenever the sum of lower-level entries exceeds the

value reported at the heading level. These adjustments to the OECD TiSP dataset ensure
its internal consistency and help recover additional observations.
       Even though the majority of OECD countries already accounts for a large share of global
cross-border service trade (74 percent of world exports and 69 percent of world imports, based
on 28 OECD members in 2007), we attempt to maximize coverage of global trade flows by
augmenting the OECD TiSP data with information from the “United Nations International
  31
    For within-OECD trade, the original export flow is always retained even if a matching mirror flow would
be found to exist.


                                                    54
Trade in Services Database” as published by the United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Aﬀairs, Statistics Division (UNSD). The UN services trade data are broken down
by EBOPS category and partner country, starting with the year 2000, on an annual basis.
The UNSD receives data and metadata from National Statistical Oﬃces, Central Banks and

the Statistical Oﬃce of the European Communities; all values are in US dollars. The UN
dataset is subjected to the same procedure for checking internal consistency across EBOPS
levels.32 Only originally reported export flows are used, no mirroring is performed on UN
data.

       Since OECD’s TiSP constitutes our preferred data source, the UN data serves to augment
the dataset only in instance when the corresponding OECD observation is missing. This
implies that mirror OECD flows take precedence over original UN exports even if an exact

match exists. An additional 120,000 observations can be gained by updating missing OECD

data with UN data.33

       Production Data. Annual production data for services sectors are obtained from the
“EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts: November 2009 Release” as updated in

March 2011. The EU KLEMS Database provides for one of the most detailed sectoral

breakdowns available. Coverage comprises mostly of OECD members which corresponds

closely to the source for cross-border services trade data. The raw data consist of “gross

output at current basic prices” in millions of local currency units. All gross output (GO)
values are converted into current USD using oﬃcial exchange rates taken from Eurostat.

We use data covering 2000-2007 as EU KLEMS series currently extend only up to 2007. As
noted above, availability of services production data predetermines the dimensions of our
  32
      Amongst other things, the hierarchical consistency check serves to level out heterogeneous reporting
habits across countries. For instance, the United States happens to report bilateral trade in ‘Telecommuni-
cations services’ only at the subheading level whereas the heading entry ‘Communications Services’ is missing
in the raw (unprocessed) data; performing the consistency check as described above allows us to retain this
information which would otherwise likely have been lost.
   33
      The majority of those–or 93,000 observations–that appear as missing in the TiSP data can be updated
from the UN database, whereas 20 percent consist of ‘new’ entries in the sense that the respective country
pair–year–EBOPS combination did not exist in the OECD data. Both additions underscore the usefulness
of drawing on both datasets.



                                                     55
sample to 28 countries, 12 sectors, and 8 years over the period 2000-2007, even though the
gravity model estimations in section 4 use trade data for an additional eight countries.34
       Production data is reported according to the NACE Rev.1 classification (Statistical Clas-
sification of Economic Activities in the European Communities), which is derived from ISIC.

Most of the 28 countries report services production data at the NACE division level, yet
three countries report with less sectoral detail (Australia, Canada, and the United States).
In order to estimate the gravity model, NACE output data need to be concorded to the
trade classification for services, which was done based on the “Correspondence between ISIC

Categories for Foreign Aﬃliates (ICFA) and Extended Balance of Payments Services Classifi-
cation (EBOPS)” as published in Annex IV of the UN’s Manual on Statistics of International
Trade in Services. The concordance required modifications, for instance when the correspon-

dence table is more detailed than what is reported in the EU KLEMS database, and/or when

a NACE category would need to be mapped onto multiple EBOPS codes. Some sectors are

inherently diﬃcult to concord to trade categories, reflecting the fact that their output is
unlikely to be tradable, e.g. real estate activities, sewage and sanitation activities, or some

residual categories. These sectors do not appear to have much relevance for trade in services

and were thus dropped. Table 1 displays the 12 sectors that could successfully be concorded.

       Internal Trade and Expenditures. Both variables are calculated from production data in

the following way. A country’s internal trade for any given sector is calculated by subtracting
sectoral exports from gross output. We back out a country’s sectoral expenditure data as

the sum of imports from all origin countries including itself or, equivalently, gross output
less exports plus imports from abroad.
       Gravity Variables. Data on standard gravity variables including distance, common lan-
guage, common borders, and colonial ties are from CEPII’s Distances Database. An im-
portant advantage of the CEPII Distances Database is that it includes population-weighted
distances that can be used to calculate consistently both bilateral distances as well as inter-
  34
    These countries are Chile, Hong Kong China, Israel, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, the Russian Feder-
ation and Turkey.


                                                  56
nal distances.35 We use the former in the gravity estimations of international services trade
and the latter in our study of the determinants of borders.



Appendix B: Prediction Accuracy and Number of Coun-

tries

This robustness check illustrates how the accuracy of projections depends on the share of
actual output information that is available for estimating equation (18). The exercise involves
estimating output repeatedly for a given country as in section 5.2 but each time based upon
an incrementally smaller sample containing output information. We then trace out how
the mean and variance of predicted output change as the procedure is run on less and less

information (Figure 12). The 90% confidence interval is constructed based on 200 random

country samples for each set number of countries (N = 27, 26, . . . , 17) used to predict output;

in each case the value of predicted output at the 5th and 95th percentile of the resultant

distribution is retained.36
       The examples of Austria, Belgium, France, Korea, Poland and Germany in the case of

Computer services, which are shown in Figure 12, demonstrate two facts that we would

expect from this exercise: (1) median inferred output (as a percentage deviation from its
true value) is stable as it is consistently estimated even as less information is used to predict

it; (2) at the same time, the confidence interval widens as the auxiliary regression is based
upon less and less countries. The pattern of loss in accuracy is qualitatively similar across
  35
      The CEPII procedure (see Mayer and Zignago (2006)      ∑ is based ∑ on popHead and Mayer (2000), using the
following formula to generate weighted distances: dij = k∈i pop       k
                                                                   popi    l∈j popj dkl , where popk is the population
                                                                                  l


of agglomeration k in trading partner i, and popl is the population of agglomeration l in trading partner j,
and dkl is the distance between agglomeration k and agglomeration l, measured in kilometers, and calculated
by the Great Circle Distance Formula. All data on latitude, longitude, and population is from the World
Gazetteer web site.
   36
      In Figure 12, a value of zero at the horizontal axis indicates that no country is deliberately discarded from
the estimation other than the one whose output is to be predicted out-of-sample. There is no confidence
interval in this case (since all 200 random samples are identical), and the point estimate in percentage
deviation terms corresponds to the respective country’s entry in Table 10.




                                                         57
countries, and does also not vary across years (Figure 13). Unsurprisingly, the patterns diﬀer
across sectors but not systematically so (Figures 14 and 15 for Japan). Overall, the results
of this robustness exercise are obviously noisy due to small sample size in combination with
influential data; however, they do support the notion that the method proposed in section

5.2 is not particularly sensitive to either the amount of data available or individual countries
used for out-of-sample prediction.




                                              58
                                                             Figure 12: Comparison across COUNTRIES: Computer services, 2000
                                              Country: AUT                                                                                                                                Country: BEL
                                              Sector: 7                                                                                                                                   Sector: 7
 Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                               Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
100%




                                                                                                                                              100%
                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                              Country: FRA                                                                                                                                Country: KOR
                                              Sector: 7                                                                                                                                   Sector: 7
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                              Percentage deviation of predicted output

                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
   100%




                                                                                                                                                100%




                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                              Country: POL                                                                                                                                Country: DEU
                                              Sector: 7                                                                                                                                   Sector: 7
   Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                              Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
                                                                                                                                                    100%
100%




                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.




                                                                                                                                         59
                                                             Figure 13: Comparison across YEARS: Australia, Transportation
                                           Country: AUS                                                                                                                               Country: AUS
                                           Sector: 1                                                                                                                                  Sector: 1
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                           Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                           Year: 2000                                                                                                                                 Year: 2002




                                                                                                                                                       100%
       100%




                                           0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                   0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                       Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                Number of countries dropped

                                                             Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                          Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                           Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                     Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                           Country: AUS                                                                                                                               Country: AUS
                                           Sector: 1                                                                                                                                  Sector: 1
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                           Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                           Year: 2004                                                                                                                                 Year: 2006




                                                                                                                                                           100%
                100%




                                           0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                   0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                       Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                Number of countries dropped

                                                             Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                          Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                           Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                     Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.




                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                      Figure 14: Comparison across SECTORS (I): Japan, 2000
                                           Country: JPN                                                                                                                                Country: JPN
                                           Sector: 1                                                                                                                                   Sector: 2
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                            Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                           Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
           100%




                                                                                                                                           100%
                                           0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                       Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                             Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                           Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                           Country: JPN                                                                                                                                Country: JPN
                                           Sector: 3                                                                                                                                   Sector: 4
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                           Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                           Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
             100%




                                                                                                                                                    100%




                                           0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                       Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                             Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                           Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                           Country: JPN                                                                                                                                Country: JPN
                                           Sector: 5                                                                                                                                   Sector: 6
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                           Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                           Year: 2000                                                                                                                                  Year: 2000
                                                                                                                                             100%
100%




                                           0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                    0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                       Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                 Number of countries dropped

                                                             Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                           Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                           Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                      Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.




                                                                                                                                      61
                                                                        Figure 15: Comparison across SECTORS (II): Japan, 2000
                                              Country: JPN                                                                                                                               Country: JPN
                                              Sector: 7                                                                                                                                  Sector: 8
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                              Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                 Year: 2000




                                                                                                                                                              100%
         100%




                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                   0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                          Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                     Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                              Country: JPN                                                                                                                               Country: JPN
                                              Sector: 9                                                                                                                                  Sector: 10
Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                              Percentage deviation of predicted output
                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                 Year: 2000
    100%




                                                                                                                                               100%




                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                   0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                          Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                     Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.



                                              Country: JPN                                                                                                                               Country: JPN
                                              Sector: 11                                                                                                                                 Sector: 12
   Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                                                                                                                              Percentage deviation of predicted output




                                              Year: 2000                                                                                                                                 Year: 2000
                                                                                                                                                  100%
100%




                                              0                 2             4               6                        8            10                                                   0                 2             4               6                        8            10
                                                                          Number of countries dropped                                                                                                                Number of countries dropped

                                                                Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI                                                                          Median pred                    Avg pred                    95% CI
                                              Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.                                                                     Note: CI constructed based on 200 random samples for each sample size.




                                                                                                                                         62
