                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




REGULATION OF INSURANCE WITH ADVERSE SELECTION AND SWITCHING COSTS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE PART D.

                                         Maria Polyakova

                                       Working Paper 21541
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21541


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2015




This paper is the first chapter of my MIT dissertation. I am indebted to Amy Finkelstein, Nancy Rose,
Jonathan Gruber, and Stephen Ryan for their guidance and support throughout this project. I thank
Jason Abaluck, Isaiah Andrews, Andreas Breiter, Francesco Decarolis, Glenn Ellison, Sara Fisher
Ellison, Kate Easterbrook, Michael Greenstone, Martin Hackmann, Nathan Hendren, Gaston Illanes,
Ray Kluender, Brad Larsen, Anna Mikusheva, Manisha Padi, Maxim Pinkovskiy, Jim Poterba, Adam
Sacarny, Brad Shapiro, Annalisa Scognamiglio, Stefanie Stantcheva, Michael Whinston, Joachim
Winter and seminar participants at MIT, Georgetown, Yale, UIC, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Stanford, Toulouse School of Economics, Bocconi, Sciences Po, WUSTL, NBER, ARIA RTS, iHEA,
IIOC, for very helpful comments, suggestions and discussions. I also thank Jean Roth at NBER and
Sarah Brunsberg at ResDAC for their help in navigating the Medicare data, as well as the Max Planck
MEA for their hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Maria Polyakova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Regulation of Insurance with Adverse Selection and Switching Costs: Evidence from Medicare
Part D.
Maria Polyakova
NBER Working Paper No. 21541
September 2015
JEL No. H0,H50,H51,I1,I13,L51,L78

                                                    ABSTRACT

I take advantage of regulatory and pricing dynamics in Medicare Part D to empirically explore interactions
among adverse selection, switching costs, and regulation. I first document novel evidence of adverse
selection and switching costs within Part D using detailed administrative data. I then estimate a contract
choice and pricing model in order to quantify the importance of switching costs for risk-sorting, and
for policies that may affect risk sorting. I first find that in Part D, switching costs help sustain an adversely-selected
equilibrium and are likely to mute the ability of ACA policies to improve risk allocation across contracts,
leading to higher premiums for some enrollees. I then estimate that, overall, decreasing the cost of
active decision-making in the Part D environment could lead to a substantial gain in consumer surplus
of on average $400-$600 per capita, which is around 20%-30% of average annual per capita drug spending.


Maria Polyakova
Department of Health Research & Policy
Stanford University
Redwood Building T111
150 Governor's Lane
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
maria.polyakova@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

Outsourcing a public health insurance benefit to private insurers creates a familiar trade-off
between potential efficiency gains from competition and potential efficiency losses from adverse
selection. We know much less, however, about the trade-offs from other market imperfections
in competitive insurance settings. In this paper, I utilize the institutional environment of Medi-
care Part D prescription drug insurance program, to empirically analyze the role of switching
frictions, focusing on how they may interact with the allocation of risks across contracts, and
with the outcomes of policies that regulate the contract space.
    Medicare Part D is a $100 billion public insurance program introduced in 2006 that currently
enrolls approximately 36 million beneficiaries.1 This heavily subsidized benefit is administered
entirely by private insurers that are extensively regulated. The insurers offer a variety of plans,
making individual contract choice a prominent feature of the program.
    Motivated by the dynamic evolution of the regulatory and pricing environment of Medicare
Part D, I use the detailed administrative records on enrollment, health risk, and spending in the
program, to explore how switching costs interact with adverse selection and with the regulatory
interventions that change the relative generosity of plans. The paper argues that, conceptually,
whether switching costs ameliorate or exacerbate adverse selection depends crucially on how
both the relative prices and the relative coverage generosity of contracts evolve in comparison
to the initial conditions. Quantitatively, I estimate a large switching friction, and that imple-
menting a nudging policy in the current Part D environment is likely to lower the degree of
adverse selection, and result in on average $400−$600 per capita gain in consumer surplus from
better matching of individuals to contracts and more efficient pricing. My results also highlight
that switching costs may mute the ability of policy instruments, such as changes in minimim
coverage requirements, to redistribute risks. I estimate that in the presence of switching fric-
tions, the Affordable Care Act policy of increasing coverage by “filling the donut hole,” will not
equalize risks across contracts, foregoing a $17 gain in average per capita consumer surplus.
   1
     https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2015-Fact-sheets-items/2015-04-
30.html


                                                  2
   The paper is structured as follows. The key pieces of Part D’s institutional environment are
summarized in Section 2. Section 2 also describes the sample of the nationwide administrative
data from the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid. In Section 3, I turn to descriptive analysis.
   The data suggest that there exists both cross-sectional and dynamic selection in Medicare
Part D. Surprisingly, given the extent of policy attention to this concern, adverse selection in
Medicare Part D has received little attention in the empirical literature. To fill this gap, I
document several pieces of evidence for the presence of adverse selection. First, I present the
results of the cross-sectional positive correlation tests in the spirit of Chiappori and Salanie
(2000). These tests suggest a large degree of asymmetric information: the most generous plans
attracted individuals whose annual drug spending was more than a standard deviation above
the spending in the least generous plans. Although it is typically hard to disentangle selection
from moral hazard in the positive correlation tests, Medicare Part D setting provides me with
a way of addressing this problem. I use a rich set of moral hazard-free ex ante diagnostic
information about the beneficiaries to recompute the positive correlation tests that still reveal
similar patterns. Consistent with these cross-sectional results is also the evidence of dynamic
adverse selection, which we see in the rapid unraveling of the most generous contracts.
   I then turn to the question of whether choices in Medicare Part D exhibit switching frictions,
which may be an important factor in understanding the over time dynamics of the risk-allocation
patterns highlighted above. Medicare Part D’s institutional setting and administrative records
provide a fruitful setting for exploring inertia in contract choices. First, there is substantial
variation in the choice set that is available in the program over time. Second, every year, new
beneficiaries enter the program, as they become eligible for Medicare upon turning 65. Using
these two sources of variation, I show that choices of the “continuing” cohorts persistently reflect
the market conditions of the year when they first entered, while the choices of the otherwise
similar newly entering cohorts reflect current market conditions.
   With the model-free evidence of adverse selection and switching costs in hand, I proceed to
a contract-valuation choice model of individual preferences for insurance plans in Section 4. I
estimate a flexible choice model that admits observed and unobserved heterogeneous preferences,

                                                 3
and allows me to quantify switching frictions, adverse selection, and the individuals’ willingness
to pay for different contract features conditional on their risk. The estimation results, discussed
in Section 5.1, suggest that switching costs are large and critical for explaining enrollment
paths over time. They further suggest that health risk plays an important role in determining
individual choices, which is consistent with the model-free evidence of adverse selection.
   Counterfactual analyses in Section 5.2 utilize the estimated choice model to explore the
complex interactions among adverse selection, switching costs, and minimum standard policy
regulations in the Medicare Part D setting. In the first counterfactual, I find that shutting down
the inertia channel in Part D, decreases the difference in the average risk between the least and
the most generous contracts by 26%. In the second counterfactual that simulates the expansion
of the minimum required benefit in Part D as envisioned under the Affordable Care Act (ACA),
I show that costly switching mutes the ability of policy instruments to redistribute risks. These
results may appear unintuitive, as in a standard model of adverse selection where only premiums
adjust over time, we would expect that active choices of rational consumers are likely to lead
to more acture adverse selection. Indeed, Handel (2013) provides an empirical example of
switching costs restricting a selection spiral in an employer-provided health insurance setting.
In general, however, the direction of the effect of switching costs on selection is ambiguous, and
depends on the development of relative premiums and relative coverage over time. Determining
the direction of the interaction between selection and choice stickiness is especially complex in
exchange-style health insurance settings. In such settings, a large number of competing plans
are differentiated both vertically and horizontally, their prices and characteristics are affected by
a host of regulatory interventions, and, due to complex subsidy and risk-adjustment provisions,
as well as strategic pricing, the relative premiums of plans may not perfectly reflect the actuarial
differentials among them. The combination of these factors implies that in such markets the
relative prices of more comprehensive contracts may up or down, and their characteristics may
adjust relative to the other contracts in a way that favors less acute sorting.
   To assess the quantitative relevance of these mechanisms in Medicare Part D, I conduct
several welfare analyses in Section 5.3. I find that independently of whether we believe that the

                                                 4
estimated switching friction is a real cost or not, there is a substantial gain in consumer surplus
to be realized from active decision-making and better matching. I estimate a gain in average
per capita consumer surplus on the order of $400 − $600 or 20% − 30% of the average annual
drug expenditure. This represents an upper bound of the possible surplus gain, as it assumes
that we completely eliminated the stickiness in choices. These numbers are in stark contrast to
my estimate of consumer surplus gain from the reduction in adverse selection, which I estimate
to be at least an order of magnitude lower. The latter result largely reflects how differences in
risks across more and less generous contracts are translated into consumer premium differences
under the existing regulatory environment in Medicare Part D. Overall, my results suggest that,
conditional on the observed environment, decreasing the cost of decision-making in a setting
like Part D is likely to have a significantly net positive effect on consumer surplus.
   The analysis in this paper is related to several literatures. First, the paper is related to the
growing literature on Medicare Part D. It is closest to the analyses in Ho et al. (2015), who
identify inattention as a key force for the observed choice stickiness, and analyze its implications
for strategic supply-side pricing. A lot of the Part D literature has focused on assessing the
rationality of individual decisions (Heiss et al. 2010, 2013; Abaluck and Gruber 2011, 2013;
Kesternich et al. 2013; Ketcham et al. 2012; Kling et al. 2012; Ketcham et al. 2015). Heiss et al.
(2009) note that adverse selection may be an important concern in Part D. Several papers have
suggested that switching costs may be present in Part D. Ericson (2014) documents evidence
of insurer pricing strategies consistent with the presence of inertia, while Abaluck and Gruber
(2013) and Miller and Yeo (2015a) include consumer inertia in their models. Ketcham et al.
(2012), on the other hand, suggest that inertia is not of key concern in Part D. Some of the
other work analyzing Medicare Part D has looked at the impact of Part D on prescription drug
consumption (Yin et al. 2008; Duggan and Scott Morton 2010); the role of subsidies(Decarolis,
2015; Miller, 2015; Decarolis et al., 2015); the welfare of reducing choice (Lucarelli et al., 2012)
and of adding a public option (Miller and Yeo, 2015b); mergers (Chorniy et al., 2014); risk
adjustment (Carey, 2015); and the moral hazard response to non-linearities of the contracts
(Einav et al., 2015). Duggan et al. (2008) provide an extensive overview of the Part D’s design.

                                                 5
        Second, the paper is related to the growing empirical literature that analyzes asymmetric
information, regulation, contract design, and welfare in both employer-provided and public
health insurance settings. Einav et al. (2010) provide a systematic overview of the literature in
this vein. The paper builds upon the insights in the work on the interaction between adverse
selection and minimum standards in Finkelstein (2004), as well as on the interaction between
adverse selection and inertia in an employer-provided insurance setting in Handel (2013).
        Third, the paper also relates to the growing literature on inertia and defaults in a variety of
public finance settings: among recent examples are Chetty et al. (2014), Beshears et al. (2014),
Hastings et al. (2013) and Luco (2013), who document such patterns in retirement savings
accounts, and Nosal (2012), who estimates switching costs in Medicare Advantage. Finally,
methodologically and conceptually, the paper is related to a broad literature that assesses the
impact of switching costs on market outcomes in a variety of settings (Farrell and Klemperer
2007 provides a survey), as well as the vast literature on regulation (Joskow and Rose 1989;
Armstrong and Sappington 2007).



2         Institutional Setting and Data

Basics of Medicare Part D
        Medicare is a public health insurance program for the elderly and disabled in the U.S. Until
2006, standard Medicare insurance covered hospital and physician services, but not prescription
drugs. In 2006, Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage was launched as part of the
Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, becoming the largest expansion of Medicare since its
introduction in 1965. While Medicare bears the greater share of Part D costs, the actual
administration of the Rx benefit and part of the actuarial risk have been outsourced to private
insurers. Part D insurers cover around 32 million beneficiaries (Hoadley et al., 2012). The
program has cost the government around $60-70 billion annually since 2006.2
        Medicare Part D coverage is voluntary. Eligible individuals have to actively enroll in one
    2
    See   Medicare    Baseline    Projection     reports   by    the   Congressional   Budget    Office:
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/44205.


                                                     6
of more than 30 stand-alone Rx plans offered in their state of residence during annual open
enrollment period or when they first become eligible, e.g. turn 65.3 Once enrolled, beneficiaries
pay premiums on the order of $400 − $500 a year, and in return insurers pay for prescription
drug purchases subject to a deductible, cost-sharing, and coverage limits. Beneficiaries stay in
their chosen plan for a year and may change their choice during the open enrollment period
next year. If beneficiaries make no active changes, CMS continues enrolling them into the same
plan. The facts that individuals self-select into plans and have a “default” plan if they do not
take any action after their first enrollment will be important for my analysis.
       Data – baseline sample
       I utilize administrative CMS data that comprises a 20% random sample of Medicare benefi-
ciaries nationwide for years 2006-2009. The data provides demographic and health information
about the beneficiaries, records the characteristics of all Part D plans available in each region
of the country, as well as the enrollment choices of the beneficiaries, and their subsequent pre-
scription drug claims. I make a number of restrictions to the original sample of 40.3 million
beneficiary-year observations to isolate the part of the market where 65 year old and older en-
rollees self-sort into a cleanly observable set of stand-alone prescription drug contracts. These
restrictions bring the sample down to 5.3 million individual-year observations.4 I further con-
struct a panel sub-sample of the baseline sample that contains individuals, whose choices and
utilization can be observed from the first year they enter the program to 2009. The panel
sub-sample has 3.7 million beneficiary-year observations on approximately 1 million unique
individuals.
       Table 1 provides the summary statistics of the observed demographic and risk related vari-
ables for the full sample, the baseline sample and the panel sub-sample. The individuals in
   3
     Part D is split into 34 geographic markets. They trace out state boundaries, combining some less densly
populated states into one market. All beneficiaries that live in the same Part D region face the same premiums
and contracs features.
   4
     More details on data construction are available in Appendix; Table A.1. The two biggest restrictions
are: 1) excluding beneficiaries that enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans that combine inpatient, outpatient,
and prescription drug coverage; 2) excluding individuals that were eligible for low-income subsidies from the
government, as a lot of these individuals did not make their own contract choices, and faced different premiums
and cost-sharing.



                                                      7
the baseline sample are on average 76 years old, 64% female, predominantly white (95%), with
annual average drug spending of about $1,900. The panel sub-sample looks very similar, albeit
a year younger on average and with slightly lower annual spending. In comparison to the full
sample, the baseline sample has individuals that are older, more often white and more often
female. Overall, the baseline sample has somewhat healthier individuals when compared to the
full Medicare population.
   Regulatory environment and the contract space
   The Medicare Part D’s contract space is strongly influenced by a minimum standard reg-
ulation. Medicare has designed a so-called Standard Defined Benefit (SDB) for the Part D
program, and insurers are required to provide coverage with at least the same actuarial value.
The SDB has an unusual design that features a relatively low deductible, flat co-insurance rate
of 25% up to the initial coverage limit (ICL) and subsequent “donut hole”, or coverage gap,
that has a 100% co-insurance until the individual reaches the catastrophic coverage arm of the
contract. Figure 1 illustrates what these cost-sharing features imply for individual out-of-pocket
spending. Insurers are allowed to adjust and/or top up the SDB contract design. The resulting
plans are highly multidimensional contracts that vary on a variety of characteristics, such as
cost-sharing thresholds, co-pay and co-insurance levels, and coverage in the “donut” hole.
   Despite the multi-dimensionality of contracts, there are three stylized facts about this market
that allow me to simplify the description of the contract space. First, each insurer in practice
offers the same me
   nu of 2-3 contracts in all Part D regions in which it operates. Second, insurers tend to adjust
only premiums, but not other contract features across different geographic regions. Third,
insurers tend to keep the “types” of contracts in their menu fixed over time. Using these three
stylized facts, I classify all contracts into four types. Contracts that offer the SDB level of
deductible and no coverage in the gap are classified as Type 1 contracts, while contracts that
reduce the deducitble (typically all the way to zero) and offer no coverage in teh gap are
classified as Type 2 contracts. Type 3 contracts offer a reduced deductible and partial coverage
in the gap, while Type 4 contracts offer a reduced deductible and full coverage in the gap. In

                                                8
addition to the cross-sectional complexity of the contract space, there is substantial over time
variation in characteristics and premiums. The time-series changes are the outcome of both the
market-driven adjustments of contract characteristics by insurers, as well as of annual changes
in SDB regulation. Figure 1 demostrates that SDB regulation increased its generosity over time
for higher spenders. For example, an individual who spent $3,000 on prescription drugs in an
SDB plan, would have paid $1,500 out of pocket in 2006, but $1,196 in 2009.



3     Descriptive evidence

3.1    Adverse selection in Medicare Part D

The theory of adverse selection postulates that more comprehensive insurance contracts are
likely to attract a pool of individuals with higher health risks. In practice, the literature does
not always find evidence of adverse selection in insurance markets (Finkelstein and McGarry,
2006), which suggests that the presence of selection is ultimately an empirical question. In this
section, I document novel empirical evidence for the presence of adverse selection in Medicare
Part D. To begin with, I present the cross-sectional correlation test as described in Chiappori and
Salanie (2000) using the ex-post realized drug expenditures. This exercise detects the presence
of asymmetric information and follows the well-established testing literature reviewed in Einav
et al. (2010). I then provide two pieces of additional evidence that help disentangle selection
from moral hazard, which is a common concern in health insurance. First, I repeat the Chiappori
and Salanie (2000) test using ex-ante information about individuals’ health summarized in a
risk score index. Second, I document patterns strongly consistent with the presence of a death
spirals in the early years of the program. It is important to note that in this section I evaluate
and define adverse selection as the inherent sorting of risks across contracts. I do not explicitly
consider whether this inherent risk-sorting is ex-post successfully mitigated in insurers profits
though a multitude of risk-adjustment and reinsurance policies that the federal government has




                                                9
put in place to combat selection in Part D.5 We can think about the exercise as testing for
whether there is in fact a reason for the government to be implementing these policies.
       Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates the positive correlation test graphically. It plots the average
realized drug spending in each region by contract type in 2006. We can see the stark differences
in the expenditures in the more and less generous contracts; for example, Type 4 contracts have
realized average annual spending on the order of $4, 000 in all regions, as compared to $1, 500
in the Type 1 contracts. Column (1) in Panel A of Table 2 presents the formal specification of
this positive correlation test. Since insurers are allowed to price the same contracts differently
in different regions, I control for region fixed effects. The regression specification takes the
following form:
                                              k=4
                                              X
                          Yirt = αr + δt +          βk 1{ContractT ypeit = k} + irt                            (1)
                                              k=2

where i indexes individuals, r indexes regions and t indexes years. I use realized total drug
spending as the outcome variable in Column (1). The results suggest that more generous
contracts have higher spenders. For instance, contracts with full gap coverage have individuals
with realized drug spending that is more than a standard deviation higher than in the plans
with minimum standard coverage.
       Since the correlation test that uses the realized spending as the outcome variable captures
both adverse selection and moral hazard, I repeat the exercise using risk scores as the outcome
variable in Column (2). Risk scores are constructed using ex-ante diagnostic information from
Medicare’s inpatient and outpatient claims, and therefore do not reflect any effects of Part D
plan structure on spending.6 Using the risk score measure gives qualitatively similar results,
although the magnitude of differences is smaller. To give a more meaningful interpretation to
   5
     There are three key policies that the government uses to ex-post adjust insurer profitability from bad risk
pools. First, government subsidies to insurers are adjusted to account for enrollees’ risk scores. Second, at very
high spending level,s the government directly picks up 80% of the bill, leaving the insurer liability limited to 15%
with the remaining 5% paid by the patient. Thirds, so-called risk corridors ensure that insurance companies do
not suffer large overall losses at the end of one fiscal year of operations.
   6
     CMS uses risk scores to adjust subsidy payments to insurers. This implies, if risk adjustment system were
perfect, the implications of adverse selection documented here on premiums would have been mitigated by CMS
payments across insurers. As noted above, in that case we could think about the exercise as testing for whether
there is in fact a reason for the government to be implementing these policies.



                                                        10
the results with risk scores, in Column (3) I project drug spending onto risk scores and use
“monetized” risk scores as the outcome variable in the correlation test. Column (3) thus gives
us the lower bound on how much of the estimated differences in Column (1) can be attributed
to adverse selection on ex ante observed (and thus potentially priceable) risk. Panel B of Figure
2 illustrates the moral hazard-free results graphically. The figure plots the empirical CDF of
the ex-ante risk, as measured by monetized risk scores, in different types of contracts in year
2006. We observe that the empirical CDF of risks in more generous contracts is shifted towards
having more mass of higher risks.7
      In addition to the presence of cross-sectional adverse selection, over time development of the
contract space in Medicare Part D is consistent with the presence of a rarely observed selection
spiral. Despite the extensive efforts of the regulator to incentivize private insurers to offer Part
D contracts with full gap coverage, Type 4 contracts were not available in the market from 2008
onwards. In Panel B of Table 2, I document that the average premiums in Type 4 contracts
increased by 93% from 2006 to 2007, as compared to under 30% premium increase in other
contract types. The average expenditure in these contracts increased from $3,852 to $4,377,
and enrollment dropped from 5% to 1% of the market in the first two years. In 2008 onwards
there were no Type 4 contracts.


3.2       Switching frictions in Medicare Part D

In general, documenting inertia or switching frictions in observational data is challenging, since
we need to distinguish between the “structural” state dependence and unobserved persistent
individual heterogeneity (Heckman, 1981a,b; Heckman and Singer, 1986; Heckman, 1991; Hon-
oré, 2002; Honoré and Tamer, 2006; Dube et al., 2010). Several features of the Medicare Part
D environment, however, render themselves well to such analysis. First, due to the regulatory
changes, entry and exit of plans, as well as substantial market-driven over time adjustment
in prices and characteristics of contracts (some of it strategic, see Decarolis (2015)), there is
pronounced non-stationarity in the observed contract space of the program. Second, the Part D
  7
      The graphical results of Panel A and B for other years of the data are presented in the Appendix.


                                                       11
environment allows observing all individuals making their first choice in 2006, as well as younger
individuals making their first choices in years 2007-2009 from the adjusted contract menus. In
this section, I utilize these two features of the Part D environment to provide model-free ev-
idence of choice behavior consistent with the presence of switching frictions.8 This approach
to documenting switching frictions is in the spirit of Handel (2013)’s approach to documenting
inertia in employer-provided health insurance.
    I find four descriptive patterns in the data consistent with the presence of significant switch-
ing frictions in Part D. First, as I document in Panel B of Figure 3, in each year of the
program about 90% of individuals enroll in their “default” plans; for individuals whose default
plans significantly change their financial characteristics (and thus their type) this probability is
still around 80%. Since premiums and contract characteristics change substantially from year
to year even if plans do not change their “type”, the high persistence in choices suggests that
switching costs may be present; this evidence alone, however, could just point to very persistent
preferences.
    As the second piece of evidence, I compare the choices of the newly entering and existing
enrollees in different years. The results are recorded in Table 3. I focus on the individuals
that can be tracked from their first entry continuously to 2009 and whose default plans’ types
were not changed by insurers throughout the observed years. This isolates individuals whose
choices are not conflated with substantial supply-induced re-classification of plan types. Two
patterns are pronounced in the data and consistent with the idea that switching frictions play
an important role. First, enrollment shares over time for a given cohort tend to be closely
related to the choices and market conditions of the first year in which the cohort entered the
program. Second, the choices of different cohorts in the same year are very different, even if
cohorts differ only by one year of birth. For example, comparing the choices in 2008 of the
cohort that entered in 2006 and the cohort that entered in 2008, we see that the 2008 cohort
is almost twice less likely to enroll in the least generous Type 1 plan than the 2006 cohort in
   8
     Section ?? then presents a more formal discussion of the issues related to the identification of the state
dependence parameter in dynamic discrete-choice panel data models.



                                                      12
2008: 10% vs 19 % enrollment share. Another persistent difference in choices is visible for the
2007 cohort, which in 2007 was much more likely to select the Type 3 plan with partial gap
coverage than cohorts entering in other years.
    Comparing the choices of different cohorts by their choice of different insurer brands rather
than contract types paints a similar picture. Figure 3 records the enrollment shares of the
two biggest insurers in the sample for each year 2006-2009. The enrollment shares are shown
separately for the 65 year olds, who are entering the program anew, and older enrollees with
incumbent plans. We see a striking difference in the 2009 choices. In this year, one of the
insurers (“Insurer B”) - which substantially increased its premiums in 2009 - lost almost all of
its market share with the new enrollees. Only about 5% of the 65 year olds chose to enroll in
the plans offered by this insurer. Among the continuing cohorts, its enrollment share also fell,
but not nearly as dramatically. It remained higher than 20%, implying that in 2009 the existing
cohorts were four times more likely to be enrolled with Insurer B than the new enrollees.



4     Empirical model

The descriptive evidence in Section 3 has documented that adverse selection and switching
frictions are present in Medicare Part D. This evidence alone, however, doesn’t allow quan-
tifying the economic significance of these market imperfections, or the extent to which they
may impact regulatory policies. To allow for such quantification, I formulate an econometric
model of how individuals choose which contract to enroll in, and how insurers adjust contracts’
premiums as a function of their risk pool. The model specifies the choice decision as a function
of the individuals’ information about their health risk, their incumbent insurance contract, and
heterogeneity in individuals’ preferences for different features of the contracts. Importantly, the
model does not attempt to identify different sources of inertia, but rather essentially quantifies
how much more likely beneficiaries are to select their incumbent plan conditional on the char-
actersitics of that plan, their choice set, and their idiosyncratic preferences. The choice model
takes a contract-valuation approach rather than a realized utility approach. This implies that I


                                                 13
project all contracts into a set of discrete characteristics and specify a stochastic indirect utility
function over these charactersitics, rather than projecting contract characteristics into the mean
and variance of spending and specifying a utility function over spending. Einav, Finkelstein,
and Levin (2010) extensively discuss the advantages and diasadvnatages of both approaches.9
       Specification. Each year t an individual i who lives in region r and is enrolled in the
Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug program chooses among Jr plans offered by B
insurers. Jr varies by region, as some plans are only offered in a subset of markets, and for
most plans premiums vary across markets. The insurance contracts in each Jr can be projected
into the same set of observable characteristics. I let individual i’s utility from choosing plan j
(where “plan” is region-specific, so r-indexing is suppressed) in year t be given by:


                             uijt = −αpjt + βit φjt + γit 1{Default}ijt + ijt                              (2)


                                           ijt ∼ iid Type 1 EV

Utility thus depends on the annual premiums charged by the plan in a given region in a given
year pjt , the characteristics of the plan φjt , and whether j was a default plan for individual
i in year t, where the default plan is usually the incumbent plan from t − 1.10 Individuals
are assumed to choose a plan that gives them the highest utility. An important assumption
that is implicit in this formulation of the utility function is that individuals are myopic in their
choice of plans. Further, this formulation assumes that beneficiaries choose the option with the
highest “perceived” utility, which may not necessarily correspond to the “best” plan for them
from actuarial risk-protection perspective (Abaluck and Gruber (2011, 2013)). For the analysis
of risk-allocation and choices in counterfactual scenarios, however, this “perceived” utility is
exactly the object of interest.
   9
     The contract valuation approach is common in the literature on health insurance; among recent applications,
are Carlin and Town 2010; Lustig 2011; Bundorf et al. 2012; Starc 2014; Ericson and Starc 2015.
  10
     In cases where plans were renewed or consolidated, CMS would default individuals in the same (if renewed)
or designated new (if consolidated) plan if individuals took no action to change their choices; I record these
cases as having “defaults”.




                                                      14
       I let the characteristics component φjt of the utility function include the following:


        βit φjt = β1it Deductiblejt + β2it ICLjt + β3it 1{Partial coverage in gap}jt +                         (3)

                + β4it 1{Tiered Cost Sharing}jt + β5it 1{LIS eligible plan}jt + β6i 1{Brand}j


This specification assumes that conditional on insurer, differences in plans can be accounted
for by the deductible level, the initial coverage limit and a set of indicators on whether or not
the plan offers partial coverage in the gap, whether the plan uses fixed dollar co-payments or
co-insurance percentage, and whether the plan is eligible to enroll individuals with low-income
subsidy. The included characteristics capture a substantial amount of variation among plans,
since many features that are not explicitly included, such as the quality of customer service,
pharmacy network quality, and the generosity of drug formularies tend to be insurer-level rather
than plan-level characteristics.
       Individual preferences for health insurance may reflect both individual health risk, as well
as horizontal tastes and risk aversion that may or may not be correlated with expected drug
spending. To capture these features of insurance demand in the model, I include rich observed
and unobserved heterogeneity in the specification of marginal utility. First, I allow individual
preferences for contract features to depend on the demographics and the individual’s health
risk. I use the full set of demographics observed in the data - age, gender, and race; as well
as proxies for expected spending - risk scores and an additional flag for having end-stage renal
disease diagnosis, which identifies especially high risks. Vector Dit records this information:
Dit = {ageit , genderi , racei , risk scoreit , esrd indicatorit }. The preferences are allowed to depend
on risk scores, but not on the realized spending. The advantage of this specification is twofold.
First, it takes an ex-ante perspective and does not impose that beneficiaries have the exact
knowledge of their ex-post realized spending. Instead, it assumes that beneficiaries have a
general understanding that certain diagnostic groups on average cause higher drug spending.
Second, it removes the concern about moral hazard in the choice model.11 In addition to
  11
    To verfiy that this choice of specification does not drive the results, I have estimated the model with ex-post
spending as part of the mean of random coefficients, with and without risk scores as additional mean shifters.


                                                        15
the rich set of observed heterogeneity, I allow for unobserved heterogeneity in the model, by
including random coefficients on the deductible, the initial coverage limit, and the indicator
for partial coverage in the gap. The distribution of the random coefficients is specified to be
normal.12 The unobserved heterogeneity allows for any private information about health risk
not captured in risk scores, for the heterogeneity in risk aversion, or any other individual-
specific preferences (or “mistakes”) for certain contract features. All in all, the coefficients on
the contract characteristics and the lagged dependent variable are specified as follows:13


                        βit = π β Dit + ψiβ , where ψ β ∼ N (ψ β , σ 2 ), forβ1 , β2 , β3                       (4)


                                        βit = π β Dit + ψ β forβ4 , β5 , β6                                     (5)

                                               γit = π γ Dit + ψ γ                                              (6)

Assuming that an individual chooses the plan that maximizes his or her utility, the model lets
us calculate the probability of a beneficiary choosing different plans in his or her choice set as
a function of parameters. The maximum likelihood estimation approach is then used to find
the values of the parameters that best rationalize the observed choices. Since in the data I can
track the same individuals making several consecutive choices, the estimation utilizes this panel
structure, explicitly modeling the probability of a sequence of choices. While assuming the
extreme value distribution for the taste shocks produces a closed-form probability expression
conditional on the realization of the random coefficients, the unconditional probability involves
integrating out the normally-distributed random coefficients. The latter implies that there is
no analytic closed-form solution for the probability integral that is part of the log-likelihood
The results are very similar to the baseline specification.
   12
      Variations on this specification, such as specifying more flexible heterogeneity on brand fixed effects, or
premiums, or imposing a log-normal distribution of random coefficients, do not significantly alter the main
estimates, although adding more unobserved heterogeneity does tend to reduce the estimate of the switching
friction. Hence, an important caveat to the current specification is that allowing for substantially more un-
observed heterogeneity may further reduce the exact magnitude of the switching friction estimate. Appendix
Table A.2 reports the results of the specification checks.
   13
      Note that for β6 , the baseline model includes demographic interactions on 2 largest brands, the more flexible
specification, reported in the Appendix Table A.2 includes full set of observed and unobserved heterogeneity in
insurer brands.


                                                        16
function. Thus, the model is estimated using a simulated maximum likelihood (MSL) procedure
as described in Train (2003, 2009) and Hole (2007).
       Identification. The identification of the parameters relies on several unique features of the
data. First, in the estimation of the switching friction parameter γ, we have to consider two is-
sues: distinguishing between the “spurious” versus “structural” state-dependence and the initial
conditions problem.14 The inclusion of the unobserved individual heterogeneity through random
coefficients into the model addresses the first issue in a way that is standard in the literature.
The assumption is that the random coefficients capture individual-specific persistence in pref-
erences, while the lagged dependent variable parameter captures the “true” state-dependence.
Moreover, in 2007, 2008, and 2009, there were cohorts of 65 year olds that first became eligible
for Medicare and entered the Part D program anew without switching costs. This implies that
in years 2007-2009 of the data I observe individuals choosing with and without switching costs
from the same menu of contracts. The latter feature greatly aids in separating the persistent
individual heterogeneity from the switching friction. The second issue of the initial conditions
problem does not arise in the current setting, as I observe the first choices for all individuals in
the estimation sample, because the year of the program’s launch is recorded in the data.
       In addition, the descriptive evidence in Sections 2 and 3 suggests that there is substantial
variation in the prices and the characteristics of plans in each year of the program. Such
variation is important, since if the environment were very stable, we couldn’t expect to observe
any changes in choices either with or without costly switching.15 The cross-sectional variation
in the non-price features offered by different plans (such as zero deductible) is generated by the
insurers’ strategy of offering menus of several vertically-differentiated contracts. This strategy is
  14
      The concern in the first issue is that the lagged dependent variable in the utility function, which is capturing
the switching cost, will be correlated with an individual-specific preference parameter. To illustrate, in a generic
binary non-linear dynamic panel model, this would imply that in yit = 1{βxit + yi,t−1 γ + αi + it > 0}, yi,t−1
is a function of αi . Thus, if αi is unaccounted for and left in the unobserved part of the utility function,
the identification assumptions about i will be violated. The literature on the non-linear dynamic panel data
discusses the two broad approaches to this problem - assuming a parametric distribution for the unobserved
individual heterogeneity (“random effects”), or trying to difference out the individual effects without functional
form assumptions (“fixed effects”), where the latter approach encounters a lot of challenges given the non-linear
nature of the model. Honoré (2002) and Honoré and Tamer (2006) provide excellent discussions.
   15
      Dube et al. (2010) discuss the importance of observing variation in the choice set for the estimation of
demand models with lagged dependent variables.


                                                         17
stable over time, which ameliorates that concern about contemporaneous responses to aggregate
demand shocks. Further, a lot of time-series variation in contract features is generated by the
changes in the minimum standard policy that annually adjusts the standard deductible and
initial coverage limits. The variation in premiums stems from two sources. First, insurers set
different relative prices for the two or three contract types in their contract menus. Second,
insurers set different prices for the same contracts in different geographic regions. All these
features of the data combined, aid to the estimation of the switching friction in this setting -
a task that is typically challenging in observational choice data settings. The intuition of the
identification argument is similar to that in Handel (2013) and Ho et al. (2015).
   Naturally, the rich cross-sectional and time-series variation in the premiums of insurance con-
tracts comes from observational data and not pricing experiments, suggesting that endogeneity
concerns are warranted. The stochastic component of the utility function ij may include un-
observed characteristics of contracts that are correlated both with premiums and individual
choices, leading to an omitted variables bias. For example, an insurer could be advertising a
particular contract in its menu more than other contracts and setting the price of this contract
higher/lower because of that. Note that conditioning on the insurer-specific fixed effects does
not resolve this issue if insurers are advertising a particular contract in their menu. One exam-
ple of such situation in the Medicare Part D setting is the endorsement of selected contracts
by a well-known third party. Several contracts in the portfolio of one insurer were endorsed by
the American Association of Retired Persons. It would be natural to assume that the AARP
endorsement both leads individuals to select this contract with a higher probability and allows
the insurer to raise prices either to exploit the less elastic demand, or to cover costs that may
arise from the marketing relationship with the AARP. Having such unobserved characteristics
in the stochastic portion of the random utility specification violates the assumption of no cor-
relation between the observed and unobserved components of utility. The standard approach
in the Medicare Part D literature (Abaluck and Gruber (2011); Heiss et al. (2013)) has been to
assume that the rich observed characteristics capture all the relevant information about choices.
In this paper I utilize an instrumental variables strategy based on the observations of contracts’

                                               18
expenditures in the administrative data to improve upon this approach.
       To correct for potential endogeneity, we need an instrumental variable that affects contract
premiums, but is not correlated with the contract characteristics that are not observed in
the utility function. Since the costs of insurance contracts depend almost entirely on the
prescription drug claims submitted by their enrollees, I use mean lagged realized claims as an
instrument for current premiums. As Medicare regulation suggests, and the pricing model below
confirms empirically, contract prices are strongly conditionally and unconditionally correlated
with lagged mean realized claims in the contract. To utilize the lagged mean realized claims in
each contract as an instrumental variable, we need to assume that the variation in this variable
is independent of the unobserved contract characteristics conditional on the observed contract
characteristics. For example, we need to assume that the AARP endorsement does not affect
the level of realized risks in the contract. This assumption appears plausible, as long as we
believe that the unobserved characteristics do not screen risks. The latter is indeed very likely,
as the reduced-form analysis of Section 3.1 suggests that the largest risk-screening happens
primarily on the gap coverage margin. To operationalize the instrumental variables estimation,
I utilize the control function approach.16
       Empirical model of contract pricing. To analyze how risk allocation may change in re-
sponse to nudging policies or to increases in minimum standard requirements, I need to account
for how insurers may adjust premiums of their contracts in response to the hypothesized changes
in the environment. I utilize a hedonic-style approach to estimate each insurer’s emprical policy
  16
     Petrin and Train (2009). Formally, the premium for contract j is a function of observed contract char-
acteristics φj , a variable that affects premiums, but doesn’t otherwise affect the choice decisions zj , and the
remaining unobserved term κj : pj = f (φj , zj , κj ). The endogeneity concern arises if κj is correlated with
ij in the utility function. Assuming linearity and additive separability of the unobserved component we have:
pj = λφ φj +λz zj +κj , which is the first stage familiar from a linear IV model. As the choice model is not linear in
price, however, the 2SLS technique cannot be applied. One alternative is the control function approach. The idea
of this approach is to empirically estimate κj and condition on it (or its function) explicitly in the utility function.
In practice, κj is calculated as the residuals of the first-stage regression of premiums on the observed contract
characteristics included in the utility function and the lagged claims instrument. In the second step, a linear con-
trol function CF = ω κˆj is included into the utility function:uijt = −αpjt + βit φjt + γit 1{Default}ijt + ω κˆj + 0ijt .
I assume that the stochastic part of the utility function 0ijt has an iid extreme value component that is inde-
pendent of κj with the remaining component distributed jointly normal with κj . This assumption returns a
mixed logit model with mixing over the selected characteristics of the contract as well as the error component
(Villas-Boas and Winer, 1999).



                                                            19
function. This reduced form approach does not specify an explicit model of strategic pricing
incentives, such as Bertrand. It does, however, allow for a tractable way of accounting for how
changes in risk allocation may impact premiums in an environment that is likely characterized
by a Markov-style equilibrium, as pricing decisions depend on the risk pool accumulated by
insurers in the previous period.17 Furthermore, the hedonic specification captures the regulato-
rily allowable determinants of prices. When insurance plans submit their annual prices to the
Part D program, Medicare requires them to “justify” the economic validity of these prices. Par-
ticipating insurers have to provide information about the spending experienced by the current
enrollees in a given plan in the previous year and how the plan projects these spending will
change in light of any planned changes in plan characteristics (usually those driven by changes
in the minimum standard regulation).18 I therefore include the moments of the lagged spending
distribution and the key financial characteristics of the plans as the primary components of
this pricing regression. Medicare allows plans to include administrative costs and desired profit
margins for the plans, which I assume are insurer-specific and so can be picked up by insurer
fixed effects. Importantly, this empirical policy function captures insurer’s pricing decisions
conditional on the overall observed environment, such as the degree of risk adjustment, and the
bidding mechanism that CMS uses to convert prices submitted by insurers to premiums faced
by consumers(Decarolis et al., 2015). The full specification takes the following form:


                      E[Yjbt |.] = αb + δr + M 0 jbt−1 β +                                                  (7)

                                  + γ1 Dedjbt + γ2 ICLjbt + γ3 1{P artialGap}jbt


where j indexes plans (where “plan” is region-specific), b indexes insurers (brands), r indexes
  17
      See Decarolis et al. (2015) for a Bertrand model of pricing incentives in Part D. The Bertrand model
encorporates explicit strategic incentives, but in its standard form needs to make assumptions about the full
effectiveness of risk adjustment in mitigating risk-related pricing incentives.
   18
      For example, from CMS 2007 regulation (“Call Letter”): “In order to prepare plan bids, PDP Sponsors will
use HPMS to define their plan structures and associated plan service areas and then download the PBP and Bid
Pricing Tool (BPT) software. For each plan being offered, PDP Sponsors will use the PBP software to describe
the detailed structure of their benefit packages and the BPT software to define their bid pricing information.
Each formulary submitted by April 17, 2006, must accurately crosswalk to a plan (or set of plans) defined during
the bid process. The combination of the PBP and BPT for a plan comprises a bid.”



                                                      20
34 Part D regions, t indexes years.19 Yjbt is the annual premium charged to the beneficiaries
by plan j of insurer b in year t. Vector M contains several moments of the distribution of drug
expenditures experienced by plan j in year t − 1, including the mean, the standard deviation,
the inter-quartile range and the tail percentiles. As Table A.5 reports in the Appendix, the
moments of the lagged risk distribution and the key characteristics of the plans together with
the region and insurer fixed effects account for 80% of the variation in the data on premiums
over years 2007-2009. As expected, plans with higher lagged mean annual spending, or plans
that offer a lower deductible, higher ICL or partial coverage in the gap charge higher premiums.



5      Results

5.1      Parameter estimates

Table 4 records the detailed parameter estimates of the baseline specification.20 The estimates
suggest that beneficiaires dislike paying premiums and deductibles, and that the insurer’s brand
plays an important role in enrollment decisions. The switching “cost” is estimated to be sub-
stantial on average, on the order of $1, 000. I estimate that the switching cost is increasing at
the rate of $74 for an additional unit of risk score, and at the rate of about $3 per year of age.
Hence, the level of inertia varies in a statistically, but not economically significant way with
observable demographic and risk chracteristics. For example, a 75 year old white female with
no end stage renal disease and an average health risk is estimated to face a switching “cost” of
$1, 164; while an 80 year old white male with no ESRD and twice the expected risk is estimated
to face a switching cost of $1, 253.21
  19
      To alleviate a concern about potentially radically different pricing techniques in the first year of the program,
I only utilize data on 2007-2009 in the pricing regression.
   20
      Table A.2 compares parameter estimates from several specifications of the choice model. Models that include
some unobserved heterogeneity and control function all give similar results.
   21
      The estimated order of magnitude is roughly similar to other findings in the health insurance literature.
Handel (2013) estimates the switching costs to be about $2, 000 in the context of employer-provided health
insurance; Nosal (2012) estimates the switching cost in Medicare Advantage health plans for seniors to be about
$4, 000. Using a different choice model, Abaluck and Gruber (2013) estimate the switching costs in Medicare
Part D to be on the order of $600−$700, which is lower than what my estimates suggest in the willingness-to-pay
terms, although they similarly find that beneficiaries are roughly 500% more likely to choose a plan that is the



                                                          21
    Consistent with the reduced-form tests for adverse selection in Section 3, I find that ben-
eficiaries with higher health risk value the generosity of coverage more than individuals with
lower risks. For instance, individuals with a risk score that is twice the Medicare average, are
willing to pay $22 more, on average, for each additional $100 of the initial coverage limit, about
$120 more to enroll in plans that have fixed co-pays rather than co-insurance, and about $230
more, on average, to be in a plan that offers partial gap coverage, than otherwise observation-
ally identical beneficiaries with average risk. There is substantial unobserved heterogeneity in
the valuation of gap coverage - with a standard deviation estimate of $248 - suggesting that
conditional on the observationally the same health risk profile, individuals may have strong
preferences for or against coverage in the gap. This heterogeneity would be consistent with the
presence of private information about health risk, or substnatial differences in risk aversion, or
in other preferences for this plan feature.
    Overall, the parameter estimates capture the intuition of the reduced form patterns in the
data - beneficiaries are substantially more likely to enroll in their default contracts, and some
contract features are highly valued by enrollees with higher health risk. Appendix Section 7.3
discusses the quantitative aspects of the fit in detail.


5.2     Counterfactual simulations

Simulation of risk allocation with costly and costless switching Cases A and B in
Table 5 and Figure 4 illustrate the results of a counterfactual nudging policy simulation that
completely shuts down inertia. Hence, the results serve as the upper bound of the effect of
reducing inertia. This counterfactual exercise is similar in spirit to the analysis in Handel
(2013) in the employer-provided insurance setting. The counterfactual is implemented as a
policy shock in year 2009 of the program. I report several moments of the data, aggregating
them to the three types of plans. Note that while in practice the complete elimination of
inertia may be impossible, we can imagine an intervention that dropped all existing coverage
“default” plan for them in a given year. Using aggregate data and a dynamic demand model, Miller and Yeo
(2015a) estimate the switching cost in Part D to be $1, 700, which is higher than my estimates.



                                                  22
and required individuals to choose their plans anew.
       I perform two simulations of the model. The first simulation, marked with A, simulates
the model with estimated switching costs. I use the pricing function from Section 4 to predict
2009 premiums conditional on the enrollment patterns and risk allocation observed in 2008
data. Other contract charactersitics, pre-2009 choices, and the demographic and health risk of
the beneficiaries are taken as given from the data.22 This step creates a baseline that takes
into account the simulation error. I then use this baseline instead of the actual observed
2009 outcomes as a comparison benchmark in analyzing the scenarios without switching costs.
Baseline enrollment shares, risk sorting, and prices paid, closely resemble the earlier descriptive
evidence. Type 2 plans with reduced deductible and no gap coverage have the highest enrollment
share - 71% and about average (in-sample) risk profile of $1, 915 expected annual spending. Type
3 plans with partial gap coverage are adversely selected with the average expected spending of
$2, 386. The difference in the average risk between the Type 1 and Type 3 plans is substantial -
expected spending in type 3 plans is 31% or $563 higher. Type 3 plans, with just 9% enrollment
share, have annual premiums that are on average $400 higher than in plans without partial gap
coverage and no deductible. Note that the average premiums are unweighted and reflect the
(simulated) pricing levels on the market rather than enrollment patterns.
       The next simulation sets the switching cost parameter γ in the utility function to zero for all
individuals, which eliminates the inertia channel starting with year 2007. Hence, I re-simulate
individuals’ choices starting with 2007. I allow insurers to respond to changes in the risk sorting
patterns induced by the removal of switching costs in each year. Insurers are assumed to adjust
their premiums according to the stylized recursive pricing model outlined above. To calculate
new prices I use the simulation of demand for individual contracts without switching costs to
calculate the new allocation of risks, which is then feeded into the pricing equation.
  22
    As part of specification checks, I tested the alternative approach of simulating the model from 2006 onward
rather than taking the observed lagged choices as given in 2009. While the simulation error accumulates starker
over several simulation periods in this case, this doesn’t change the analysis in a substantive way. The baseline
approach pursued in the main text renders itself better to the interpretation of the switching cost reduction as
a sudden policy shock in one year. This point is irrelevant for the simulations without switching costs, since
lagged choices do not enter the utility function.



                                                       23
   Shutting down the inertia channel and adjusting insurers’ premiums leads to lower relative
premiums of the most generous Type 3 contracts, and a smoother distribution of risks across
contract types. The enrollment-unweighted premium for the most generous Type 3 plans with
partial gap coverage that now enroll slighly lower average expected risk decreases by 5%, so
does the unweighted premium for Type 1 plans. Weighted premiums decrease more, as without
a switching friction individuals enroll into cheaper plans. Risk sorting among plans becomes
less acute and all of them move closer to the average. The relative average risk between the
Type 1 minimum standard plans and Type 3 plans with partial gap coverage falls from $563 to
$416, which is a 26% decrease in the risk difference relative to the baseline simulation. Figure
4 illustrates this result graphically. It plots the counterfactual risk CDFs by the type of plan
for the baseline (Panel A) and the simulation without the inertia channel (Panel B). The graph
demonstrates that the decrease in the relative risk between most and least generous contract
types holds throughout the whole distribution of risks and not only for the mean.
   Simulation of “filling the gap” policy. The observation that switching frictions alter the
sorting of risks across contracts suggest that they may impact the effect of policies that regulate
the contract space, and which we would naturally expect to change the allocation of risks on the
market. Consider Medicare Part D’s minimum standard regulation. Under the Affordable Care
Act (ACA), the government envisions “filling the donut hole”, which basically implies increasing
the level of the minium defined benefit that insurers have to provide. Since the inception of
the program, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has been concerned with the
availability of Part D coverage that goes beyond the minimum coverage requirements. CMS
recognized that such coverage may be valuable for beneficiaries with costly health conditions,
but also that the existing risk-adjustment and reinsurance policies may not be sufficient to
overcome adverse selection into such coverage. CMS has experimented with different reinsurance
policies that were supposed to encourage private provision of coverage in the gap; nevertheless,
as we have seen, plans with full coverage were not offered on the market after 2008. The donut
hole coverage has become a prominent issue in public debate and in the media, especially as
public health research was argueing that the “donut” hole could be harmful for beneficiaries

                                                24
with chronic conditions (Stuart et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2009; Gu et al., 2010) Ultimately,
the goal of closing the gap in coverage via regulatory decree became a part of the new health
care law. This provision of the ACA is currently in the early implementation stage. A notable
feature of this policy is that although the new regulation is substnatially changing the contract
landscape, current insurance plans were not discontinued, and beneficiaries were not required
to make brand new choices.
   To understand how inertia may impact the effect of this regulation, I do two counterfactual
simulations in which I force all plans to have the level of 2009 catastrophic coverage threshold
($6, 145) as their initial coverage limit (originally $2, 700). Increasing the initial coverage limit
to the catastrophic coverage attachment point effectively corresponds to the idea of “closing
the gap.” This change implies that Type 2 and Type 3 plans become identical in terms of
their key financial characteristics, as both of them have reduced deductible and are imposed
to have the same coverage limit. Even though the financial characteristics of these contracts
are now very close, there is still some residual horizontal differentiation across the individual
plans within each group, such as which insurer offers the plans and whether the insurer utilizes
a co-insurance or co-pay cost-sharing structure.
   The results of the simulations are reported in cases C and D in Table 5 and Figure 5. I
start the counterfactual policy analysis by quantifying how increasing the minimum required
benefit would impact risk sorting across contracts in the status quo with costly switching. I
then consider how switching costs are altering this impact. The first simulation, reported in row
C, adjusts contract features and premiums to the new level of coverage, but keeps inertia. We
see that the relative risk in contracts previously marked as Type 3 decreases by 39% relative to
the baseline; however, there is still substantial difference in risks across the three contract types.
The average expected risk in previously Type 3 contracts is higher than in previously Type 1
and Type 2 contracts by $342 and $255, respectively. Ex ante, however, we would expect that,
since there is no gap coverage dimension of differentiation among plans anymore, this policy
should completely eliminate the selection that took place on the gap coverage margin. Indeed,
the results in the second simulation, reported in D, suggest that exactly this effect takes place

                                                 25
when I shut down the inertia channel. In this scenario, all types of plans converge to having
practically identical pool of risks of around $1, 950 in expected spending, while in the scenario
with costly switching, the simulated policy had a very muted effect on the distribution of risks.
Figure 5 plots the counterfactual risk CDFs for both simulation, demonstrating that the result
holds throughout the whole distribution of risks and not only for the differences in mean risk.
In essence, the presence of switching frictions sustains “artificial” adverse selection, despite the
regulatory convergence in the generosity of contracts.


5.3    Welfare analysis

To assess the efficiency implications of the counterfactual allocations, I calculate several mea-
sures of changes in consumer surplus. The main results are reported in Table 6. In most cases,
I use the compensating variation metric of change in expected consumer surplus as derived in
Small and Rosen (1981). In general, the change in expected consumer surplus for individual
i from a change in the characteristics of the choice set from J to J 0 is (conditional on the
individual-specific parameters of the utility function θi ):

                                      "                                         #
                                    1       X                        X
                     4E[CSi |θi ] =     ln(        exp(vij 0 )) − ln( exp(vij ))
                                    α        0
                                            j ∈J 0                   j∈J



where vij is the part of the utility function in Equation 2 without the unobserved portion :


                               vij = −αpj + βi φj + γi 1{Default}ij


   In all but two calculations, I will treat the switching friction as welfare-neutral, setting γ
to zero for the purpose of surplus calculation. Since we don’t observe the individual-specific
parameters of the utility function, I use a sparse grids method (Heiss and Winschel, 2008) to
integrate out individual heterogeneity based on the observed distribution of demographics D
and the estimates of the distributions of random coefficients. The change in expected consumer
surplus then becomes:


                                                 26
                          ˆ     "                                           #
                              1       X
                                                    0
                                                                 X
             4E[CSi ] =           ln(          exp(vij 0 )) − ln( exp(vij )) dF (ψi )dF (Di )   (8)
                              α       j 0 ∈J 0                   j∈J

   In the first benchmark calculation, I treat the estimated switching friction as a real cost, and
calculate how consumer surplus would change if we removed this cost and allowed insurance
premiums to adjust. Hence, I am comparing consumer surplus between simulations A and
B of Table 5 When we remove the switching cost individuals now face a different choice set.
First, J’ differs from J because premiums have changed. In addition, v 0 differs from v, as the
former does not include the switching friction. The results reported in Column (1) of Table
6 suggest that consumer surplus increases substantially by $621 or 32% of the average annual
drug spending in the sample. This large increase is not surprising, since I have estimated a
substantial switching friction, and this calculation treats the whole friction as a welfare-relevant
cost. I estimate that there is significant heterogeneity in the efficiency cost of the switching
friction - the gain in consumer surplus increases monotonically with risk. This is intuitive, as
for higher risk individuals the differences across contracts are likely to be larger, and hence the
presence of a default is more important.
   In the next calculation I attempt to assess the efficiency implication of the switching friction
in a scenario where we do not consider the friction itself to be a real cost. In this case, the
consumer surplus formula 8 does not apply, since if we do not treat the switching friction as
part of the utility function, then we are not changing the characteristics of the choice set (apart
from the re-pricing). Hence, to evaluate the matching value of removing the switching cost, I
turn to the simulations of individual choices in the demand model. While the switching friction
does not affect welfare, it does affect choice probabilities. Simulating choices with and without
the switching friction, I can calculate how much money-metric utility individuals are foregoing
when they are lead to choose a sub-optimal contract because of inertia. We expect that the
foregone money-metric utility has to be lower on average than the estimated switching friction,
as otherwise beneficiaries would have chosen the optimal contract even in presence of inertia.
Column (2) reports the results. I estimate the value better matching at $455, or 23.4% of the


                                                   27
annual drug spending. In this simulation I kept premiums the same, at the baseline simulated
levels. Adjusting premiums to the re-allocation of risks (as in row B of Table 5) results in an
additional average gain of $10, as recorded in Column (3). Notably, there is large heterogeneity
in how much beneficiaries gain (or loose) when premiums are adjusted. The gains are higher
for higher-risk individuals, but overall the estimated standard deviation of the change is $84,
suggesting that not all beneficiaries benefit when insurers adjust premiums in response to the
re-allocation of risks.
   In Column (4) of Table 6 I come back to calculating changes in expected consumer surplus,
and evaluate the effect of removing inertia in the second counterfactual of “closing the gap.”
This calculation is similar to the one in Column (1), in that I take treat the switching friction
as a real cost. The result is quite similar; the effect of removing the switching cost is estimated
at $576. Overall, I find that whether we treat the switching friction as a real cost or welfare-
neutral, the is a substantial gain in consumer surplus - on the order of 20% − 30% of annual
drug spending - to be realized from better matching of beneficiaries to insurance contracts.
   To compare the effect of better matching to the efficiency impact of adverse selection, I
conduct four more evaluations. Note that a full evaluation of the welfare cost of adverse selection
would require a specification of insurer’s marginal cost curves, subsidy mechanisms, and the
evaluation of equilibrium allocations with and without selection. Specifying the equilibria with
and without selection is beyond the scope of this paper; hence, I provide several suggestive
estimates. First, focusing on the effect of selection on prices, I calculate the change in expected
consumer surplus that would occur if insurers all enrolled a similar pool of risks and charged
the same premiums for their contracts. I specify the premiums to be 25% of the average
expected risk in the whole sample, which leads to premiums that are roughly similar to the
observed premiums in Type 2 contracts. This stylized approach attempts to illustrate what
effect “perfect” risk-adjustment could have on consumer surplus. As reported in Column (5), I
find the effect - $26 or 1.3% of average spending - to be very modest relative to the matching
value of inertia. The magnitude, however, is in line with the estimates of the welfare cost of
adverse selection in other contexts, e.g. Einav et al. (2010); Bundorf et al. (2012). I estimate

                                                28
a large and intuitive gradient along the health risk dimension - the gain in consumer surplus
from equal premiums is larger the higher the risk. For the top 1% of the risk distribution the
gain is 4 times larger than the average.
   A typical concern in the literature that estimates the welfare loss from adverse selection is
that the loss may be substantially underestimated if we just focus on premiums, since the key
efficiency problem may be that of “missing contracts” (Einav, Finkelstein, and Levin, 2010). To
evaluate this possibility in the current context, in Column (6) I calculate the loss in consumer
surplus from removing Type 4 contracts that were still observed in 2006. Perhaps surprisingly,
removing these contracts in 2006 results in very little loss in consumer surplus on average -
about $1. This loss, however, is 20 times higher for the highest risk population, for whom these
contracts provide valuable coverage. This implies that while adverse selection may have lead to
Type 4 contracts “missing” in the Part D market, only a small fraction of the population had a
meaningful valuation for these contracts.
   In the last two surplus calculations, I evaluate the efficiency effect of the re-allocation of
risks that occurs in the counterfactual simulations after I remove the switching friction. In both
counterfactuals of Section 5.2, removing the switching friction leads to less acute sorting of risks
between the more and less generous contracts. In the recursive model of contract premiums
of Section 4, this change in risk sorting would affect premiums in year t + 1. To evaluate the
effect of the change in risk distribution on surplus, I compare the surplus in t + 1 between the
scenarios with and without the switching friction. To quantify this effect in Counterfactual 1,
I simulate 2010 premiums using the risk allocations from simulations A and B of Table 5. I
assume that the contract space in 2010 is exactly identical to that of 2009, and only change the
premiums based on different risk-sorting that had occurred in 2009 with and without inertia.
The case where I remove inertia in 2009, which decreases the differences in risks by 26%, has
a positive, but relatively small effect on consumer surplus in 2010. I estimate the average
surplus change in the sample to be $7 with a standard deviation of $12. Forward simulating
the second counterfactual of filling the gap, we get a bigger increase in surplus, as differences
in risk allocations with and without inertia and larger. I estimate that the average surplus in

                                                29
2010 goes up by $17. Note that in this case we do not estimate a risk-related gradient, which
is again intuitive, since all contracts are assumed to provide full coverage in the gap. Taken
together, the calculations suggest that removing inertia is likely to lead to a substantial gain in
consumer surplus from better matching, and to a positive, but at least an order of magnitude
smaller, gain in surplus from reduced adverse selection.



6    Conclusion

In this paper I have documented evidence of adverse selection and switching frictions in a highly
regulated Medicare Part D environment using a parsimonious classification of the contract space
and detailed administrative data. I have also shown that the wide-spread inertia in choices may
have complex interactions with the allocation of risks and with policies related to risk allocation
in this highly regulated environment. In particular, I have shown that in this environment
the initial conditions led switching costs to support an adversely selected equilibrium over
time, in the sense that different types of plans would have had more similar average risks if
switching were costless. I have also argued that in the presence of switching costs, tightening
the minimum standard requirement by “filling” the donut hole is unlikely to have the intuitive
effect of balancing risks across different contract. In particular, the counterfactual analyses
demonstrate that the issue of locked-in risks due to stickiness of choices despite the evolution of
the contract space may have an important effect on the outcomes of ACA reforms in Medicare
Part D. While I find a substantial degree of adverse selection in Part D, the current policy
environment appears to restrain the pass-through of plans’ risk profiles to consumer premiums,
so that the consumer-side efficiency loss from adverse selection among observed contracts is likely
to be moderate. I estimate this loss to consumer surplus to be on the oder of 1% of average
annual per capita drug spending. This is in stark contrast to the estimated gain in consumer
surplus on the order of 20% − 30% of average annual spending, which could be achieved from
better matching if switching or paying attention were costless. Overall, my results support the
idea that, conditional on the existing policies that mitigate the effects of adverse selection in


                                                30
the background, decreasing the cost of decision-making in the environment like Part D is likely
to have a significantly net positive effect on efficiency.
   More broadly, this paper argues that in considering the polices that may improve consumer
choice in the increasingly common public health insurance settings with regulated competition,
we have to take into account the nuanced interconnections of the different market imperfections
with the regulatory instruments targeted at correcting them. The caution, of course, comes
from the caveat that in this work I represented the reaction of insurers to policy changes in
a very stylized way. Expanding the model to allow insurers to endogenously react to adverse
selection and regulation in their choices of contract characteristics in a competitive setting
provides a fruitful area for future research.


References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011). Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence from
  Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. The American Economic Review 101 (June),
  1180–1210.
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2013). Evolving Choice Inconsistencies in Choice of Prescription
  Drug Insurance. NBER Working Paper no. 19163 .
Armstrong, M. and D. E. M. Sappington (2007). Recent Developments in the Theory of Regu-
  lation. In M. Armstrong and R. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3,
  Number 06, pp. 1557–1700. Elsevier B.V.
Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2014). Who Uses the Roth 401(k), and
  How Do They Use It? NBER Discoveries in the Economics of Aging University of Chicago
  Press, 411–440.
Bundorf, K., J. Levin, and N. Mahoney (2012). Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan Choice.
  American Economic Review 102(7), 1–38.
Carey, C. (2015). Technological Change and Risk Adjustment: Benefit Design Incentives in
  Medicare Part D. Mimeo, Cornell University.
Carlin, C. and R. Town (2010). Adverse selection: The dog that didn’t bite. Mimeo, University
  of Pennsylvania.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Petersen, T. Nielsen, and T. Olsen (2014). Active vs.
  Passive Decisions and Crowdout in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1141–1219.



                                                 31
Chiappori, P.-A. and B. Salanie (2000). Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance
  Markets. The Journal of Political Economy 108 (1), 56–78.
Chorniy, A., D. P. Miller, and T. Tang (2014). Mergers in Medicare Part D: Decomposing
  Market Power, Cost Efficiencies, and Bargaining Power. Mimeo, Princeton University and
  Clemson University.
Decarolis, F. (2015). Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy Design?
  American Economic Review 105(4), 1547–80.
Decarolis, F., M. Polyakova, and S. Ryan (2015). Welfare Effects of Supply-Side Regulation in
  Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 21298 .
Dube, J.-P., G. J. Hitsch, and P. E. Rossi (2010). State dependence and alternative explanations
  for consumer inertia. RAND Journal of Economics 41, 417–445.
Duggan, M., P. Healy, and F. Scott Morton (2008). Providing Prescription Drug Coverage to
  the Elderly: America’s Experiment with Medicare Part D. Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 22(4), 69–92.
Duggan, M. and F. Scott Morton (2010). The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
  Prices and Utilization. The American Economic Review 100 (1), 590–607.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and M. Cullen (2010). Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets using
  Variation in Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3), 877–921.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and J. Levin (2010). Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
  Markets. Annual Review of Economics 2, 311–336.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2015). The Response of Drug Expenditure to
  Non-Linear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 130 (2), 841–899.
Ericson, K. (2014). Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D Prescription
  Drug Insurance Exchange. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (1), 38–64.
Ericson, K. and A. Starc (2015). Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on the Mas-
  sachusetts Health Insurance Exchange. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (3), 667–682.
Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer (2007). Coordination and Lock-In: Competition with Switching
  Costs and Network Effects. In M. Armstrong and R. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial
  Organization, Vol. 3, Number 06, pp. 1967–2072. Elsevier B.V.
Finkelstein, A. (2004). Minimum standards, insurance regulation and adverse selection: evi-
  dence from the Medigap market. Journal of Public Economics 88 (12), 2515–2547.
Finkelstein, A. and K. McGarry (2006). Multiple Dimensions of Private Information: Evidence
  from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market. American Economic Review 96(4), 938–958.
Gu, Q., F. Zeng, B. Patel, and L. Tripoli (2010). Part D coverage gap and adherence to diabetes
  medications. The American Journal of Managed Care 16(12), 911–918.



                                              32
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
  Nudging Hurts. The American Economic Review 103 (7), 2643–2682.
Hastings, J., A. Hortacsu, and C. Syverson (2013). Advertising and competition in privatized
  Social Security: The case of Mexico. NBER Working Paper No. 18881 .
Heckman, J. (1981a). Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications,
  Chapter Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data, pp. 114–78. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
  Press.
Heckman, J. (1981b). Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications,
  Chapter The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Condition in Esti-
  mating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process, pp. 179–95. Cambridge, Mass.:
  MIT Press.
Heckman, J. (1991). Identifying the hand of past: Distinguishing state dependence from het-
  erogeneity. American Economic Review 81(2), 75–79.
Heckman, J. and B. Singer (1986). Handbook of Econometrics, Chapter Econometric Analysis
  of Longitudinal Data, pp. 1689–763. Handbooks in Economics series, book 2 Amsterdam;
  Oxford and Tokyo: North-Holland;.
Heiss, F., A. Leive, D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2013). Plan Selection in Medicare Part D:
  Evidence from Administrative Data. Journal of Health Economics 32, 1325–1344.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2009). Regulation of Private Health Insurance Markets:
  Lessons from Enrollment, Plan Type Choice, and Adverse Selection in Medicare Part D.
  NBER Working Paper No. 15392 .
Heiss, F., D. Mcfadden, and J. Winter (2010). Mind the Gap ! Consumer Perceptions and
  Choices of Medicare Part D Prescription. In D. Wise (Ed.), Research Findings in the Eco-
  nomics of Aging, pp. 413–481. The University of Chicago Press.
Heiss, F. and V. Winschel (2008). Likelihood approximation by numerical integration on sparse
  grids. Journal of Econometrics 144 (1), 62–80.
Ho, K., J. Hogan, and F. Scott Morton (2015). The Impact of Consumer Inattention on Insurer
  Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program. NBER Working Paper No. 21028 .
Hoadley, J., J. Cubanski, E. Hargrave, L. Summer, and J. Huang (2012). Medicare Policy
  data spotlight Medicare Part D: A First Look at Part D Plan Offerings in 2013. KFF
  Report (October 2012).
Hole, A. R. (2007). Fitting mixed logit models by using maximum simulated likelihood. The
  Stata Journal 7-3, 388–401.
Honoré, B. (2002). Nonlinear models with panel data. Portuguese Economic Journal 1(2),
  163–179.
Honoré, B. and E. Tamer (2006). Bounds on parameters in panel dynamic discrete choice
  models. Econometrica 74(3), 611–629.

                                             33
Joskow, P. and N. Rose (1989). The Effects of Economic Regulation. In R. Schmalensee
  and R. Willig (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. II, pp. 1449–1506. Elsevier
  Science Publishers B.V.
Kesternich, I., F. Heiss, D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2013). Suit the action to the word, the
  word to the action: Hypothetical choices and real decisions in Medicare Part D. Journal of
  Health Economics (2013).
Ketcham, J., C. Lucarelli, and C. Powers (2015). Paying Attention or Paying Too Much in
  Medicare Part D. American Economic Review 105(1), 204–233.
Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, E. J. Miravete, and M. C. Roebuck (2012). Sinking, Swimming, or
  Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D. The American Economic Review 102 (6), 2639–2673.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. C. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012). Compar-
  ison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 127 (1), 199–235.
Lucarelli, C., J. Prince, and K. Simon (2012). The Welfare Impact of Reducing Choice in
  Medicare Part D: A Comparison of Two Regulation Strategies. International Economic
  Review 53 (4), 1155–1177.
Luco, F. (2013). Switching Costs and Competition in Retirement Investment. Mimeo, North-
  western University.
Lustig, J. (2011). Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Competition
  in Privatized Medicare. Unpublished mimeo.
Miller, D. P. (2015). Risk Adjustment and Low Income Subsidy Distortions in Medicare Part
  D. Mimeo, Clemson University.
Miller, D. P. and J. Yeo (2015a). Discrete Choice Models to Estimate Switching Costs: An
  Application to Medicare Part D. Mimeo, Clemson University and Singapore Management
  University.
Miller, D. P. and J. Yeo (2015b). The Consequences of a Public Health Insurance Option:
  Evidence From Medicare Part D. Mimeo, Clemson University and Singapore Management
  University.
Nosal, K. (2012). Estimating Switching Costs for Medicare Advantage Plans. Mimeo, University
  of Mannheim.
Petrin, A. and K. Train (2009). A control function approach to endogeneity in consumer choice
  models. Journal of Marketing Research XLVI.
Small, K. and H. S. Rosen (1981). Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models.
  Econometrica 49 (1), 105–130.
Starc, A. (2014). Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap. Rand Journal
  of Economics 45 (1), 198–220.



                                             34
Stuart, B., L. Simoni-Wastila, and D. Chauncey (2005). Assessing The Impact Of Coverage
  Gaps In The Medicare Part D Drug Benefit. Health Affairs.
Train, K. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.
Train, K. (2009). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation (2nd ed.). Cambridge University
  Press.
Villas-Boas, J. M. and R. Winer (1999). Endogeneity in brand choice models. Management
  Science 45(10), 1324–1338.
Yin, W., A. Basu, J. X. Zhang, A. Rabbani, D. O. Meltzer, and G. C. Alexander (2008). The
  Effect of the Medicare Part D Prescription Benefit on Drug Utilization and Expenditures.
  Annals of Internal Medicine 148, 169–177.
Zhang, Y., J. Donohue, J. Newhouse, and J. Lave (2009). The Effects Of The Coverage Gap
  On Drug Spending: A Closer Look At Medicare Part D. Health Affairs 28(2), 317–325.




                                           35
Figure 1: Minimum benefit policy in Medicare Part D: shape of the Standard Defined
Benefit in 2006-2009


                                 5,000
                                         2006: D $250; ICL $2,250; CCL $5,100
                                         2007: D $265; ICL $2,400; CCL $5,450                                                           ~5% co-insurance
                                 4,500
                                         2008: D $275; ICL $2,510; CCL $5,730
                                         2009: D $295; ICL $2,700; CCL $6,150                            Catastrophic Coverage Limit
                                 4,000
   Out of pocket spending ,USD




                                 3,500


                                 3,000


                                 2,500                                                      100% co-insurance


                                 2,000

                                                            Initial Coverage Limit                              Coverage Gap
                                 1,500                                                                          "Donut hole"
                                         Deductible

                                 1,000                                                                                                 2006
                                                      25% co-insurance                                                                 2007
                                  500                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                       2009
                                             100% co-insurance
                                    0



                                                                                Total annual drug spending, USD



Insurers in the Medicare Part D program are required to provide coverage that gives at least
the same actuarial value as the Standard Defined Benefit (SDB). The SDB design features a
deductible, a co-insurance rate of 25% up to the initial coverage limit (ICL) and the subsequent
“donut hole” that has a 100% co-insurance until the individual reaches the catastrophic coverage
arm of the contract. The graph illustrates these features of the SDB by mapping the total annual
drug spending into the out-of-pocket expenditure. Consider an individual, who in 2006 was in
an SDB contract, and purchased prescription drugs for a total of $3, 000. Out of this amount,
the individual would pay the deductible of $250, then 25% of the next $2, 000 up to the ICL
of $2, 500, and then 100% of the next $750 in the gap, for a total out of pocket spending of
$1, 500. As the figure illustrates, the generosity of the SDB changed over time. For example, an
individual spending $3, 000 on drugs in 2009 would face the out-of-pocket expenditure of less
than $1, 200.




                                                                                          36
                                                          Figure 2: Model-free evidence of adverse selection

Panel A: Positive correlation test
                                                                                  Illustration of the positive correlation test, 2006


                                           Medicare Part D regions




                     0                                                        1,000           2,000           3,000           4,000           5,000
                                                                                            Average annual drug bill, USD

                                                                                      Contracts of type 1     Contracts of type 2
                                                                                      Contracts of type 3     Contracts of type 4


Panel B: Distribution of risks by type of plan using risk score measure
                                                                               Cumulative distribution of risk scores by plan types in 2006
                                                                     1


                                                          .8
                  Cumulative Probability




                                                          .6


                                                          .4


                                                          .2


                                                                     0
                                                                         .5                        1                     1.5                    2
                                                                              Risk score (1 = average in Medicare; ~ $2,000 in the sample)

                                                                                        Contracts of type 1             Contracts of type 2
                                                                                        Contracts of type 3             Contracts of type 4


Panel A: Average annual drug expenditures in different types of Medicare Part D plans are calcu-
lated separately within each geographic region. Baseline sample. The spending of individuals with
enrollment shorter than 12 months (primarily 65 year olds) was extrapolated to the full year. Panel B:
Baseline sample. Risk scores are based on lagged diagnostic information and not on drug expenditures.
The stochastic ranking of the distribution functions visualizes the riskier pool of enrollees recruited by
plans with more generous coverage.



                                                                                                        37
         Figure 3: Model-free evidence of switching frictions: insurer brands


                           Insurer market shares for choosers with and without default plans
              1
              .8
              .6
              .4
              .2
              0




                      2006       2007      2008       2009               2006      2007     2008     2009
                                     65 y.o.                                          66+ y.o.
                                                  Insurer A                  Insurer B
                                                  Insurer C                  Other insurers

            Based on the working sample, may not coincide with agggregate market reports



Baseline sample. We observe that the choices of the 65 year old individuals newly entering the program,
who by definition do not have incumbent plans, are much more volatile and responsive to the market
conditions over time than choices of the individuals in the older cohorts, who usually have the default
option of their incumbent plan available. Insurer “identities” here are constructed using contract
encryption in the administrative data. Because of the data encryption, separate insurers may have
been identified with error. The corresponding commercial identities of the insurance companies are
not known to the author.

Aggregate share of continuing enrollees choosing the same plan as in t − 1 (includes all insurers
and all plans):

                                                                                     2007          2008        2009

    Probability of choosing default plan for 66+ y.o. enrollees                    89.9 %         88.7 %      89.1 %
    N                                                                             1,089,978      1,162,545   1,194,036




                                                              38
        Figure 4: Counterfactual risk allocation without switching frictions

   • Panel A: Baseline simulated distribution of risks




   • Panel B: Distribution of risks without switching costs (with endogenous re-pricing)




In-sample simulation of the choice model. Panel A keeps the estimated switching cost parameter
γ, and predicts enrollment and pricing in the model. Panel B sets γ = 0, and re-simulates
both enrollment and prices. Prices are re-simulated from year 2008 onwards, as this is the first
year where the reallocation of risks induced by zero switching friction would affect recursively
specified pricing function.

                                              39
    Figure 5: Switching frictions and the ACA policy of “filling” the donut hole

   • Panel A: Distribution of risks with switching friction
                                               Counterfactual of filling the donut hole in presence of switching costs
                                         1


                                         .8
                Cumulative Probability




                                         .6


                                         .4


                                         .2


                                         0
                                              0             1000         2000             3000           4000           5000
                                                                   Expected risk (risk scores in USD)

                                                               Contracts of type 1              Contracts of type 2
                                                               Contracts of type 3




   • Panel B: Distribution of risks without switching friction

                                              Filling the donut hole in absence of switching costs with endogenous re-pricng
                                         1


                                         .8
                Cumulative Probability




                                         .6


                                         .4


                                         .2


                                         0
                                              0            1000          2000             3000           4000           5000
                                                                   Expected risk (risk scores in USD)

                                                               Contracts of type 1              Contracts of type 2
                                                               Contracts of type 3




In-sample simulation of the choice model with and without switching frictions under the counter-
factual policy of raising the minimum standard to completely fill the “donut” hole as envisioned
under the Affordable Care Act. Both Panels are based on simulated prices that reflect the
filling of the donut hole.


                                                                                40
    Table 1: Summary statistics: full sample; baseline sample; panel sub-sample

                                     Full sample   Baseline sample    Panel sub-sample
        2006
        N                             9,999,538        1,221,252           871,818
        Age (σ)                        72 (12)           76 (8)             75 (7)
        Female                           0.59             0.65               0.65
        White                            0.84             0.95               0.96
        ESRD                             0.01            0.003              0.001
        Risk score*                      n/a          0.89 (0.34)        0.86 (0.31)
        Annual drug spending (σ)         n/a         1,518 (1,899)      1,449 (1,733)

        2007
        N                             10,176,611       1,307,966           911,403
        Age (σ)                        72 (12)           76 (8)             75 (7)
        Female                           0.59             0.63               0.65
        White                            0.84             0.95               0.96
        ESRD                             0.01            0.003              0.002
        Risk score (σ)                   n/a          0.90 (0.35)        0.88 (0.32)
        Annual drug spending (σ)         n/a         1,883 (2,407)      1,832 (2,227)

        2008
        N                             10,369,814       1,356,861           954,494
        Age (σ)                        72 (12)           76 (8)             76 (7)
        Female                           0.58             0.63               0.65
        White                            0.83             0.95               0.96
        ESRD                             0.01            0.003              0.002
        Risk score (σ)                   n/a          0.91 (0.36)        0.90 (0.34)
        Annual drug spending (σ)         n/a         1,907 (2,648)      1,869 (2,479)

        2009
        N                             9,781,213        1,365,239           998,014
        Age (σ)                        71 (12)           76 (8)             76 (8)
        Female                           0.55             0.63               0.65
        White                            0.83             0.95               0.96
        ESRD                             0.01            0.003              0.003
        Risk score (σ)                   n/a          0.92 (0.36)        0.92 (0.35)
        Annual drug spending (σ)         n/a         1,950 (2,973)      1,947 (2,934)

* Risk scores are indices summarizing individual medical history from Medicare Parts A and B;
1 is average Medicare risk. The calculation of risk scores using Medicare A/B diagnostic records
and Part D RxHCC software was generously provided by Amy Finkelstein and Ray Kluender.




                                              41
                              Table 2: Evidence of adverse selection


   • Panel A: Positive correlation tests
                                              k=4
                                              P
                         Yirt = αr + δt +           βk 1{ContractT ypeit = k} + irt
                                              k=2


                                (1)            (2)                                     (3)
                       Annual drug spending Risk score                    Risk score projected to USD
   Contracts of type 1  reference category

   Contracts of type 2                -2.047                   0.00927                  24.98
                                     (71.83)                  (0.00730)                (20.89)

   Contracts of type 3              1213.4∗∗∗                 0.146∗∗∗             415.0∗∗∗
                                     (105.5)                  (0.0107)             (30.46)

   Contracts of type 4              3081.3∗∗∗                  0.260∗∗∗            728.5∗∗∗
                                     (70.71)                  (0.00521)            (14.57)

   Year FE                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes

   Region FE                           Yes                       Yes                  Yes
   N                                3,892,280                 3,892,280            3,892,280
   Mean Y                            1948.7                     0.920                1948.7
   St. dev. Y                         2712.2                    0.357                1018.7
   Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the region level
   ∗
     p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

   • Panel B: Dynamic changes in premiums and enrollment in Type 4 contracts

                       Average Premiums, USD                   Enrollment   Expenditures, USD
                       2006   2007    Change                  2006 2007      2006      2007
           Type 1       171    216      27%                   26% 22%        1,428     1,489
           Type 2       264    331      25%                   63% 63%        1,596     1,724
           Type 3       472    610      29%                    6%     14%    2,483     2,802
           Type 4       668   1,291    93%                     5%     1%     3,852     4,377

Panel A. Baseline sample 2007-2009. Outcomes: (1) annual drug spending; (2) risk scores;
(3) monetized risk score (constructed from E[AnnualDrugSpendingi |.] = α + βRiskScorei
run separately for each cross-section). Panel B records premiums, enrollment, and total drug
expenditures in Plan Types 1-4, in years 2006-2007.




                                                         42
                                 Table 3: Model-free evidence of switching frictions: contract types


                 Cohorts of 65 year olds whose incumbent plans were not re-classified into a different type by the insurer
                                            65 y.o. in 2006              65 y.o. in 2007          65 y.o. in 2008 65 y.o. in 2009
                                      (1)     (2)      (3)    (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)         (10)
          A. Enrollment shares       2006    2007     2008   2009    2007      2008      2009      2008     2009        2009

          Contracts of type 1          22 %     22 %     19 %     17 %     17 %     15 %     14 %     10 %     11 %         12 %
          Contracts of type 2          73 %     73 %     77 %     79 %     72 %     75 %     77 %     82 %     82 %         82 %
          Contracts of type 3          4%        5%       5%      4%       11 %     11 %     10 %      7%      7%           5%

          N                           37,500 37,500 37,500       37,500   35,759 35,759 35,759       40,960 40,960         43, 520




43
          B. Incremental premium               in year 2006                    in year 2007          in year 2008      in year 2009
          Contracts of type 2                      $138                            $125                   $54               $37
          Contracts of type 3                      $375                            $360                  $410              $469


     Panel A shows enrollment shares in each year across three types of plans for cohorts of 65 year olds entering the program in
     different years. The sample includes only individuals, whose incumbent plans were not re-classified in their type by the supply-side
     throughout the observed enrollment time. The choices of a given cohort are recorded for all subsequent years of available data.
     The calculation is based on the panel sub-sample data, as described in the data construction appendix. The table shows raw
     enrollment shares as observed in each year subject to the classification of contracts into the 4-type topology. The choices of cohorts
     show persistence over time and differ from the choices of newly entering cohorts within the same year. The difference is especially
     apparent between the first two and the last two years of the data. Panel B adds information about the development of the relative
     annual premiums over-time. The premiums are reported as increments relative to the Type 1 contract with SDB deductible and
     no coverage in the gap. To reflect the market conditions, the premiums are constructed as averages weighted by enrollment of 65
     year olds.
                                      Table 4: Parameter estimates of the baseline choice model
                                                                            Interaction with demographics
      Plan characteristic Estimate          s.e.   Risk score    s.e.   White   s.e. Female    s.e  Age              s.e     ESRD      s.e.
      in $100 or binary
      Annual premium         -0.498        0.011       -          -      -     -            -        -      -         -      -     -
      Deductible - µ         -1.238        0.127     0.038      0.037 -0.023 0.057       0.013     0.025 0.008      0.002 -0.039 0.258
      Deductible - σ          0.470        0.024       -          -      -     -            -        -      -         -      -     -
      Initial Coverage - µ   -0.168        0.027     0.109      0.007 0.021 0.012        0.003     0.005 0.0003    0.0003 0.099 0.036
      Initial Coverage - σ    0.087        0.005       -          -      -     -            -        -      -         -      -     -
      Eligible for LIS, 1/0  -1.093        0.241    -0.125      0.072 -0.089 0.106        0.017    0.047 0.026      0.003 -0.683 0.563
      Fixed co-pays, 1/0     -1.538        0.394     0.589      0.119 -0.343 0.188        0.003    0.076 0.019      0.005 -1.521 0.789
      Partial gap, 1/0 - µ   -2.153        0.334     1.126      0.089 0.105 0.150        -0.059    0.065 0.016      0.004  0.055 0.540
      Partial gap, 1/0 - σ    1.238        0.054       -          -      -     -            -        -      -         -      -     -
      Default plan, 1/0       5.091        0.262     0.369      0.066 -0.815 0.125       -0.067    0.046 0.015      0.003 -0.394 0.381
      Log-likelihood         -59,224




44
      N total observations  2,435,171
      N unique individuals    12,769
      N choice situations     47,770
      Max N alternatives        66
      N of regions              34


     The table reports MSL estimates for the baseline specification of the model. To reduce the computational burden, the model was
     estimated on a sub-sample of individuals. This allows including panel observations for these individuals for all fours years of the
     data as well as to directly specifying each contract in the individuals’ choice set in each year without any aggregation. To construct
     the estimation sample, I restricted the panel sub-sample to include individuals marked with CMS 5% sample flag (which amounts
     to taking a 25% draw of the panel sub-sample, since the original data represented a 20% population sample of Medicare). I then
     took a 5% random draw of that data in a way that preserves the original panel structure. The resulting dataset is not different
     from the original panel sub-sample in a statistically meaningful way. The table reports estimates of utility parameters and not
     marginal effects. Coefficients significant at 10% level are marked in bold font. Only key coefficients are reported; in particular, the
     model includes 10 fixed effects for insurer brands; the top 2 brands are interacted with obeservable demographics and risk scores.
                             Table 5: Counterfactual simulations

                                                                  Type 1       Type 2       Type 3
    Year 2009 outcomes
                                                                 contracts    contracts   contracts

    Average risk (monetized risk scores, USD)
    A. Baseline prediction                                        $1,823       $1,915       $2,386
    B. Remove inertia in 2007-2009; re-price                      $1,895       $1,904       $2,311
    C. Fill the gap; update prices, but keep inertia              $1,838       $1,925       $2,180
    D. Fill the gap; update prices, remove inertia in 2009        $1,922       $1,951       $1,926

    Average ex-post annual drug spending, USD
    A. Baseline prediction                                        $1,726       $1,876       $3,036
    B. Remove inertia in 2007-2009; re-price                      $1,915       $1,914       $2,330
    C. Fill the gap; update prices, but keep inertia              $1,757       $1,873       $2,687
    D. Fill the gap; update prices, remove inertia in 2009        $1,947       $1,955       $1,961

    Enrollment share
    A. Baseline prediction                                          20%         71%           9%
    B. Remove inertia in 2007-2009; re-price                        26%         64%           9%
    C. Fill the gap; update prices, but keep inertia                19%         68%          13%
    D. Fill the gap; update prices, remove inertia in 2009          25%         61%          13%

    Unweighted average annual premium
    A. Baseline prediction                                         $389         $513         $910
    B. Remove inertia in 2007-2009; re-price                       $368         $507         $866
    C. Fill the gap; update prices, keep inertia                  $1,466       $1,595       $1,855
    D. Fill the gap; update prices, remove inertia in 2009        $1,466       $1,595       $1,855



Summary of counterfactual simulations. (A) simulates the baseline, taking contract defaults
in 2009 as given; it simulates premiums for 2009 using the data on observed 2008 enrollment
and the pricing model. (B) shuts down the inertia channel in the utility function, and allows
premiums to adjust to the new sorting of individuals when switching costs are not present. The
premium adjustments are simulated from 2008 onwards - the pricing model is recursive and
takes into account changes in 2007 risk-sorting. (C) and (D) implement the Affordable Care Act
policy of filling the donut hole, i.e. set ICL to $6,154 for all plans. Premiums are adjusted to reflect
more generous coverage. In (C) I keep the switching friction parameter; in (D) I set it to zero. In (C)
and (D) the distinction among contract types is based on the baseline simulation.




                                                  45
                                  Table 6: Welfare analysis


                                Quantifying the surplus effect of removing inertia
 4E[CS],                           Counterfactual 1 - remove inertia          Counterfactual 2
 except (2) and (3)           γ=0             Matching        Risk re-pricing   Fill the gap
 (USD per capita)              (1)               (2)                 (3)             (4)

 Average                       $621               $455               $10                $576
 Standard deviation            $242               $365               $84                $224
 % of mean spending           31.9%              23.4%              0.5%               29.6%
 By risk percentile
 <p5                          $623                  $472             $12                $588
 >p25                         $641                  $468             $10                $592
 >p50                         $660                  $484             $12                $607
 >p75                         $678                  $500             $13                $619
 >p95                         $711                  $548             $15                $648

                               Quantifying the surplus effect of adverse selection
                        Equal premiums Remove Type 4 Counterfactual 1 Counterfactual 2
 4E[CS]                    in 2009       plan in 2006   simulate forward simulate forward
 (in USD per capita)          (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)

 Average                       $26                -$1                $7                  $17
 Standard deviation            $40                 $4                $12                 $15
 % of mean spending           1.3%               -0.1%              0.4%                0.9%
 By risk percentile
 <p5                           $3                    $0               $6                 $19
 >p25                          $31                   -$1              $7                 $16
 >p50                          $39                   -$2              $8                 $16
 >p75                          $52                   -$3              $9                 $16
 >p95                          $82                   -$7             $11                 $15
 >p99                         $115                  -$20             $15                 $15

(1)-(3) report results for Counterfactual 1 that removes the switching friction. (1) Reports the
average4E[CS] (Small and Rosen, 1981) when we treat the switching friction as a real cost.
This change in surplus depends on the choice set of the consumer and not on the observed or
simulated choices. (2) Reports the difference in WTP for the insurance plan that is selected
with and without a switching friction. The WTP in both cases treats the switching friction itself
as welfare-neutral. (3) Incremental change to (2) when premiums are adjusted. (4) Same as (1),
but first fill the gap and adjust premiums; (5)-(8) do not include inertia. (5) Sets all premiums
equal to 25% of the average risk. (6) Removes Type 4 plans in year 2006 from the choice set;
(7) and (8) forward simulate (1) and (4) to assess the effect of change in risk distribution.




                                               46
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION APPENDIX




               47
7      Appendix

7.1     Conceptual framework: interaction between adverse selection

        and switching cost in the presence of minimum standard regu-

        lation

A stylized model of insurance contract choice below highlights the key economic channels that
are analyzed empirically in the paper. Consider a mass of beneficiaries, each described by
a pair of characteristics - the individual’s risk type r, as well as risk preferences and other
demographic or idiosyncratic factors that may affect the individual’s preference for insurance
together denoted with φ. For simplicity, assume that the individual faces a choice between two
insurance contracts that differ only in their deductible. The more generous contract H has a
zero deductible and a premium pH , while the less generous contract L has a deductible d > 0
and a premium pL < pH .
   Assuming the separability of prices in the indirect utility function and letting v(d, φ, r)
denote the valuation of a contract with deductible d by individual (φ, r), we arrive at a standard
choice problem in a differentiated goods environment. Individual (φ, r) chooses contract L if:

                                     v(0, φ, r) − v(d, φ, r) < pH − pL

                                               4v(d, φ, r) < p
   where p denotes the relative price. Suppose that for any given level of the deductible, the
valuation of an insurance contract is increasing in risk r, i.e. ∂v(d,φ,r)
                                                                    ∂r
                                                                           > 0 and preferences
                            ∂v(d,φ,r)
such as risk aversion, i.e.    ∂φ
                                      > 0, while the valuation is decreasing in the deductible
for a given (φ, r), i.e. ∂v(d,φ,r)
                             ∂d
                                   < 0. Suppose further that the valuation and prices are such
that the “market is covered” in the sense that all individuals find it optimal to buy one of the
insurance contracts rather than to remain uninsured.23 Then, there exists an individual of type
(φ̂,r̂) who is indifferent between the two contracts, i.e. 4v(d, φ̂,r̂) = p. The average risk that
contract L expects to get after individuals choose between the two contracts is E[r|4v(d, φ, r) <
4v(d, φ̂,r̂)].
     Now suppose we introduce an exogenous shock to the model that changes the features of the
contract space. Consider, for instance, a one-dimensional minimum standard policy that only
sets the maximum allowed deductible d.  ¯ Assume further that the less generous contract sets its
deductible d to always equal the maximum deductible set by the government: d = d.     ¯ The more
generous contract, at the same time, always keeps zero deductible. This simplification implies
that I am not modeling how insurers originally decide whether to offer the minimum standard
or zero deductible, taking these decisions as given and stable from the policy perspective.
     Now suppose the government changes its policy and increases the maximum allowed de-
  23
     While this assumption is certainly restrictive and eliminates an important extensive margin on which the
minimum standard may affect the market (Finkelstein, 2004), the empirical model in this paper focuses on the
effects of the minimum standard on the intensive margin, across different levels of contract generosity, and thus
I focus on this aspect of the question in this stylized model as well.


                                                       48
ductible from d to d0 > d > 0 and nothing else changes. In particular, suppose for a moment
that relative prices remain the same p. Individuals that were choosing contract L before, will
switch to contract H under the new policy if now:

                                         4v(d0 , φ, r) > p

      The risk pool of switchers from the less to the more generous contract under the new policy
but without price adjustment is: E[r|4v(d, φ, r) < p and 4v(d0 , φ, r) > p]. Whether this re-
sorting results in higher or lower risk in contract L depends on whether the effect of risk on
valuation grows faster at a higher deductible than the effect of non-risk preferences on valuation
                                                                                          2 v(.)
under a higher deductible. In other words, it depends on the relationship between ∂∂r∂d          and
∂ 2 v(.)
 ∂φ∂d
         .
      Now suppose that individuals face a switching cost γ. This cost may be heterogeneous
across individuals and correlate both with individual preferences φ and risk type r. Let γ be a
function of individual characteristics γ(φ, r). With the switching friction individuals that were
choosing contract L before the policy change, will switch to contract H under the new policy
if:
                                      4v(d0 , φ, r) > p + γ(φ, r)
The switching cost has the effect of diminishing and tilting the set of beneficiaries that are
indifferent between switching to H and staying in L. The first order effect is that the presence
of the switching friction slows down the re-sorting process, as now fewer consumers react to the
change in the contract space. The second-order tilting effect is that whether relatively higher
or lower risks tend to stay in contract L rather than change to H in the presence of switching
cost will depend on the partial and cross-partial derivatives of the switching cost with respect
to risk r and preferences φ.
    Allowing insurers to adjust prices to the new regulation and sorting patterns that are dis-
torted by the switching costs produces theoretically ambiguous results that depend on the rela-
tionship between contract valuation and risk. For example, with a higher regulated deductible,
the relative price will increase because a higher deductible mechanically reduces the liability
of contract L. This, in turn tightens the switching constraint 4v(d0 , φ, r) > p0 + γ(φ, r) >
p + γ(φ, r), which can further decrease or increase the risk depending on the individual value
function. Overall, the direction of change in sorting patterns induced by the change in the
contract space are ambiguous if we allow for switching costs and allow insurers to adjust prices
in response to changes in selection patterns. The effect that the regulation has on the allo-
cation of risks across contracts will depend on the partial and cross-partial derivatives of the
valuation and switching costs with respect to risk and preferences. The choice model in Section
4 estimates these inter-dependencies in Medicare Part D empirically and uses the estimates to
simulate the role of switching costs in shaping the risk-sorting across contracts in response to
market-driven and regulatory changes in contracts.




                                                49
7.2    Construction of the empirical sample from Medicare’s adminis-

       trative data

I restrict the sample to individuals of age 65 and older residing within 34 Medicare Part D
regions or 50 states (Medicare combines some states into the same PDP market), who did not
die in the reference year and were originally entitled to Medicare because of old age rather than
disability. In other words, I do not include individuals, who may become eligible for Medicare
before they turn 65 as part of their SSDI benefit. I further drop observations on individuals
that were dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid in the reference year, since these individuals
are assigned to plans by CMS rather than choosing plans on their own. This brings the sample
down to 25.6 million beneficiary-year observations. I then eliminate individuals that did not
enroll in Part D or were enrolled in Medicare Advantage (or another managed care) option that
combines prescription drug coverage with healthcare insurance.
    Most differences between the panel sub-sample and the baseline comes from the way CMS
draws its 20% random sample of the Medicare population. These samples are only partially
based on panel draws and thus not all individuals are observed in every year. For details on
the CMS sampling procedures see the Chronic Condition Data Warehouse User Manual v.1.7.
Some individuals in the panel sub-sample will be lost if they change from a PDP to a Medicare
Advantage prescription drug plan simultaneously with switching from the “traditional” Medicare
to the HMO system. Moreover, it is possible that some individuals leave the Part D program
altogether; this option is likely to be very rare, however, since these beneficiaries would then
face premium penalties if they decide to re-enter the program at a later date. Lastly, some
observations will be lost in the panel sub-sample due to individuals dying in years 2007-2009.




                                               50
                                                  Table A.1: Construction of the baseline sample


                                                          2006                           2007                    2008                    2009
           Full sample, N                           9,999,538            100%     10,176,611     100%     10,369,814     100%      9,781,213       100%
           Keep age 65+ within 50 states            8,385,276             84%      8,511,573     84%       8,658,693      83%      8,066,696        82%
           Drop if died in the reference year       7,982,664             80%      8,111,023     80%       8,249,112      80%      7,714,002        79%
           Drop if dual eligible any month of year 6,839,959              68%      6,952,339     68%       7,087,638      68%      6,637,418        68%
           Keep if Medicare b/c of old age          6,412,259             64%      6,505,996     64%       6,619,029      64%      6,178,410        63%
                                 a
           Keep PDP enrollees                       1,797,409             18%      1,739,617     17%       1,800,364      17%      1,611,820        16%
           Drop recipients of premium subsidies     1,551,253             16%      1,597,567     16%       1,668,923      16%      1,505,854        15%
           Drop RDS and missing risk scores         1,221,252             12%      1,307,966     13%       1,356,861      13%      1,365,239        14%




51
           Baseline sample                         1,221,252              12%     1,307,966      13%      1,356,861       13%     1,365,239         14%
           Panel sub-sample                          871,818              9%        911,403       9%        954,494        9%       998,014         10%


     The table shows the restrictions to the original sample of 20 % Medicare beneficiaries that were imposed to get to the baseline
     sample. The key restriction was to drop observations on individuals who didn’t enroll in any Part D plan or enrolled in Part D
     through their managed care plan rather than through a stand-alone prescription drug plan (PDP). For years 2007-2009, I kept only
     individuals who were enrolled in a PDP for the whole year with the exception of the 65 year olds - this excludes those individuals
     who were allowed to join the plan outside of the open enrollment period because they e.g. changed their state of residence. In
     2006, given the different special open enrollment period, many individuals were not enrolled for all 12 months and so I keep all
     individuals who initiated enrollment at some point during 2006 and didn’t leave in subsequent months of 2006.
       a
           Mainly drops those who did not enroll in Part D at all and those who enrolled in Medicare Advantage or other Part D coverage options.
7.3    Empirical model: specification checks and fit of the choice model;

       point estimates of the pricing regression

The following set of tables and figures report additional results related to the empirical model
in Section 4. Table A.2 reports several alternative specifications of the choice model. The main
differences across the specification are whether there is observed and unobserved heterogeneity,
and if unobserved heterogeneity is present, how it is specified. I also report several specifications
that do not use the control function IV to assess how the inclusion of the instrumental variable
changes the results. Figure A.1 adds to the reported point estimates by plotting the estimated
distributions of observed and unobserved heterogeneity for the baseline model specification.
Tables A.3 and A.4 and Figures A.2 and A.3 report several metrics and simulations of model
for for the baseline choice model. Table A.5 reports the results of the pricing regression.




                                                 52
                       Table A.2: Contract choice model specifications


                                                               Type of heterogeneity
                                  No         No            Observed Unobserved Unobserved     LN Unobsered
                                  (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)

 Annual premium, $100            -0.3727    -0.4042         -0.4299    -0.4148     -0.5272         -0.5052
                                (0.0070)   (0.0096)        (0.0099)   (0.0078)    (0.0126)        (0.0123)
 Deductible, $100, µ             -0.4329    -0.4405         -0.8430    -1.2329     -1.1415     0.305 [-1.36]
                                (0.0104)   (0.0105)        (0.1110)   (0.1266)    (0.1331)        (0.0906)
 σ                                   -          -               -       0.4802      0.4112      0.304 [0.44]
                                                                      (0.0232)    (0.0249)        (0.0303)
 x Risk                            -          -              0.0715     0.0393      0.0529          0.0703
                                                           (0.0329)   (0.0367)    (0.0389)        (0.0362)
 ICL, $100                       0.0305     0.0325          -0.0839    -0.1650     -0.1631     -1.648 [-0.19]
                                (0.0017)   (0.0017)        (0.0179)   (0.0262)    (0.0276)        (0.1268)
 σ                                  -          -                -       0.0815      0.0849     0.402 [0.087]
                                                                      (0.0053)    (0.0055)        (0.0408)
 x Risk                            -          -              0.0812     0.1052      0.1125          0.1061
                                                           (0.0045)   (0.0066)    (0.0071)        (0.0062)
 Partial coverage in gap, 1/0    0.4102     0.4717          -1.4298    -2.0850     -2.0823     0.55 [-1.734]
                                (0.0297)   (0.0323)        (0.2754)   (0.3358)    (0.3634)        (0.1856)
 σ                                  -          -                -       1.2640      1.3023      0.979 [3.55]
                                                                      (0.0522)    (0.0589)          0.1826
 x Risk                            -          -             0.8983      1.0954      1.1030          1.0729
                                                           (0.0762)   (0.0897)    (0.0976)        (0.0913)
 Default plan, 1/0               5.7324     5.7330          5.1096      5.0675      4.8150          5.0449
                                (0.0213)   (0.0213)        (0.2413)   (0.2584)    (0.2917)        (0.2762)
 x Risk                             -          -            0.2365      0.3589      0.4033          0.3788
                                                           (0.0612)   (0.0655)    (0.0741)        (0.0700)

 Heterogeneity in preferences     No          Yes        Yes          Yes (obs    Yes (obs+     Yes (obs +
 for specific insurers                    (observed) (observed)       on top 2)    unobs)     unobs on top 2)
 Control Function IV               No         Yes        Yes             No          Yes            Yes
 Number of rand. coefficients       0          0          3               3           13             5
 Observations                   2,435,171 2,435,171 2,435,171         2,435,171   2,435,171      2,435,171
 SL at convergence               -60,179    -59,536    -59,224         -59,291     -58,655        -59,106

 γ, 75 y.o. female, av.risk      5.73       5.70            5.80       5.78         5.44           5.63
 γ
 α
   , 75 y.o. female, av.risk    $1,538     $1,326          $1,164     $1,392       $1,032         $1,114

The table reports estimates of utility parameters and not marginal effects. Reported are only
the key estimates; the model also includes other contract parameters, demographic interactions
and fixed effects as discussed in the main text. The IV specification uses the control function
approach. In Column (6) the square brakets report the median or standard deviation of the
random coefficients based on the point-estimates for the mean and s.d. of the natural logarithm
of the coefficients.




                                                      53
      Figure A.1: Distributions of observed and unobserved heterogeneity in valuation of deductible and gap coverage

                                  Distribution of bDeductible                                                                Distribution of bDeductible
                                    Observed heterogeneity                                                            Observed and unobserved heterogeneity




              .05
                                                                                                  .004




              .04
                                                                                                    .003




                .03
                                                                                            .002
                                                                                            Density




           Density
         .02
                                                                                                  .001




              .01
              0
                                                                                                  0
                      -140        -120                        -100                    -80                   -600      -400            -200                0              200
                                           bDeductible / -a                                                                          bDeductible / -a

                             Below average risk                  Above average risk                                   Below average risk                Above average risk




54
                                     Distribution of bGap                                                                      Distribution of bGap
                                    Observed heterogeneity                                                            Observed and unobserved heterogeneity




              .01
                                                                                                  .002




              .008
                                                                                             .001 .0015




           Density
                                                                                            Density




         .004 .006
                                                                                                  5.0e-04




              .002
              0
                                                                                                  0




                      -200    0              200                     400              600                     -1000     -500               0               500               1000
                                             bGap / -a                                                                                 bGap / -a

                             Below average risk                  Above average risk                                   Below average risk                Above average risk




     Distributions are based on the estiamted mean and standard deviation of random coefficients from the baseline model specification
     in Table 5.1. The distributions are simulated in the estimation sample, and hence reflect the observed distribution of demographics.
Table A.3: Choice model fit: summary statistics by contract type and insurer for
enrollment and risk distribution moments


                                                      Enrollment
                                            Model simulation         Model simulation
                                 Observed with observed defaults without observed defaults

     Contracts   of   type   1   21.71%           20.71%                  24.16%
     Contracts   of   type   2   65.93%           69.78%                  68.34%
     Contracts   of   type   3   10.78%           8.88%                    6.94%
     Contracts   of   type   4    1.58%            0.63%                   0.56%

     Insurer A                   29.65%           30.77%                  28.78%
     Insurer B                   27.10%           25.91%                  22.32%

                                          Average risk score
                                    Model simulation         Model simulation
                         Observed with observed defaults without observed defaults
     Contracts of type 1   0.85            0.84                    0.86
     Contracts of type 2   0.88            0.89                    0.89
     Contracts of type 3   1.01            1.03                    1.00
     Contracts of type 4   1.04            1.08                    1.08

     Insurer A                     0.92             0.92                    0.91
     Insurer B                     0.86             0.85                    0.86


The table compares three within-sample predicted and observed moments in the data: 1)
Enrollment shares in different types of plans and in different insurer brands; 2) Average drug
spending in different types of plans and in different insurer brands and 3) Average risk scores
in different types of plans and in different insurer brands. The data is pooled over time and
regions. To simplify the contract space, the comparison is made at the 4-type plan aggregation
and at brand-level aggregation for the top 2 insurers. A more disaggregated fit of the model
is illustrated in Figure A.2. For the risk scores and drug bills, “predicted” measures refer to
the sorting of the observed risks and expenditures as suggested by the simulation of the choice
model.




                                                  55
                                               Figure A.2: In-sample fit of the choice model: fit in the first year of the program (2006)
                                                   Allocation of risk across contracts, 2006                                         Observed in-sample CDF of expected risk by plan type in 2006
                                                                                                                           1




                                       2,000
                                                                                                                           .8


                                                                                                                           .6




                             1,500
                                                                                                                           .4




                   1,000
                                                                                                  Cumulative Probability
                                                                                                                           .2




          500
         Average expected spending, USD
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                0           1000          2000             3000          4000         5000
                                                                                                                                                    Expected risk (risk scores in USD)




                              0
                                                          Observed            Model prediction                                                  Contracts of type 1             Contracts of type 2
                                                                                                                                                Contracts of type 3             Contracts of type 4
          Plans with highest enrollment only


                                                Allocation of enrollment across contracts, 2006                                     Predicted in-sample CDF of expected risk by plan types in 2006




56
                                                                                                                           1




                              3
                                                                                                                           .8


                                                                                                                           .6




                               2
                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                  Cumulative Probability




                                                                                                                           .2




                 1
              Percentage of enrollee-years
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                0           1000          2000             3000          4000         5000
                                                                                                                                                    Expected risk (risk scores in USD)




                              0
                                                          Observed            Model prediction                                                  Contracts of type 1             Contracts of type 2
                                                                                                                                                Contracts of type 3             Contracts of type 4
         Plans with hihgest enrollment only

     To construct simulated enrollment, the estimated coefficients of the choice model together with simulated random components were used to
     find the contract with the highest utility in each individual’s choice set. The observed risk scores of the individuals predicted to enroll in
     different plans were used to compute the average predicted risk. Each pair of bars in the graph represents a different Medicare Part D plan
     (“plan” is region-specific). The graphs display only top 90 out of 2,357 contracts.
                                                      Figure A.3: In-sample fit of the choice model: panel fit with and without observed defaults
                                                          Fit conditional on observed default contracts, 2006-2009                                          Fit not conditional on observed default contracts, 2006-2009




                                                                                                                                      4,000




                                          2,500
                                          2,000
                                                                                                                                            3,000




                                          1,500
                                                                                                                                 2,000




                                          1,000
                                                                                                                       1,000




         Average expected spending, USD
                                                                                                                      Average expected spending, USD




                                          500
                                          0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                      Observed               Model prediction                                                             Observed               Model prediction

         Plans with highest enrollment only                                                                          Plans with highest enrollment only


                                                      Fit conditional on observed default contracts, 2006-2009                                         Fit not conditional on observed default contracts, 2006-2009




57
                                          4
                                                                                                                                      4




                                               3
                                                                                                                                              3




                                  2
                                                                                                                                 2




                        1
                                                                                                                       1




                       Percentage of enrollee-years
                                                                                                                      Percentage of enrollee-years




                                          0
                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                      Observed               Model prediction                                                             Observed               Model prediction

         Plans with highest enrollment only                                                                          Plans with highest enrollment only

     To construct simulated enrollment, the estimated coefficients of the choice model together with simulated random components were used to
     find the contract with the highest utility in each individual’s choice set. The observed risk scores of the individuals predicted to enroll in
     different plans were used to compute the average predicted risk. Each pair of bars in the graph represents a different Medicare Part D plan
     (“plan” is region-specific). The graphs display only top 90 out of 2,357 contracts.
Table A.4: Basic descriptive evidence generated in the model: share of enrollees
choosing the “default” option


                                                                    2007        2008        2009

    1. Share observed in the baseline sample
    Probability of choosing default plan for 66+ y.o. enrollees    89.9 %      88.7 %      89.1 %
    N                                                             1,089,978   1,162,545   1,194,036

    2. Share observed in the estimation sample
    Probability of choosing default plan for 66+ y.o. enrollees    89.9%       89.5%       89.6%
    N                                                              11,170      11,640      12,197

    3. Share predicted in the estimation sample
     (conditional on observed defaults)
    Probability of choosing default plan for 66+ y.o. enrollees    86.3%       84.8%       86.3%
    N                                                              11,170      11,640      12,197

    4. Share predicted in the estimation sample
    (not conditional on observed defaults)
    Probability of choosing default plan for 66+ y.o. enrollees    89.4%       88.5%       88.9%
    N                                                              11,170      11,640      12,197

This tables reports the simulation of the baseline descriptive evidence on the switching rates in
the contract choice model.




                                                 58
Table A.5: Pricing model used for the simulation of premiums in the counterfactual
scenarios


                                  0
          E[Yjbt |.] = αb + δr + Mjbt−1 β + γ1 Dedjbt + γ2 ICLjbt + γ3 1{P artialGap}jbt
where j indexes region-specific plans, b indexes insurers (brands), r indexes 34 Part D regions,
t indexes years


                                                                   (1)
                                                          Annual premium, USD
                   Lagged mean spending                         0.132∗∗∗
                                                               (0.00992)

                   Deductible amount, USD                      -0.489∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0262)

                   ICL amount, USD                              0.312∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0198)

                   Partial coverage in the gap, 1/0             293.9∗∗∗
                                                                (11.89)

                   Insurer FE                                     Yes

                   Region FE                                      Yes
                   N                                             2566
                   Mean Y                                        540.2
                   St. dev. Y                                    253.3
                   R-squared                                     0.802
                   Clustered standard errors in parentheses
                   ∗
                     p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001


The pricing regression is estimated on a dataset that records, for all prescription drug plans,
the annual premium, the mean, the standard deviation and other moments of the lagged drug
spending distribution in the plan (by plan enrollees in the baseline sample). The data also
records the key financial characteristics of the plans - the deductible, the ICL and the gap
coverage indicator of each plan in the program for years 2007-2009. For the cases where plans
changed their ID over time due to mergers, I use Medicare plan cross-walk to match plans. The
regression output doesn’t report the coefficients on the set of fixed effects, as well as on the
standard deviation, the kurtosis, the inter-quartile range, the 95th and 5th percentiles of the
lagged distribution of realized expenditures, but these variables are included in the regression.




                                                 59
7.4   Model-free evidence from Section 3 for all years in the data




                                  60
     Figure A.4: Positive correlation tests: years 2006-2009




61
     Figure A.5: Distribution of risks by type of plan: years 2006-2009




62
Figure A.6: Evidence of switching costs: price sensitivity estimates by cohorts over
time

                                          0.0000
                                                               2006                        2007                2008              2009


                                          -0.0005



                                          -0.0010
              Price elasticity estimate




                                          -0.0015



                                          -0.0020


                                                                                                               First
                                          -0.0025                                                              choice
                                                                                                               in 2008


                                          -0.0030
                                                          First choice
                                                          in 2006
                                                          (all cohorts)                First
                                                                                       choice
                                          -0.0035
                                                                                       in 2007



                                          -0.0040
                                                                          65 in 2006              66 in 2006    67 in 2006   68 in 2006
                                                    Cohorts:
                                                                          69 in 2006              65 in 2007    65 in 2008




I use a simple conditional logit regression to test whether there are statistically significant
differences in the price sensitivity of the cohorts of new and continuing enrollees. Under the
null hypothesis of no switching costs, we would expect the coefficients on plan premiums for
new (65 y.o.) and existing enrollees of similar age (66 - 70 y.o.) in the same year to be very
close to each other. The estimates allow me to reject this null. I find that price sensitivity
is significantly higher in magnitude for 65 year olds than for all cohorts of 66-70 year olds in
years 2007-2009. This does not hold in 2006 when beneficiaries of all ages are entering the
program anew. Furthermore, the estimates of the price coefficient are virtually identical for
each age group among 66-70 year olds, suggesting that the difference between the estimated
price sensitivity for the new and continuing cohorts is not driven by age differences per se, but
instead are related to the lack of switching costs for the 65 year old beneficiaries. The price
coefficients are estimated using the following random utility specification:

    uij = −α65 pij + α66 pij 1{Age = 66} + α67 pij 1{Age = 67} +
        + α68 pij 1{Age = 68} + α69 pij 1{Age = 69} + α70 pij 1{Age = 70} + brandj + ij

ij ∼ iid Type 1 EV. The specification includes fixed effects for eight largest insurers. The
estimates use separate cross-sectional parts of the data sample that is used later to estimate the
full choice model. The sample is restricted to only include individuals that are 65-70 years old.
The graph plots the (sum of) coefficients on premiums in the utility function and not marginal
effects.




                                                                                                   63
