NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF THE TAX DEDUCTION FOR POSTSECONDARY TUITION:
IMPLICATIONS FOR STRUCTURING TAX-BASED AID
Caroline M. Hoxby
George B. Bulman
Working Paper 21554
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21554

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This work is a component of a larger project examining the effects
of federal tax expenditures and on-budget expenditures related to higher education. Selected, de-identified
data were accessed through contract TIR-NO-12-P-00378 with the Statistics of Income (SOI) Division
at the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of Barry W. Johnson
and Michael Weber of the Statistics of Income Division, Internal Revenue Service. The authors acknowledge
very useful comments from Judith Scott-Clayton and Bruce Sacerdote. They also acknowledge help
from John Friedman, Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez, and Daniel Yagan.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Caroline M. Hoxby and George B. Bulman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of the Tax Deduction for Postsecondary Tuition: Implications for Structuring
Tax-Based Aid
Caroline M. Hoxby and George B. Bulman
NBER Working Paper No. 21554
September 2015
JEL No. C21,C55,H2,H24,H26,I22,I23,I26
ABSTRACT
The federal tax deduction for tuition potentially increases investments in postsecondary education
at minimal administrative cost. We assess whether it actually does this using regression discontinuity
methods on the income cutoffs that govern eligibility for the deduction. Although many eligible households
take nearly the maximum deduction allowed, we find no evidence that it affects attending college (at
all), attending full- versus part-time, attending four- versus two-year college, the resources experienced
in college, the amount paid for college, or student loans. Our analysis suggests that the deduction's
inefficacy may be due to issues of salience, timing, and the method of receipt. We argue that the deduction
might increase college-going if it were modified in simple ways that would not increase costs but would
make it more likely to relax liquidity constraints and be perceived as a price change (which they is)
as opposed to an income change. We outline how such modifications could be tested. This study
has independent applied econometrics interest because households who would be just above a cut-off
manage their incomes so that they fall slightly below it. This income management generates bias due
to reverse causality, and we explore how to choose "doughnut-holes" that avoid bias without undue
loss of statistical power.

Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu
George B. Bulman
Department of Economics
University of California
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
gbulman@ucsc.edu

1

Introduction

The U.S. federal government has a somewhat bewildering array of programs that help families
pay for higher education. Some of these programs, such as the Pell grant for low-income
students, receive significant media attention and appear to be salient to families. Others,
especially those that operate through the tax code, are less in the public eye. However, all of
these programs have the goal of causing people to acquire additional higher education by
reducing the price of college and relaxing liquidity constraints. They are usually justified with a
return-on-investment argument: By causing people to attain more education than they otherwise
would, society benefits because people earn more, pay sufficiently more taxes to finance the
programs, and are better citizens in myriad ways. All these arguments depend, however, on the
programs' having positive causal effects on college-going. In this paper, we investigate one of
the key tax expenditures for higher education: the above-the-line deduction for tuition and fees
(DTF). The DTF has features--sharp eligibility cut-offs based on household income--that make
it highly susceptible to causal analysis. Since we find no evidence that the DTF has a causal
effect on any measure of college-going, we apply economic logic to its structure to explain the
likely reasons why it is inefficacious. For instance, we argue that the DTF may perceived as a
change in income rather than a change in the price of college (which it actually is). If it is
perceived as a change in income, its effect would be negligible, consistent with our results. We
suggest simple modifications to the DTF that would not change its cost but that would likely
make it more efficacious. We outline how such modifications could be tested.
This study has independent applied econometrics interest because our data are so dense
and precise that it is a near perfect application for exploring "doughnut-holes" as a remedy for
manipulation of a forcing variable in regression discontinuity analysis. Because estimates of the
DTF suffer from reverse causality bias if we do not account for households' tendency to manage
their incomes to get slightly below the cutoffs, we produce unbiased causal estimates by
applying a statistically appropriate doughnut-hole to each cut-off.
It is reasonable to ask why the federal government has both grant-based and tax-based
programs that support individuals' spending on higher education. Programs that operate through
the tax code, like the DTF, have the advantage of extremely low paperwork and administrative
costs. Form 8917, which a family files for the DTF, has only 6 questions and could take at most
a few minutes to complete. In contrast, the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA),
required for the grant programs, has 105 questions and is time-consuming to complete. To help
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) administer the tax expenditures for higher education, schools
issue a 1098-T for every student. But, the cost of doing this plus the IRS's costs of processing
the extra lines in the tax code, even if very generously estimated, could not possibly represent
more than 0.1 percent of the tax expenditures. In contrast, each college and the U.S. Department
of Education maintains an office to administer federal grant aid, and cost of running these offices
appears to amount to 10 percent of the total spent on grants. There are also concerns that schools
commit fraud when administering grant-based aid.4
The negligible cost of administering a tax-based aid program like the DTF is undoubtedly
4

The estimate of the cost of administering federal grant aid is based on authors' calculations. The U.S. Department
of Education's budget indicates that the federal administrative cost amounts to about 4.3% of the total spent on
grants. The budgets of higher education institutions suggest that their cost of administering financial aid amounts to
about 5.4% of grants. For the concerns about fraud, see for instance U.S. General Accountability Office (2010).
1

an advantage, but it may have disadvantages owing its superficial aspects. If a family pays
tuition and fees with typical timing, it receives its tax-based aid an average of 10.5 months later.
This timing may make the tax-based aid less likely to relax liquidity constraints than grant-based
aid which is timed to coordinate with tuition bills. In addition, because tax rules are complex,
families may not understand that they are eligible for tax-based aid when they are making
college-going decisions. Such non-recognition may limit the causal impact of the programs on
educational attainment. In particular, families may fail to perceive the aid as a change in the
price of college (which it is) and may instead perceive it as income. If they perceive it as
income, the effects of the aid are likely to be negligible. We show that a reasonable upper bound
on the income effect of the DTF is an increase in college attendance of a tiny 0.25 percentage
points (a quarter of 1 percentage point).
In short, understanding the causal effects of the DTF is both feasible and important. If
tax-based aid causally increases college-going, its administrative costs are so low that it might be
wise to substitute it for grant-based aid. If the DTF has little or no effect on college-going,
economic logic may suggest how the DTF could be modified to increase its causal effects
without increasing its potential costs. This is an unusual win-win situation.
We believe this paper contributes in four ways. First, the DTF is an important tax-based
aid program that has received virtually no evaluation.5 Second, because the DTF lends itself to
regression discontinuity analysis and because we employ nearly ideal administrative data, our
estimates are precise and bias-free under assumptions that we are able to validate well. Third,
our analysis suggests that apparently superficial aspects of the program--its salience, timing, the
way it is presented, the way it is received--may crucially change its effects. This is why we may
be able to restructure the DTF to make it attain its intended effect without increasing its cost.
Finally, our study is ideal for investigating manipulation of the forcing variable and the use of
doughnut-holes in regression discontinuity analysis. Although we did not begin this study in an
effort to learn about optimal doughnut-holes, our results could inform any such analysis.
The main limitation of this study is that our estimates of the effect of the DTF are local to
households with income in the vicinity of one of the eligibility thresholds.6 Fortunately, there
are several thresholds--as low as $65,000 and as high as $180,000--so we do not rely on
households in a narrow income range.
In section 2 of this paper, we explain how the DTF works. Section 3 describes our data
and the college-going context. Section 4 reviews the regression discontinuity method. We
discuss income management and statistically appropriate doughnut-holes in section 5. In section
6, we consider how households perceive the DTF and what this behavioral economics implies
for analysis. In section 7, we estimate the DTF's causal effect on numerous college-related
outcomes including attendance, college choice, instructional resources, tuition paid, and student
loans. In section 8, we summarize our findings and explain why we should not be surprised that
DTF has negligible effects on college-going. In section 9, we posit that simple revisions to the

5

For analysis of the federal tax credits for higher education, see Bulman and Hoxby (2015), Turner (2011), Long
(2004), Hoxby (1998), and Maag and Rohaly (1997).
6

The most credible studies that examine the effect of grant aid rely on randomization or regression discontinuity.
They also produce effects that are local. For instance, most random assignment occurs only among students who are
marginal to the program along some dimension such as achievement or family income.
2

DTF might increase its effects. We propose a rigorous test of these revisions.

2. The Tax Deduction for Tuition and Fees
The DTF was enacted as part of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2001 (P.L. 107-16). It remains in force today although currently it is less used because the
American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC), a temporary higher education tax credit enacted in
2009 as part of the Economic Stimulus, is more generous for full-time undergraduate students in
many circumstances.7 Since a family cannot take both the DTF and one of the higher education
tax credits, tax expenditures on the DTF will remain unusually small until 2017 when the AOTC
expires. At that time, projecting from pre-AOTC costs, the DTF will be a tax expenditure of
about $4 billion each year. We focus our analysis on the pre-AOTC tax years (2002 to 2008)
because that period reveals the effects of the deduction in a normal year when temporary
measures like the AOTC were irrelevant.
Under the DTF, a household that pays tuition and fees for undergraduate or graduate
education is eligible to deduct that payment, up to some maximum, from gross income.8 The
deduction is above-the-line, meaning that the households need not itemize deductions to take the
DTF. Eligibility for the DTF depends on a household's modified adjusted gross income (MAGI)
which is equal to total income minus all of the other above-the-line deductions.9 In 2002 and
2003, joint-filing households with MAGI less than or equal to $130,000 and single-filing
households with MAGI less than or equal to $65,000 were eligible for a $3,000 deduction. In
2004, a two threshold system was adopted and the maximum deduction was increased. Joint
filers with MAGI less than or equal to $130,000 and single filers with MAGI less than or equal
to $65,000 were eligible for a $4,000 deduction. Joint filers with MAGI greater than $130,000
but less than or equal to $160,000 and single filers with MAGI greater than $65,000 but less than
or equal to $80,000 were eligible for a $2,000 deduction. These rules remain in force as of 2015.
We thus have six distinct income cut-offs that can be used to identify the effects of the DTF.
The DTF income thresholds are tens of thousands of dollars distant from the thresholds
for the higher education tax credits. This is important. Regression discontinuity-based estimates
are based on an identification assumption of continuity. Therefore, the credibility of the
estimates could be impaired by the presence of other policies that are discontinuous (have
thresholds) in the bandwidths that are statistically relevant for the DTF. Fortunately, the tax

7

There was no DTF in the 2006 tax year, but the DTF was reinstated for 2007 and subsequent years. The Lifetime
Learning tax credit can also be more generous than the DTF under certain circumstances
8

The deduction is per filer, not per student. The household itself must spend the money for tuition and fees. If
some colleges expenses are paid by a tax-free scholarship, fellowship, grant, employer assistance, or veterans'
assistance, the qualifying tuition and fees are reduced commensurately.
9

The DTF is computed after all of the other above-the-line deductions have been subtracted from total income.
These other deductions vary slightly with the tax year but are: educator expenses, moving expenses, selfemployment taxes, alimony, IRA contributions, student loan interest, penalties on saving withdrawals, Archer
medical savings accounts, Health Savings Accounts, self-employed health insurance, self-employed retirement
accounts, and business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and certain others.
3

credits have no such thresholds.10
The amount by which the DTF changes a household's tax liability depends on its
marginal tax rate. For instance, if a 2004 household had income of $130,000 and tuition and fees
spending of $4,000 or more, it would be eligible for a deduction of $4,000. Its marginal tax rate
in that year would have been 28 percent, so the DTF would have reduced its taxes by $1,120
(=0.28 × 4000).
The DTF is for expenses paid in the tax year. For instance, a student might pay for the
spring of her freshman year in January 2007 and pay for the fall of her sophomore year in
September 2007. These two payments would generate a deduction on the taxes due on April 15,
2008. Thus, the tax-based aid associated with the January payment would be received about
12.5 to 16.5 months after the payment was made. The aid associated with the September
payment would be received about 4.5 to 8.5 months after the payment was made. On average,
households realize the DTF 10.5 months after making tuition payments.
If a household understands the DTF rules and anticipates how they will apply, the
household will treat the DTF as a reduction in the price of higher education, which it is. A
household that does not understand the DTF may treat it as an increase in income. Therefore, it
is important to consider how well households understand the DTF rules.
If a household files its own taxes without software or a tax preparer, it must complete
Form 8917 to take the DTF. The form makes the income eligibility cut-offs fairly obvious:
If the result [MAGI] is more than $80,000 ($160,000 if married filing jointly),
STOP. You cannot take the deduction for tuition and fees.
Slightly less obvious language divides filers into those who qualify for the two tiers of
deductions:
Is the amount [MAGI] more than $65,000 ($130,000 if married filing jointly)?
Yes. Enter the smaller of [tuition and fee spending] or $2,000. No. Enter the
smaller of [tuition and fee spending] or $4,000.
The value of the DTF may be misunderstood even by households who complete Form 8917
since what they transfer to their main tax form is the amount of the deduction (for instance,
$4,000). They may fail to understand that they need to multiply the deduction by their marginal
tax rate to learn how much it reduces their taxes. Many people do not know their marginal, as
opposed to their average, tax rate anyway.
Tax preparation software, such as Turbotax, obscures the DTF rules. Because a
household with tuition and fee expenses is potentially eligible for several tax breaks, software
first asks whether the household paid tuition and fees and then silently determines which, if any,
tax break will benefit it most. Some software alerts a household that it is ineligible for tax-based
aid even though it paid tuition and fees. At that point, the household might investigate the DTF
rules or use trial and error (adding or subtracting income) to figure out whether it was close to a
threshold. Because most software nudges filers to invest in an IRA at the end of the filing
process, that nudge might also cause a household to realize that it was close to a DTF

10

We choose bandwidths based on what is statistically appropriate. It just happens that these bandwidths never
include thresholds relevant to the higher education tax credits.
4

threshold.11
Although human tax preparers are less mechanical than software, they tend to ask
questions and convey information in a manner that is similar to software.

3. Data, Cohorts and Years, the College-Going Context, and Income Dynamics
A. Data
We use de-identified data from an IRS database that are fully accurate and maximally dense.
From Form 8917, we derive the qualified spending on tuition and fees that a tax filer claims. We
derive relevant variables from returns: MAGI and filing status. Using data from information
returns, we compute income and filing status even for non-filers. We use variables derived from
Form 1098-T (the form on which institutions report payments of tuition and fees): tuition and
fee payments, whether the student is enrolled at least half-time, whether the student is enrolled in
graduate studies, and scholarships and grants received by the student. These variables are
available regardless of whether a student actually takes tax-based aid for higher education.12 We
derive data on student loan interest from Form 1098-E. For data on colleges' characteristics
(two- versus four-year, college resources), we rely on the National Center for Education
Statistics' Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).
B. Cohorts and Years
We describe individuals by their "cohort" based on the year in which they would graduate from
high school if they entered primary school according to their state's compulsory schooling laws
and progressed through school strictly on time. For instance the "2004 cohort" are the
individuals expected to graduate from high school in June 2004.13 We hereafter call the cohort's
expected graduation year "year 0," the next year "year 1," and so on. Year 1 corresponds to the
spring of freshman year and fall of sophomore year for people who progress through grade 12
strictly on time. It corresponds to the fall of freshman year for people who enter kindergarten
late or otherwise graduate a year late, as about one-third of students do (Deming and Dynarski,
2008). As a factual matter, people are most likely to be enrolled in higher education in year 1,
followed closely by year 0.
C. The College-Going Context
To put the DTF in context, we present relevant summary statistics in Table 1 which classifies
households by MAGI. The MAGI intervals are narrower near the DTF thresholds to provide
facts we need later. The table shows college attendance, tuition paid, and education resources
experienced in year 1 for student from joint filing households in the 2004 cohort. It also shows
11

Davis (2002) and Turner (2012) suggest that the complexity of the higher education tax benefits may make
eligible people fail to take the most advantageous benefit or to take a benefit at all.
12

In some cases, the 1098-T-derived variables generate a less than completely accurate calculation of the DTF for
which the filer is eligible. In particular, a scholarship can pay for qualified tuition and fees but can also pay for other
expenses such as room and board. Only the part of scholarship that pays for tuition and fees should be subtracted
from the payment made by the student's family, but schools can report the entire scholarship on the 1098-T.
13

We use the compulsory schooling dates for each state to identify when a child would typically start school. For
instance, a state might specify that any child who is age 6 by December 31 must be enrolled in the school year that
begins in September of that calendar year.
5

student loan interest paid in years 1 through 7 (2005 through 2011). We focus on the 2004
cohort because it is similar to the cohorts who would start college in 2002 and 2003 (potentially
affected by the first version of the DTF) and to the cohorts who would start college in 2004
through 2008 (potentially affected by the second version of the DTF). Appendix Table 1 shows
additional outcomes, such as scholarships and grants received, for the same students. Appendix
Table 2 shows the full array of outcomes for students from single filing households.
Table 1 and Appendix Tables 1 and 2 reveal a few things that help us interpret our
findings. First, there are many more joint filers near the income cut-offs than there are single
filers. Second, college attendance (at all), four-year college attendance, college tuition paid, list
tuition, and instructional resources rise (nearly) monotonically with income. That is, students
not only switch from no-college to four-year college as income rises but they also "upgrade"
from two- to four-year college and from colleges with fewer resources to colleges with more
resources. Third, grants and scholarships first fall with income (as need-based aid falls), then
rise in income (reflecting the fact that upper-middle income students attend more expensive
schools and are more likely to receive merit aid), and then fall in income again (because affluent
households receive little aid of any kind). Fourth, student loan interest rises and then falls with
income. Low-income households receive more generous need-based grants and have little
borrowing capacity. Thus, loans peak for households in the $90,000 to $110,000 range and
thereafter fall, presumably because more affluent households do not need to borrow much to
finance college education.
D. Income Dynamics
The DTF income thresholds have remained the same in nominal dollars but the incomes of
households in the vicinity of the eligibility cutoffs tended to grow, in nominal terms at least, over
the years we study. Therefore, if a household with a prospective college student gets near an
income cut-off, it typically crosses as its income rises. These income dynamics are relevant to
regression discontinuity analysis because a household that is close to but below a threshold
(eligible, in other words) in year 0 is fairly likely to cross that threshold sometime before year 4.
To see this, consider income dynamics for the 2002 cohort's households whose MAGI
was $0 to $10,000 below $120,000 in the year they should have graduated from high school. We
deliberately examine this "placebo threshold" rather than an actual DTF threshold because we
are interested in income dynamics that are unaffected by income management.
We find that households who had MAGI $0 to $10,000 below the placebo threshold in
year 0 had a 42 percent probability of being (placebo) eligible in that year only. The households
had a 21 percent probability of being eligible in years 0 and 1, a 10 percent probability of being
eligible in years 0 through 2, and a 27 percent probability of being eligible for all four years from
0 to 3. Over years 0 through 3, only 6 percent of households cross the placebo threshold first in
an upwards and later in a downwards direction.
In short, a student who is near a DTF threshold but treated in his freshman year (the 0-1
school year) has a high probability of being treated in his sophomore year (the 1-2 school year),
a good chance of being treated in his junior year (the 2-3 school year), but only a small chance of
being treated in his senior year (the 3-4 school year). It will be useful to remember these
dynamics when interpreting the regression discontinuity results.

4. The Regression Discontinuity Method
Our regression discontinuity analysis is based on the assumption that other factors that affect
6

college-going change continuously through the income eligibility thresholds while, as already
shown, the DTF changes very discontinuously. Following the standard formulation (Hahn,
Todd, and van der Klaauw, 2001), we specify that the causal effect of the DTF on college
outcome Y can be expressed by the following equation, where d is the distance between MAGI
and the eligibility cutoff.
(1)
If other factors that affect college outcomes, å, do not change discontinuously at the cutoff:
(2)
then â, the change in the college outcome at the eligibility threshold, is the causal effect of the
DTF. This implies the standard estimating equation:
(3)
where i indexes potential students, h indexes tax filing households, f is a continuous function
such as a polynomial, and Eligible is a indicator for the household being eligible for the DTF on
the basis of its MAGI. There are no time subscripts in the equation yet. This is an issue we
discuss below.
We follow the recommended procedure (Lee and Lemieux 2010) and estimate results for
alternative polynomials in distance and alternative bandwidths that encompass the optimal
bandwidth ranges (Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012).

5. The Suitability of the Tax Deduction for Regression Discontinuity Analysis
Regression discontinuity methods work best in an environment where (i) a threshold in a
continuous forcing variable (income) generates a large change in a policy variable (the amount
of DTF for which a student qualifies); (ii) the threshold is strictly enforced; (iii) there are very
dense data near the threshold for the forcing, policy, and outcome variables; (iv) other factors
that might affect college-going do not change discontinuously at the threshold; (v) people do not
manipulate the forcing variable near the threshold in an attempt to make themselves eligible.
Below, we show that our setting easily satisfies conditions (i) through (iv). Now,
however, we focus attention on condition (v) because it is crucial for what follows.
A. Income Management
To analyze the DTF using regression discontinuity, we need the forcing variable, MAGI, to be
free of manipulation or "management" near the threshold. While such management may be
perfectly legal, it can generate serious reverse causality bias because the only people who have
an incentive to manage MAGI are those who pay tuition and fees during the tax year. Thus, 100
percent of "managers" who end up just below the cutoff have a student attending college while
only a share of "non-managers" who remain above the cut-off have a student in college. For
managing households, the DTF does not cause college attendance. Rather, the reverse is true:
college attendance causes households to practice income management so that they can take the
DTF. This reverse causality means that if we do not fully eliminate the effects of income
7

management, our estimates will be biased in favor of finding that the DTF raises college-going.
Some forms of income management require the household to foresee that it will be above
the cutoff in the absence of management. For instance, if a household decides to delay the
receipt of some income, it must do this before December 31st. On the other hand, a household
can deposit money in an IRA right up until April 15 of, say, 2004 and still have that deposit
reduce its 2003 MAGI. Thus, a household that does not realize that it is above the cutoff for the
DTF until it actually files its taxes could manage its income at late as the day on which it files so
long it has not already exhausted its annual IRA contribution limit. Most forms of illegal
evasion, such as overreporting business or moving expenses, could also occur as late as tax filing
day. Of course, all forms of income management impose some implicit or explicit costs on the
household. The greater the DTF that a household would receive if eligible (that is, the greater
the tuition and fees it paid), the greater its incentive to manage income.
The test for management of the forcing variable is whether there is displacement of the
MAGI distribution from above to below the eligibility cutoff. We show such tests in Figure 1
and Appendix Figures 1 through 5 using income bins that are $500 wide. (We show year 1
because it is the year in which people are most likely to be enrolled in higher education. Similar
figures for years 0, 2, 3, and 4 may be obtained from the authors.)
It is visually obvious that households manage their incomes to make themselves eligible
for the DTF if they would otherwise be just above the cut-off. For instance, in Figure 1 (joint
filers in 2002 and 2003 near the $130,000 cutoff), mass is missing from the bins between
$130,001 to $133,000. Mass is added to the added to the 127,001 to $130,000 bins. The parallel
Appendix Figures 1 and 2 (for 2004 through 2008) show similar displacement within $3,000 on
each side of the cut-off.
For single filers at all three thresholds (Appendix Figures 3 through 5), there is evidence
of income management but only for the bins that are within $1,500 on each side of the cut-off.
Of course, given single filers' lower incomes, a $1,500 change in income is as consequential in
percentage terms as a $3,000 change for joint filers.
If we do not exclude the data in the region subject to income management, we will
overestimate the effects of the DTF on college enrollment, the amount spent on tuition and fees,
and the college resources that students experience. To avoid this reverse causality-induced bias,
we must impose a doughnut-hole around each cut-off so that our estimates do not rely on the
households most likely to practice income management. Currently, there is no econometric
theory of optimal doughnut-holes (although one of the authors is working on this problem with
an econometrician). However, the basic logic is as follows. We want to impose a doughnut-hole
that is sufficiently wide to eliminate reverse causality bias. The wider the doughnut-hole,
though, the more reduced is our statistical power. This is because, as we widen the doughnuthole, we cannot widen the bandwidth unthinkingly. The plausibility of our model of the
continuous relationship between income and college-going deteriorates as we draw observations
further from the threshold. This is fundamental to the logic of regression discontinuity
identification.
To choose a doughnut-hole that is sufficiently wide to eliminate bias from income
management but not so wide as to eliminate statistical power, we proceed as follows. We
estimate the bias in each small income range by running a local regression of density (g) on

8

MAGI--omitting $5,000 on either side of each cut-off.14 This gives us a prediction of what
density would be in the absence of income management. Thus, we also have an estimate of the
excess or missing density at each MAGI. We then take the base rate of college-going around
each threshold from Table 1. (For instance, the base rate of college attendance is 80 percent for
individuals from joint filing households near the $130,000 threshold. ) We assume that all of the
excess and missing density is associated with individuals who have a 100 percent probability of
attending college since only they have an incentive to practice income management.
Then, for each possible doughnut-hole and each outcome, we have estimates of the bias
due to income management and of the standard error of the effect of DTF eligibility. If the bias
is such that it would be statistically significantly different from zero, a larger doughnut-hole is
needed.
For instance, using the $130,000 threshold for the 2002 and 2003 cohorts, the estimated
effect of the DTF on college attendance would be upward biased by 2.4 percentage points
(0.024) with no doughnut-hole. Since the standard error is as small as 0.003 (with a quartic
polynomial and $20,000 bandwidth), this bias would be highly statistically significant and
misleading. With a $1,000 doughnut-hole, the bias is 1.6 percentage points (0.016) and the
standard error is as small as 0.004 so we would again have the appearance of a statistically
significant effect where there is none. With a $2,000 doughnut-hole, the estimated bias is 1.3
percentage points and the standard error is between 0.007 and 0.018 depending on the
polynomial and bandwidth. Thus, the bias would be statistically significantly different from zero
in some cases. With a $3,000 doughnut-hole, we estimate the bias to be 1 percentage point and,
in all cases, the standard errors are such that this bias would not be statistically significantly
different from zero. This suggests that we need a $3,000 doughnut-hole at this threshold.
We estimate that we need $3,000 doughnut-holes for all the joint filing thresholds and
$1,500 doughnut-holes for the single filing thresholds. It is reasonable that larger doughnutholes in absolute dollars are needed for joint filers' thresholds because the doughnut-holes they
need are about the same percentage of income as the single filers'. For the remainder of the
paper, we call the doughnut-hole we need the "base case" and use bold type face to emphasize
the base case estimates in tables where we show results for a variety of doughnut-holes. (We
could show estimates only for the base case since we think that only those estimates are free of
bias. However, by showing estimates for a variety of doughnut-holes, we allow readers to gauge
the extent of reverse causality bias caused by income management.) Doughnut-holes larger than
the base case needlessly reduce statistical power.
Recall that MAGI is equal to total income minus the other above-the-line deductions.
We therefore investigated the channels through which income management occurs. We found
no evidence that other deductions, such as the IRA deduction, jump discontinuously at the
MAGI threshold. This suggests that other deductions are not the primary channel for income
management. However, deductions vary so greatly that they might matter a lot and still not
generate compelling evidence. On the other hand, we observe displacement in total income that
is similar to what we observe in MAGI. In addition, we observe that income management
appears to be non-existent among households that report only wage and salary income.15 Thus,
14

In practice, a local regression with a quadratic in MAGI has very high explanatory power.

15

The evidence mentioned in this paragraph is available from the authors.
9

we conclude that most of the income management visible in Figure 1 and Appendix Figures 1
through 5 operates through channels such as schedule C business income, capital gains, rental
income, partnership income, S corporation income, farm income, and the like.
B. Changes in Aid at the Income Eligibility Thresholds
Figures 2 and 3 and Appendix Figures 6 through 10 show that the income eligibility thresholds
for the DTF are strictly enforced and that the deductions fall by large amounts at the threshold.
All the figures use year 1 data, employ $500 wide MAGI bins, and show kernel-weighted local
polynomial regressions. The local polynomial regressions are shown in two ways: (i) using all
of the observations, (ii) using all the observations except those in the base case doughnut-hole
around the threshold. The figures are mirrored by Tables 2 and 3 which show regression
discontinuity estimates of the effect of income eligibility on, respectively, DTF take up and the
deduction amount (unconditional on take up). To aid interpretation, the final line of Table 3
shows the average deduction amount taken by households at each income eligibility threshold
conditional on taking the DTF. Appendix Tables 3 and 4 are extended versions of Tables 2 and
3: they show results for a wider variety of bandwidths and polynomials.
Figures 2 and 3 show, that for the 2002 and 2003 cohorts, the share of joint filers who
took the DTF in year 1 is 58 percent with the base case doughnut-hole. The average DTF is
$1,573 at the threshold which means that households near the threshold who were taking it were
taking a deduction of $2,646, close to the maximum allowable DTF of $3,000 in 2002 and 2003.
Appendix Figure 6 and Tables 2 and 3 tell a similar story for the 2004 through 2008
cohorts. Joint filers' take-up of the top tier DTF rate drops by 55 percent at the lower cut-off if
we use the base case doughnut-hole. The average deduction drops by $1,023 at the lower cut-off
in the base case. This means that households just below the threshold who were taking the DTF
were taking a deduction $1,498 larger than that of households just above the lower cut-off.
Appendix Figure 7 and the fourth column of Tables 2 and 3 show the upper cut-off
among 2004 through 2008 cohorts who file jointly. Their take-up rate falls by 64 percent with
the base year doughnut-hole. The average deduction drops by $1,199 at the upper cut-off in the
base case. This means that households just below the upper cut-off who were taking the DTF
were taking a deduction of $1,860, close to the maximum of $2,000.
Appendix Figures 8 through 10 and the remaining columns of Tables 2 and 3, for single
filers, also exhibit sharp discontinuities in the receipt of aid at the cut-offs and income
management in the immediate vicinity of the cut-offs. Focusing on year 1 and our base case
doughnut-holes for single filers, we estimate that 24 percent of those in the 2002 and 2003
cohorts who were just below the cut-off took the DTF and their average deduction--conditional
on taking a deduction--was $2,279. For the 2004 through 2008 cohorts, single filers' take-up of
the top tier DTF fell by 19 percent at the $65,000 cut-off and their average deduction-conditional on taking a deduction--fell by $1,178 there. Their take-up rate fell by 30 percent at
the $80,000 cut-off and their average deduction--conditional on taking one--was by $1,755, the
maximum being $2,000.
It is notable that single filers are less likely to take the DTF and take slightly lower
deductions, when they take one, than joint filers. This is mainly because students from single
filing households tend to attend less expensive schools.
C. Summing Up the Usefulness of the "Experiments"
So far, we have focused on the year 1 effects of the income thresholds with the base case
doughnut-hole, a quintic polynomial, and a bandwidth of $20,000 for joint filers and $10,000 for
10

single filers. (Because they are about the same share of income at the income at the threshold,
the base case has a $20,000 bandwidth for the joint filers and a $10,000 bandwidth for single
filers.) We show this case in bold in the top row of Tables 2 and 3. We use the other rows of the
tables and Appendix Tables 3 and 4 to demonstrate a few other points. First, the estimated
effects of income eligibility are sensitive to the width of the doughnut-hole. The effects with a
zero doughnut-hole are very often statistically significantly larger than the effects with the base
case doughnut-holes. This is evidence of income management. Second, although wider
bandwidths substantially reduce our standard errors, they do not much change the estimated
effects of income eligibility on take-up or the deduction amount. This is not a surprise because it
is visually obvious in Figure 1 and Appendix Figures 1 through 5: The relationships between the
DTF variables and MAGI tend to be flat near the income cut-offs so bandwidth is unimportant.
Third, the estimated effects of eligibility on take-up and the deduction amount do not depend
much on the order of the polynomial that we use. This suggests that, apart from income
management and the rule-driven discontinuity, the MAGI-deduction relationship is smooth
enough to be modeled well with a quintic polynomial. We do not need a higher order one.
In short, the doughnut-holes matter. The order of the polynomial and the bandwidth are
less important.
Table 4 shows the effects of the income thresholds on take-up and the amount of the DTF
for all of years 0 through 4. For conciseness, they show only the base case. The effects are
always greatest in year 1. This is to be expected since year 1 picks up the school years in which
people are most likely to enroll in postsecondary education. The effects rise from year 0 to year
1 and then fall away gradually from year 1 to year 2, year 3, and year 4. In other words, the DTF
is most relevant in the years in which people are most likely to attend college.
We take away a few conclusions. First, all of the estimated effects on DTF take-up are
highly statistically significant. For the base case, the t-statistics for the effect of the DTF
threshold on take-up range from 43 to 80 for joint filers and range from 13 to 25 for single filers.
(Recall that there are fewer single filers near the thresholds than joint filers.) Thus, we do not
lack statistically strong "experiments." Second, the amount of the deduction taken by those who
are just short of an income cut-off is consistently between 75 and 93 percent of the maximum
allowable ($2,000 to $4,000 depending on the cut-off) for joint filers and 59 to 88 percent for
single filers. Thus, the changes in aid experienced at the thresholds are substantial. Third, the
estimated effects are insensitive to the polynomial and bandwidth but sensitive to the width of
the doughnut-hole. Thus, we will only obtain plausibly causal effects of the DTF on collegegoing if we apply the base case doughnut-holes.

6. Anticipation and Salience: Price versus Income Effects
The timing of DTF filing and receipt affect how we implement the regression discontinuity
method and interpret its results. Consider four cases: (i) households who always understand the
DTF rules; (ii) households who are not aware of the DTF rules until they find themselves
eligible for it but who thereafter understand the rules; (iii) households who never understand the
DTF rules and simply accept the extra income as an exogenous "helicopter drop;" (iv)
households who never understand the DTF rules but expect to be eligible in this tax year if they
were eligible in the last tax year.
We are mainly concerned with what these cases imply for our analysis. However, the
discussion also has substantial behavioral economics interest. How families actually think about
11

the DTF matters. It is not enough to know what a rational economist trained in tax rules would
think.
Among relevant households who understand the DTF rules, 2003 eligibility matters for
2003 college decisions, 2004 eligibility for 2004 decisions, and so on. Thus, the regression
discontinuity should be set up with year t choices as the dependent variables and year t
eligibility and distance from the cutoff as the independent variables:
(4)
where â should be interpreted as the effect of a change in the price of college equal to the
certainty equivalent of the DTF.
If households are initially ignorant of the DTF rules but learn them once they take the
DTF, they will fail to respond in their first year of eligibility but, after that, start behaving like
always-knowledgeable households. Thus, the appropriate regression discontinuity equation is
the same. However, we expect â to be greater if a household has DTF experience.
If households never learn the DTF rules but simply find themselves with extra income,
they will experience a pure income effect in the tax year after they are eligible. The appropriate
regression discontinuity specification has the previous year's distance and eligibility as the
independent variables:
(5)
and ã represents the pure income effect of the DTF. This income effect is likely to be very small
because it is logically bounded by the income-college relationships shown in Table 1. The
statistics shown in the table are almost surely upward biased indicators of the causal effect of
income on college-going because wealth, parents' education, and other factors that increase
college are positively correlated with income and are not controlled in the table. For instance,
near the $130,000 joint filing threshold, a $3,000 DTF that increases a household's income by
about $1,000 ($3,000 DTF with a 28 percent marginal tax rate) could have at most a 0.14
percentage point effect on college attendance and a 0.18 percentage point effect on 4-year
college attendance (conditional on attending).16 These numbers are crucial for understanding our
results: the DTF's causal effect on college-going must necessarily be tiny if it runs through an
income effect rather than a price effect.
Finally, if households never learn the rules but expect to remain eligible once they have
received the DTF, the DTF should act like a change in the price of college in the year after the
household is eligible. Thus, the appropriate regression discontinuity specification is same as in
the previous case but ã now represents the effect of a perceived (not necessarily actual) change
in the price of college.
Since households may be of all the types described above, we first estimate the all-in-thesame-tax-year regression (equation 4) with a doughnut-hole:

16

To see this, observe the statistics in Table 1a on either side of the $130,000 threshold. Then observe that (80.8% 79.4%)/10 = 0.14% and that (72% - 70.2%)/10 = 0.18%.
12

(6)
where r is the radius of the doughnut-hole (for instance, $3,000 on either side of the cut-off) and
b is the bandwidth (for instance, $20,000 on either side of the cut-off). We then estimate a
regression that allows the previous year's eligibility to matter:
(7)
where g is a polynomial in the previous tax year's MAGI distance from the cutoff. We estimate
this equation using only the data within the bandwidth but outside the doughnut-hole in both
years t and t-1:

We impose a doughnut-hole on both years because we do not know which type each household
is, and this is thus the only way to exclude bias due to income management.

7. The Effects of the Deduction for Tuition and Fees
A. Differentiating Visually between Causal Effects and Income Management
Before examining figures based on actual data, it is useful to illustrate how one would
differentiate visually between a causal effect of the DTF and income management. Figure 4
shows what a causal effect of the DTF on college attendance would look like in its left panel. Its
right panel shows what income management would look like.
At the eligibility threshold, a household's potential DTF falls and this may exert a price,
income, or liquidity effect that causes a downward shift in the level of attendance. Crucially,
this shift should affect a wide array of households above the cut-off, not merely households in
the doughnut-hole. Thus, we obtain a picture like that shown in the left panel, where the
income-attendance relationship exhibits a vertical shift downwards at the threshold but otherwise
maintains its shape.
In contrast, income management would produce an upward "flick" of the incomeattendance relationship just before the threshold and a downward flick just after the threshold.
The flicks would be contained in the doughnut-hole. These flicks are the symptom of
households who would contain a college student in any case managing their incomes to gain
DTF eligibility. Apart from these flicks (and outside the doughnut hole), the income-attendance
relationship would appear as though the threshold did not exist.
Of course, a figure might show evidence of both a causal effect (the downwards shift)
and income management (the flicks).
B. The Current Year Effects of the Deduction for Tuition and Fees
In this subsection, we focus on year 1 and the all-in-the-same-tax-year specification (6). That is,
we focus on the specification that assumes families understand the DTF well enough for it to
exert a price effect. Since we are examining year 1 effects, about half of the families eligible for
the DTF will have been eligible in the previous year (year 0). Thus, even if families have to
experience the DTF in a previous year to understand it as a price effect, we may find evidence of
13

all-in-the-same-tax-year effects.
Figures 5 through 8, Appendix Figures 11 through 14, and Tables 5 and 6 present the
effects of the DTF on attending postsecondary school (at all) and on attending four-year college
(conditional on attending). Our definition of postsecondary attendance (at all) is whether a
person is a student for whom "qualified" tuition and fees were paid or billed. That is, our
definition is aligned with the DTF rules. As in the previous figures, we employ $500 MAGI bins
and show kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions using (i) all of the observations, (ii) the
observations except those in the base case doughnut-holes. We show other outcomes, years, and
specifications in subsequent tables.
The figures provide no visual evidence that the DTF affects either attendance or fouryear college. On the other hand, the figures do provide clear visual evidence of income
management. The flicks are small but visible especially in the four-year figures for married
filers. For instance, Figures 6 and 8 make it obvious that households with students attending
four-year college manage their incomes to get just below the income threshold. The visual
evidence indicates that these managing households would have had incomes above the threshold
but within $3,000 of it. It is harder to see the flicks in the figures for single filers because all
effects are smaller for them, but close inspection suggests that they manage income too.
Of course, visual evidence is not precise so we now turn to regression estimates. The top
row of Table 5 shows the effects of the DTF on attendance in our base case. Without exception,
the estimated effects are not statistically significantly different from zero. The standard errors
are such that we cannot rule out very small effects such as a 1 percentage point effect. However,
we can rule out effects of 2 percentage points.
Indeed, examining all the rows of Table 5 and Appendix Table 5 (which is an extended
version that shows a wider array of bandwidths and polynomials), we see a consistent story. If
we ignore income management and set the doughnut-hole to $0, the DTF apparently raises
attendance and four-year college. However, this apparent effect is certainly reverse causality
bias because it disappears as the doughnut-hole increases from $0 (implausible) to the base case
that eliminates the effects of income management. Any apparent effect is pure bias.
Although the estimates are sensitive to the width of the doughnut-hole, they are not
notably sensitive to the polynomial or bandwidth. This is not surprising because, as shown in
the figures, the relationships are quite smooth apart from the flicks in the doughnut-holes. In
estimates not shown but available, we find that increasing the bandwidth merely generates more
precisely estimated null effects.
Table 6 repeats the exercise for four-year college attendance, conditional on attending at
all. For the base case (top row), the estimated effects of the DTF on four-year college are never
statistically significantly different from zero. The standard errors are such that we cannot rule
out small effects of about 2 percentage points for joint filers. The remaining rows of Table 6 and
Appendix Table 6 (which shows more specifications) tell a consistent story: Income
management generates estimates that are substantially upward biased if we apply a $0 doughnuthole. Thus, a naive analysis might suggest that the DTF has a causal effect on college-going.
This suggestion disappears when we apply doughnut-holes that plausibly eliminate reverse
causality bias.
Table 7 shows the base case regression discontinuity results for years 0 through 4 for
joint and single filers. Broadly, these confirm the year 1 results: A few estimates suggest that
the DTF has a statistically significant causal effect on attending (at all), but the ratio of
14

statistically significant estimates to all estimates is about what we would expect to occur if the
true effect were zero given 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals. There are no estimates that
suggest that the DTF causes students to attend four-year college (conditional on attending).
Table 8 shows the base case regression discontinuity effects of DTF eligibility on further
college-related outcomes. There is little or no evidence that the DTF has a statistically
significant causal effect on attending full-time (conditional on attending), on two-year college
(conditional on attending), the instructional spending of the college attended, the core studentrelated expenditure of the college attended (an indicator of the school's resources), the "sticker
price" tuition of the college attended (an indicator of how expensive it is for a full-pay student),
the tuition actually paid (net of grant aid), or grants and scholarships received.
Interestingly, the DTF also does not statistically significantly affect the interest paid on
student loans in years 1 through 7. (For instance, we sum interest paid in 2003 through 2009 for
the 2002 cohort.) This lack of an effect on interest paid suggests that when families receive the
DTF, it does not reduce their student debt. Of course, the DTF unambiguously increases the
family's income so it must increase consumption, increase saving, or reduce debt other than
student loans (credit card debt, for instance).
C. Effects of Taking the Deduction for Tuition and Fees in the Current and Previous Year
We found no evidence that the DTF affects college-going outcomes in the year in which it is
taken. There are several possible explanations, some of which we consider only in the next
section. Here, however, let us consider whether families who receive the DTF in year t-1 act as
though they qualify for a discounted price of college in year t--even though this is not the way
the DTF works. If this is so, estimates of equation (7) should show them reacting to lagged DTF
eligibility.
Because it requires a household's income to have been in the vicinity of a DTF threshold
in two subsequent years, we have fewer observations to estimate the lagged specification given
by (7). Therefore, we focus on a $20,000 bandwidth even for single filers. We also focus on the
$65,000 single and $130,000 joint thresholds because, by combining all available years across
the two DTF regimes, we can include four cohorts: 2002, 2003, 2004, 2007.17 Finally, we focus
on years 0, 1, and 2 in which people are most likely to attend college. (Results available from
the authors show similar effects for years 3 and 4.
Table 9 provides no indication that lagged or current eligibility for the DTF affects
college attendance (at all), attending full-time (conditional on attending), attending four-year
college (conditional on attending), attending two-year college (conditional on attending), the
instructional spending of the college attended, the core student-related expenditure of the college
attended, the sticker price of the college attended, the tuition actually paid, grants and
scholarships received, or the interest paid on student loans in years 1 through 7. None of the
estimated effects is statistically significantly different from zero. However, because the standard
errors are larger with the lagged specification, the effects that we cannot rule out are slightly
larger. For instance, we cannot rule out attendance effects of 2 percentage points for joint filers
or 3 percentage points for single filers.
17

Recall that there was no DTF in the 2006 tax year. Thus, both the 2005 and 2006 cohorts must be omitted from
the specification (7) with lagged eligibility. Estimates for the $80,000 and $160,000 thresholds can employ only the
2004 and 2007 cohorts. As a result, those estimates, while similar, have standard errors that are larger than
desirable. These results are available from the authors.
15

8

Discussion

A. Our Findings, Summarized
After testing a broad array of possibly affected outcomes using a method, regression
discontinuity, that imposes minimal assumptions, we find no evidence that the DTF affects
college-going. This conclusion is robust to choices about the polynomial and bandwidth used
for the regression discontinuity specification.
We find that the DTF is taken up by a substantial share of households and that they take
deductions close to the maximum allowed. They accurately apply the DTF rules to the MAGI
they report to the Internal Revenue Service. As a result, many households that are paying tuition
and fees do have higher net-of-tax incomes as a result of the DTF. They are spending or saving
this income in some way, but it is evidently some way that does not affect college-going more
than negligibly.
We find that households near the income eligibility cut-off for the DTF manage their
MAGI so as to push it slightly below the cut-off. This income management need not be illegal
evasion: Various legal forms of avoidance could generate the same result. Moreover, although
income management is a nuisance for implementation of the regression discontinuity method, its
implications for tax revenue and tax fairness are small. Most of the households who are
practicing income management would have MAGI just above the cut-off report MAGI just
below the cut-off. Put another way, the reason that we exercise considerable vigilance about
income management--by imposing doughnut-holes--is that we wish to avoid producing estimates
that suffer from reverse causality bias. If we were not concerned with producing causal
estimates and were only concerned about lost tax revenue, such vigilance would make little
difference.
B. What Explains the Tax Deduction's Lack of Effect on College-Going?
One explanation for the DTF's lack of effect on college-going is that households in the vicinity
of the income cut-offs may be insensitive to the price of postsecondary education. That is, the
elasticity of their college-going behaviors with respect to the price may be so low that it is
indistinguishable from zero. This explanation is not implausible because families near the cutoffs are fairly affluent and may therefore be insensitive to prices.18 Moreover, the vast majority
of the cost of college for most students is the opportunity cost, not tuition and fees. Perhaps we
would not be surprised if we learned that a $1,000 decrease in the opportunity cost of college
produced a negligible change in college-going among people from households near the income
cut-offs. If so, we should also not be surprised to learn that a DTF worth $1,000 produced a
negligible change in college-going among people from the same households.
However, it is possible that these households are sensitive to the price of college but that
the DTF is structured in a way that makes it inefficacious. This possibility is especially
interesting because the DTF's structure could be altered, without changing its potential cost, to
make it more likely to achieve its intended, causal effects.
To see this, consider four interrelated aspects of the DTF that may make it inefficacious:
the lack of salience of the DTF rules, the timing with which households become aware of the
deduction for which they are eligible, the timing with which the deduction is received, and

18

Table 1 indicates that the eligibility cut-off occurs at the 82th percentile of income among joint filers with a 17
year-old in year -1 and the 89th percentile among single filers with a 17 year-old in year -1.
16

aspects of the DTF that make it likely to be perceived as additional income rather than a change
in the price of college.
As noted earlier, the DTF rules are not obvious. This likely lack of salience matters
because of the DTF's timing. Consider the time line for a typical prospective student who
applies to college for the first time. In the third quarter of year t-1 or early in the first quarter of
year t, she applies to colleges. Also in the first quarter of year t, she completes the Free
Application for Federal Student Aid. In April of year t, she learns which schools have admitted
her and what financial aid packages she has been offered. In May of year t, she accepts an
admissions offer. This is also when she makes decisions about whether to take out loans and/or
accept a work-study job. Some schools require a deposit on tuition and fees at this time. In
August or September of year t, she pays tuition and fees for the fall term. In December of year t
or in the first quarter of t+1, she pays tuition and fees for the spring term(s). Finally, by April 15
of year t+1, she or--more likely--her parents file their taxes. When they do so, they realize the
deduction or, at a minimum, learn its income implications.
In short, the prospective student makes all of her college-going decisions--where to
apply, which college to accept, which financial aid package to take, what loans to assume--10 to
18 months before the deduction is realized. Thus, if she fails to predict the DTF well in advance,
her decisions may be unaffected or affected in some way that produces a negligible causal effect.
Moreover, even if the student is expert at predicting the DTF, she or her parents may be
liquidity constrained at the times when tuition and fees are due. Since the deduction will not
have been realized at those times, the DTF will not relax such liquidity constraints.19 Its future
receipt will not affect college choices. Thus, even a household that fully understands the DTF
may act as though it did not exist.
Finally, the DTF seems designed to convince families that it is an increase in parents'
income rather than a decrease in the price of the student's college. It is computed on separate
forms (or in a series of rule-obscuring frames if a tax preparer or software is used), transferred to
one of a series of deduction lines on form 1040, eventually multiplied by the household's tax
rate, and ends up reducing the taxes paid by the filer, who is usually not the student. A family
might make all of the connections and recognize that the DTF is actually a discount on the price
of college, not an increase in net-of-tax income. However, it is doubtful whether the ordinary
family is so savvy. We have already seen that if the family perceives the DTF to be a change in
income rather than price, the effect on college-going is likely to be negligible.
C. The Tax Credits' Analogous Issues and Lack of Effect on College-Going
In previous work (Bulman and Hoxby 2015), we demonstrate that the tax credits for higher
education--which cost as much as $25 billion a year--also have little or no effect on collegegoing. Moreover, some estimates in that work are "local" to households with modest incomes:
married joint filers with $25,000 to $50,000, for instance. The tax credits appear not to affect
their college-going, but it seems implausible that such households are simply too affluent to be
sensitive to the price of college.
While the credits differ substantially from the DTF, the credits share the features likely to
make the DTF inefficacious: a lack of salience, timing unaligned with decision-making and

19

In theory, a household that accurately predicts its receipt of a DTF could petition its employer(s) to reduce its
withholding, thereby realizing the DTF before it files. However, such changes in withholding are extremely rare.
17

tuition bills, a method of receipt that makes them likely to be perceived as income rather than as
a change in the price of college.
If it is their shared features that make the credits and DTF inefficacious, we should not
be surprised that both programs, despite their differences, have little or no effect on collegegoing.

9. Simple revisions to the DTF might increase its causal effects
To illustrate the point that relatively arbitrary features of the DTF may explain its inefficacy, we
propose a simple experiment. Suppose that instead of the DTF being based on tuition and fees
and MAGI in year t, it were based on tuition and fees in year t (the tax year) and MAGI in the
year in which a person was age 17. Suppose also that schools could file to receive the DTF
directly from government.
The DTF would work as follows. After a household filed taxes in the year in which its
child was age 17, it would receive a notice saying that its child's price of college would be
discounted by its tax rate up to a total discount equal to the maximum DTF. This discount might
apply in up to a total of four school years out of the next seven.20 Thus, a joint filing household
with MAGI of $120,000 would be notified that its child would receive a 28 percent discount off
tuition and fees up to a maximum discount of $1,120 (28 percent of $4,000). The household
would receive this notice at about the same time of year as it would receive news about the
financial aid for which its child would qualify.21 Suppose moreover that the household could
show this notice to a college when its tuition was due. At that point, the college could collect the
discounted tuition and file a claim with the Treasury for the amount of the discount. Since the
discount formula would be predetermined, there would be little reason why the Treasury could
not send the funds to the college quickly--just as the U.S. Department of Education sends Pell
grants to colleges quickly. (Pell grants are also based on current tuition and a predetermined
formula.) Households could receive annual reminder notices of their DTF eligibility until the
four school years of use or seven school years of eligibility were exhausted, whichever came
sooner.
This simple modification would make the DTF much more salient. It would ensure that
most people knew about the DTF when making key college-going decisions. The DTF would
reduce payments at the time they were due, thereby relaxing liquidity constraints. The DTF
would likely be perceived as a change in the price, much as a coupon is perceived. In other
words, if the structure of the DTF makes it inefficacious, the modification might make it
efficacious. If households fail to respond to the DTF because they are truly insensitive to the
price of college, the modification would make no difference.
The modified DTF could be made approximately budget neutral in a prospective sense.

20

Obviously, these constraints could be varied. Because some children progress slowly through elementary and
secondary school or take a "gap year" between high school and college, one would not want to constrain people to
take their DTF in--say--only four possible school years.
21

This would be true if the child were born in the first three quarters of the year and had progressed in school in an
on-time manner. If the child had an fourth quarter birthday and/or had progressed in school with a year's delay, the
family would learn of its DTF eligibility one year ahead of its child receiving financial aid information.
18

That is, the thresholds could be set to make each household eligible for the same expected
discount. However, it is unclear why the income of a person's household at age 18 is a better
measure of need for college support than the income of a person's household at age 17.
There might be three additional advantages of tax-based aid that used age 17 household
income. First, prospective students could plan their college education with a discount that was
certain rather one that could disappear under circumstances beyond the student's control.
Second, the Treasury and tax preparers could make tax-based aid "forecasters" available to
households filing their taxes for the year when their child was age 16. Like the FAFSA4caster,
such tools would provide students and their parents with an early estimate of their aid. Third, a
measure based on age 17 household income would reduce families' incentives to "game" the
dependent/independent classification in an effort to obtain more generous financial aid.
The only clear disadvantage to a DTF based on age 17 household income is that it would
give families additional incentive to manage their MAGI so as to get just below the eligibility
threshold. (The incentive would be greater because more years of eligibility would be
determined at one time.) Such income management could easily be eliminated by making the
DTF phase out rather than sharply cut-off at a threshold. There is no evidence that households
manage income to obtain the tax credits for higher education which phase out rather than sharply
cut off (Bulman and Hoxby 2015).
It would be feasible to test rigorously whether the DTF's and credits' inefficacy is due to
their peculiar features or households' insensitivity to the price of college. A randomized
controlled trial that varied eligibility and notification in the manner described above (while
holding constant all other rules) might elucidate how households interact with the tax
expenditures for higher education. Since the DTF and credits potentially support higher
education investments with minimal administrative cost, understanding them better might not
only clarify household behavior but might be useful for policy.

10. References
Bulman, George B. and Caroline M. Hoxby. 2015. “The Returns to the Federal Tax Credits for
Higher Education.” Tax Policy and the Economy 29: 1-69.
Deming, David and Susan M. Dynarski. 2008. "The Lengthening of Childhood," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 71-92.
Davis, Albert J. 2002. "Choice Complexity in Tax Benefits for Higher Education," National Tax
Journal, 50 (3): 509–538.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilber van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and Estimation of
Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica 69(1): 201-209.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 1998. "Tax Incentives for Higher Education." in Poterba, James M. (ed.),
Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12, 49–82. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Imbens, Guido, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
19

Regression Discontinuity Estimator.” The Review of Economic Studies 142: 675-697.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Design in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature. 48(2): 281-355.
Long, Bridget Terry. 2004. "The Impact of Federal Tax Credits for Higher Education." in
Hoxby, Caroline M. (ed.), College Choices: The Economics of Which College, When College,
and How to Pay For It. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 101–168..
Maag, Elaine, and Jeffrey Rohaly. 2007. "Who Benefits from the Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credit?" Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System. Online data as of August 2015.
http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds
Turner, Nicholas. 2011. "The Effect of Tax-based Federal Student Aid on College Enrollment,"
National Tax Journal 64: 839-861.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. 2002 to 2014. Form 1040 and
Instructions for Form 1040.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. 2007 to 2014. Form 8917 and
Instructions for Form 8917.
U.S. General Accountability Office. 2010. "For-Profit Colleges: Undercover Testing Finds Colleges
Encouraged Fraud and Engaged in Deceptive and Questionable
Marketing Practices," GAO-10-948T.

20

Figure 1
Modified AGI near the 2002-03 DTF married filers' eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures are histograms of modified adjusted gross income in $500 bins in year 1 (2002 and 2003 or 2004
through 2008) among married joint filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he
or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Source: De-identified tax data.

21

Figure 2
Taking the DTF and modified AGI near 2003-04 married eligibility threshold

Figure 3
Average DTF and modified AGI near 2003-04 married eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2002 and 2003) among married joint filers who had a child who would have
graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF
includes zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

22

Figure 4
Stylized illustration of a causal effect of the DTF (left panel) versus pure income management (right panel)

23

Figure 5
Attending college and modified AGI at 2002-03 married eligibility threshold

Figure 6
Four-year college and modified AGI at 2003-04 married eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2002 and 2003) among married joint
filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through
secondary school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

24

Figure 7
Attending college (at all) and modified AGI at the lower 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

Figure 8
Attending four-year college and modified AGI at the lower 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among married joint
filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through
secondary school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

25

Table 1
College-Related Outcomes for the 2004 Cohort from Joint Filing Households
all outcomes are for year 1 except as noted

Modified
Adjusted
Gross
Income

Number of
Households

Attend
Postsecondary
at All

Attend a
Four-Year
College

Tuition and
Fees Paid
($)

Core
Educational
Resources

Interest Paid on
Student Loans
through year 7
(2011)

$0-25k

223,253

32.0%

54.5%

8,829

14,731

778

$20-45k

298,369

40.1%

54.4%

7,961

14,527

959

$45-55k

174,107

48.6%

55.6%

7,801

14,564

1,171

$55-65k

183,033

54.5%

57.0%

7,867

14,644

1,302

$65-70k

90,682

58.8%

58.2%

8,404

14,895

1,390

$70-75k

88,492

61.4%

59.0%

8,033

14,951

1,444

$75-80k

85,350

63.5%

59.7%

8,617

15,220

1,494

$80-90k

155,395

67.5%

61.7%

8,746

15,546

1,519

$90-110k

236,533

72.7%

64.7%

10,332

16,182

1,548

$110-120k

83,681

77.0%

68.1%

11,024

17,125

1,521

$120-130k

66,986

79.4%

70.2%

13,236

17,753

1,491

$130-140k

51,764

80.8%

72.0%

15,169

18,426

1,457

$140-150k

41,564

82.1%

74.2%

15,399

19,050

1,384

$150-160k

33,680

83.2%

75.3%

16,461

19,732

1,337

$160-170k

26,518

83.7%

76.3%

17,067

20,168

1,242

$170-180k

21,843

84.9%

78.0%

17,562

20,586

1,161

189,049

87.4%

84.2%

27,031

25,096

709

$180k +

Notes: The 2004 cohort is the group of students who would be expected to graduate from high school in June 2004.
A person is associated with a joint filing household if, when he is age 17 (and thus not independent) his household
files jointly. We continue to associate each person with his age 17 household for the purpose of classification owing
to the fact that, after age 17, filing status is endogenous to the person's enrollment in postsecondary school. Year 1 is
the first full tax year after a person would be expected to graduate from high school if he started elementary school
on time, according to his state's compulsory schooling laws, and progressed through school on schedule (with no
retention in grade). Year 1 is the year in which people are most likely to be enrolled in postsecondary school. For
on-time students, it corresponds to the spring of freshman year and fall of sophomore year in college.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

26

Table 2
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Deduction Take-up in Year 1
quintic polynomial and $20,000 bandwidth ($10,000 for single filers)
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
(take
larger)
larger)
base case with $3,000
0.584***
0.550***
0.640***
0.238***
0.192***
0.296***
doughtnut-hole ($1,500 for
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.011)
single filers)
This case is unlikely to be
biased by income
management.
$2,000 doughnut-hole
0.576
0.547
0.642
0.232
0.197
0.295
(1000single)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.008)
$1,000 doughnut-hole
0.573
0.549
0.643
0.242
0.194
0.303
(500single)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.006)
$0 doughnut-hole
0.586
0.560
0.648
0.258
0.198
0.308
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.005)
Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on take-up of the DTF. Standard errors are in parentheses. The base case is shown in the first row and in bold. ***
indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level. We do not show asterisks
on estimates that employ doughnut-holes smaller than the base case because we know that those estimates suffer
from reverse causality bias due to income management. Because there are two tiers of income eligibility in 2004
through 2008, the estimates in the columns headed "take larger" refer to the households taking up the larger
deduction for which they qualify based on being just below an income cut-off. Appendix Table 3 shows results for
narrower bandwidths and quartic polynomials.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

27

Table 3
Effect of the DTF Threshold on the Deduction Amount in Year 1 (unconditional on taking it up)
quintic polynomial and $20,000 bandwidth ($10,000 for single filers)
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
(take
larger)
larger)
base case with $3,000
1573***
1023***
1199***
570***
361***
524***
doughtnut-hole ($1,500 for
(35)
(24)
(15)
(31)
(27)
(21)
single filers)
This case is unlikely to be
biased by income
management.
$2,000 doughnut-hole
1538
1018
1207
558
382
519
(1000single)
(26)
(18)
(11)
(23)
(20)
(15)
$1,000 doughnut-hole
1547
1039
1213
586
377
538
(500single)
(19)
(13)
(8)
(17)
(15)
(11)
$0 doughnut-hole
1594
1103
1225
619
389
549
(14)
(10)
(6)
(13)
(11)
(9)
change in deduction
amount at the cutoff
conditional on taking it

2646

1498

1860

2279

1178

1755

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on the amount of the DTF unconditional on taking it. Standard errors are in parentheses. The base case is shown in
the first row and in bold. *** indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01
level. We do not show asterisks on estimates that employ doughnut-holes smaller than the base case because we
know that those estimates suffer from reverse causality bias due to income management. Appendix Table 4 shows
results for narrower bandwidths and quartic polynomials. The bottom row shows the change in the deduction
amount at the cut-off for those households that take the DTF. These numbers are useful for understanding the degree
to which households are taking the maximum possible DTF.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

28

Table 4
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Deduction Take-up and Amount in Years 0 through 4, Base Case
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
Take-up the deduction in Year 0

0.511***
(0.010)

0.464***
(0.006)

0.566***
(0.008)

0.216***
(0.011)

0.151***
(0.006)

0.243***
(0.010)

Take-up the deduction in Year 1

0.584***
(0.010)

0.550***
(0.006)

0.640***
(0.008)

0.238***
(0.013)

0.192***
(0.007)

0.296***
(0.011)

Take-up the deduction in Year 2

0.547***
(0.010)

0.542***
(0.006)

0.624***
(0.008)

0.234***
(0.013)

0.196***
(0.007)

0.271***
(0.011)

Take-up the deduction in Year 3

0.511***
(0.010)

0.509***
(0.006)

0.576***
(0.008)

0.205***
(0.012)

0.158***
(0.006)

0.244***
(0.011)

Take-up the deduction in Year 4

0.440***
(0.010)

0.447***
(0.006)

0.503***
(0.008)

0.191***
(0.012)

0.137***
(0.006)

0.204***
(0.010)

Deduction amount (unconditional
on attending) in Year 0

1308***
(32)

856***
(24)

1035***
(15)

499***
(29)

273***
(25)

432***
(18)

Deduction amount (unconditional
on attending) in Year 1

1573***
(35)

1023***
(24)

1199***
(15)

570***
(31)

361***
(27)

524***
(21)

Deduction amount (unconditional
on attending) in Year 2

1487***
(28)

1033***
(25)

1178***
(15)

597***
(32)

405***
(27)

490***
(20)

Deduction amount (unconditional
on attending) in Year 3

1385***
(28)

997***
(25)

1082***
(16)

521***
(31)

278***
(31)

449***
(20)

Deduction amount (unconditional
on attending) in Year 4

1189***
(28)

839***
(25)

953***
(16)

483***
(30)

264***
(26)

373***
(19)

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on take-up of the DTF and the amount of the DTF unconditional on taking it. Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level. Only base case
estimates, which are unlikely to suffer from reverse causality bias, are shown. (See text and Tables 2 and 3 for the
base case specification.)
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

29

Table 5
Effect of the DTF Threshold on College Attendance in Year 1
quintic polynomial and $20,000 bandwidth ($10,000 for single filers)
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
(take
larger)
larger)
base case with $3,000
-0.007
-0.003
0.000
-0.005
0.005
-0.000
doughtnut-hole ($1,500 for
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.006)
single filers)
This case is unlikely to be
biased by income
management.
$2,000 doughnut-hole
0.005
0.001
0.009
-0.000
0.010
0.003
(1000single)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.014)
(0.008)
(0.011)
$1,000 doughnut-hole
0.005
0.003
0.007
0.003
0.017
0.005
(500single)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.008)
$0 doughnut-hole
0.019
0.012
0.007
0.015
0.019
0.012
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.006)

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on college attendance (at all). Standard errors are in parentheses. The base case is shown in the first row and in
bold. ***, **, or * indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01, 0.05, or 0.10
level. We do not show asterisks on estimates that employ doughnut-holes smaller than the base case because we
know that those estimates suffer from reverse causality bias due to income management. Appendix Table 5 shows
results for narrower bandwidths and quartic polynomials.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

30

Table 6
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Attending Four-Year College (conditional on attending at all) in Year 1
quintic polynomial and $20,000 bandwidth ($10,000 for single filers)
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
(take
larger)
larger)
base case with $3,000
-0.003
-0.002
0.001
0.007
0.002
0.003
doughtnut-hole ($1,500 for
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.009)
single filers)
This case is unlikely to be
biased by income
management.
$2,000 doughnut-hole
-0.003
-0.002
0.001
0.025
0.003
0.016
(1000single)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.022)
(0.013)
(0.017)
$1,000 doughnut-hole
0.019
0.004
-0.000
0.016
0.012
0.012
(500single)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.010)
(0.013)
$0 doughnut-hole
0.027
0.014
0.008
0.017
0.013
0.015
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.007)
(0.010)

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on four-year college attendance (conditional on attending at all). Standard errors are in parentheses. The base case
is shown in the first row and in bold. ***, **, or * indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different
from zero at the 0.01, 0.05, or 0.10 level. We do not show asterisks on estimates that employ doughnut-holes
smaller than the base case because we know that those estimates suffer from reverse causality bias due to income
management. Appendix Table 6 shows results for narrower bandwidths and quartic polynomials.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

31

Table 7
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Attending College and Four-Year College in Years 0 through 4, Base Case
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000 $130,000 $160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
Attending college (at all) in Year 0

-0.004
(0.012)

0.016**
(0.007)

0.010
(0.010)

0.021
(0.017)

0.020*
(0.012)

0.008
(0.015)

Attending college (at all) in Year 1

-0.007
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.006)

0.000
(0.008)

-0.008
(0.018)

0.014
(0.011)

0.015
(0.015)

Attending college (at all) in Year 2

0.001
(0.010)

0.010
(0.006)

0.015*
(0.008)

0.026
(0.019)

0.008
(0.011)

0.008
(0.015)

Attending college (at all) in Year 3

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.000
(0.007)

0.005
(0.009)

0.012
(0.019)

-0.011
(0.012)

0.009
(0.016)

Attending college (at all) in Year 4

0.034**
(0.012)

-0.001
(0.007)

0.002
(0.010)

0.016
(0.019)

0.007
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.016)

Four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) in Year 0

0.009
(0.017)

0.006
(0.008)

-0.008
(0.013)

0.039
(0.034)

0.019
(0.020)

-0.007
(0.026)

Four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) in Year 1

-0.002
(0.014)

0.009
(0.009)

0.006
(0.011)

-0.004
(0.029)

-0.021
(0.017)

-0.002
(0.023)

Four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) in Year 2

0.011
(0.015)

-0.000
(0.009)

-0.011
(0.011)

0.030
(0.030)

0.026
(0.018)

0.008
(0.023)

Four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) in Year 3

0.012
(0.015)

-0.000
(0.009)

-0.008
(0.011)

-0.020
(0.030)

-0.026
(0.019)

-0.017
(0.023)

Four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) in Year 4

0.006
(0.015)

0.004
(0.009)

0.019
(0.012)

0.026
(0.031)

0.019
(0.019)

0.023
(0.025)

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on college attendance (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on attending). Standard errors are in
parentheses. Only base case estimates, which are unlikely to suffer from reverse causality bias, are shown. (See text
and Tables 5 and 6 for the base case specification.) ***, **, or * indicates that an estimate is statistically
significantly different from zero at the 0.01, 0.05, or 0.10 level.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

32

Table 8
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Various College-Related Outcomes, Year 1, Base Case
all outcomes are conditional on attending college at all
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
(see notes)
cohorts
(see notes)
$130,000 $130,000 $160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold threshold threshold threshold threshold threshold
Attending college full-time in Year 1

-0.014
(0.011)

-0.004
(0.007)

0.001
(0.009)

-0.016
(0.018)

0.006
(0.011)

0.002
(0.016)

Two-year college in Year 1

-0.000
(0.015)

-0.009
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.011)

0.004
(0.029)

0.023
(0.017)

0.006
(0.023)

Instructional spending of the college
attended in Year 1

-50
(247)

139
(98)

119
(143)

-144
(424)

-214
(168)

-192
(233)

Core educational spending of the
college attended in Year 1

-73
(476)

215
(178)

177
(256)

-449
(845)

-642
(307)

-11
(425)

"Sticker price" tuition and fees of the
college attended in Year 1

-271
(350)

209
(181)

289
(259)

309
(595)

-284
(309)

-36
(430)

Total tuition paid in Year 1

149**
(65)

171
(152)

79
(221)

-10
(107)

-151
(256)

234
(360)

Total grants and scholarships in Year
1

72
(90)

24
(84)

53
(113)

239
(193)

-249
(175)

45
(228)

Student loan interest paid in Years 1
through 7

29
(74)

-56
(87)

-62
(122)

41
(89)

-30
(100)

-230
(157)

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on college-related outcomes. Standard errors are in parentheses. Only base case estimates, which are unlikely to
suffer from reverse causality bias, are shown. (See text and Tables 5 and 6 for the base case specification.) ***, **,
or * indicates that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01, 0.05, or 0.10 level. Only
the 2004 and 2005 cohorts are used for the estimates of student loan interest paid in years 1 through 7.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

33

Table 9
Effect of Current and Lagged DTF Eligibility on Attending College and Four-Year College
$20,000 Bandwidth, Quintic Polynomial
2002-2008
2002-2008
2004 & 2007
2004-2008
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
threshold

$65,000
threshold

$160,000
threshold

$80,000
threshold

Eligible for DTF in current year (year 1)

0.003
(0.008)

0.002
(0.016)

0.028*
(0.016)

0.012
(0.032)

Eligible for DTF in prior year (year 0)

-0.002
(0.009)

0.008
(0.017)

0.011
(0.016)

-0.016
(0.033)

Eligible for DTF in current year (year 2)

0.012
(0.009)

0.027
(0.017)

-0.000
(0.016)

0.005
(0.033)

Eligible for DTF in prior year (year 1)

-0.013
(0.009)

0.007
(0.017)

0.008
(0.017)

-0.007
(0.034)

Eligible for DTF in current year (year 1)

0.010
(0.013)

-0.025
(0.025)

0.011
(0.023)

-0.057
(0.048)

Eligible for DTF in prior year (year 0)

0.006
(0.013)

0.031
(0.026)

-0.028
(0.024)

-0.008
(0.049)

Eligible for DTF in current year (year 2)

0.011
(0.013)

-0.012
(0.026)

-0.004
(0.023)

0.004
(0.049)

Eligible for DTF in prior year (year 1)

0.009
(0.013)

-0.030
(0.027)

-0.014
(0.024)

-0.003
(0.050)

Attending college at all

Four-year college attendance

Notes: The table shows regression discontinuity-based estimates of the effect of various income eligibility cut-offs
on college attendance (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on attending). The specification that
includes current year and lagged income eligibility is employed: equation (7) in the text. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Only estimates that employ the base case doughnut holes, which are unlikely to suffer from reverse
causality bias, are shown. (See text for further information on the base case doughnut holes.) ***, **, or * indicates
that an estimate is statistically significantly different from zero at the 0.01, 0.05, or 0.10 level.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

34

Appendix Figure 1
Modified AGI near the lower 2004-08 DTF married filers' eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures are histograms of modified adjusted gross income in $500 bins in year 1 (2002 and 2003 or 2004
through 2008) among married joint filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he
or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Source: De-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 1

Appendix Figure 2
Modified AGI near the upper 2004-08 DTF married filers' eligibility threshold

Appendix Figure 3
Modified AGI near the 2002-03 DTF single filers' eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures are histograms of modified adjusted gross income in $500 bins in year 1 (2002 and 2003 or 2004
through 2008) among married joint or single filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in
year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Source: de-identified tax data.
Appendix Page 2

Appendix Figure 4
Modified AGI near the lower 2004-08 DTF single filers' eligibility threshold

Appendix Figure 5
Modified AGI near the upper 2004-08 DTF single filers' eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures are histograms of modified adjusted gross income in $500 bins in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among
single filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed
through secondary school on time. Source: de-identified tax data.
Appendix Page 3

Appendix Figure 6
(a) Taking DTF and modified AGI at lower 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

(b) Average DTF and modified AGI at lower 2004-08 married eligibility
threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among married joint filers who had a child who would have
graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF
includes zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.
Appendix Page 4

Appendix Figure 7
(a) Taking DTF and modified AGI at upper 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

(b) Average DTF & modified AGI at upper 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among married joint filers who had a child who would have
graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF
includes zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.
Appendix Page 5

Appendix Figure 8
(a) Taking DTF and modified AGI at 2002-03 single eligibility threshold

(b) Average DTF and modified AGI at 2002-03 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2002 and 2003) among single filers who had a child who would have graduated
from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF includes
zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from
gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or
only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.
Appendix Page 6

Appendix Figure 9
(a) Taking DTF and modified AGI at lower 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

(b) Average DTF and modified AGI at lower 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among single filers who had a child who would have graduated
from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF includes
zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from
gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or
only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 7

Appendix Figure 10
(a) Taking DTF and modified AGI at upper 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

(b) Average DTF and modified AGI at upper 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of taking the DTF and average DTF in dollars as a function of modified
adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among single filers who had a child who would have graduated
from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary school on time. Average DTF includes
zeros (non-takers). Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from
gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or
only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 8

Appendix Figure 11
(a) Attending college (at all) and modified AGI at the upper 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

(b) Four-year college and modified AGI at the upper 2004-08 married eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among married joint
filers who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through
secondary school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values
from gaussian kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations
or only those outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 9

Appendix Figure 12
(a) Attending college and modified AGI at the 2002-03 single eligibility threshold

(b) Four-year college and modified AGI at the 2002-03 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2002 and 2003) among single filers who
had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary
school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from gaussian
kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or only those
outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 10

Appendix Figure 13
(a) Attending college and modified AGI at the lower 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

(b) Four-year college and modified AGI at the lower 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among single filers
who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary
school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from gaussian
kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or only those
outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 11

Appendix Figure 14
(a) Attending college and modified AGI at the upper 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

(b) Four-year college and modified AGI at the upper 2004-08 single eligibility threshold

Notes: Figures show the probability of attending college (at all) and attending four-year college (conditional on
attending at all) as a function of modified adjusted gross income in year 1 (2004 through 2008) among single filers
who had a child who would have graduated from high school in year 0 if he or she had progressed through secondary
school on time. Each dot summarizes data in a $500 interval. The figures also show smoothed values from gaussian
kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions (degree 1, bandwidth 500) that include all observations or only those
outside the doughnut hole. Source: de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 12

Appendix Table 1
College-Related Outcomes for the 2004 Cohort from Joint Filing Households
all outcomes are for year 1 except as noted
All outcomes below for those who enroll in at least some postsecondary
education
Modified
Adjusted Gross
Income

Number of
Households

Attend at
Least
Half-Time

Grants and
Scholarships
Received ($)

"List" Tuition
and Fees

Instructional
Spending Per
Student

$0-25k

223,253

86.4%

6,397

6,314

6,033

$20-45k

298,369

87.6%

5,417

6,429

5,962

$45-55k

174,107

88.8%

4,269

6,590

5,974

$55-65k

183,033

89.8%

3,850

6,796

6,003

$65-70k

90,682

89.9%

3,883

6,876

6,107

$70-75k

88,492

90.4%

3,418

7,032

6,122

$75-80k

85,350

90.7%

3,825

7,092

6,236

$80-90k

155,395

90.9%

3,534

7,319

6,365

$90-110k

236,533

91.4%

3,640

7,682

6,621

$110-120k

83,681

91.6%

3,574

8,174

7,012

$120-130k

66,986

91.9%

3,908

8,566

7,253

$130-140k

51,764

91.9%

4,171

8,842

7,525

$140-150k

41,564

92.0%

3,426

9,280

7,790

$150-160k

33,680

92.4%

3,228

9,627

8,064

$160-170k

26,518

92.1%

3,222

9,896

8,231

$170-180k

21,843

92.4%

3,354

9,996

8,410

189,049

92.1%

2,637

12,765

10,212

$180k +

Notes: The 2004 cohort is the group of students who would be expected to graduate from high school in June 2004.
A person is associated with a joint filing household if, when he is age 17 (and thus not independent) his household
files jointly. We continue to associate each person with his age 17 household for the purpose of classification owing
to the fact that, after age 17, filing status is endogenous to the person's enrollment in postsecondary school. Year 1 is
the first full tax year after a person would be expected to graduate from high school if he started elementary school
on time, according to his state's compulsory schooling laws, and progressed through school on schedule (with no
retention in grade). Year 1 is the year in which people are most likely to be enrolled in postsecondary school. For
on-time students, it corresponds to the spring of freshman year and fall of sophomore year in college.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 13

Appendix Table 2
College-Related Outcomes for the 2004 Cohort from Single Filing Households
all outcomes are for year 1 except as noted
All outcomes below are conditional on some postsecondary attendance
Modified
Adjusted
Gross
Income

Number
of
Households

Attend Attend Attend
Postse- at Least a Fourcondary
HalfYear
at All
Time College

Tuition
and
Fees
Paid
($)

Grants
and
Scholarships
Received
($)

"List" InstrucTuition
tional
and
Spend
Fees ing Per
($) Student
($)

Core Interest
Educa- Paid on
tional Student
ReLoans
sources through
($)
year 7
($)

$0-25k

535,248

24.8%

84.8%

53.1%

6,878

5,211

5,958

5,537

13,499

715

$25-45k

371,594

35.4%

86.6%

55.0%

7,247

4,738

6,337

5,740

14,007

956

$45-55k

98,366

46.0%

88.5%

56.4%

7,939

4,226

6,778

6,167

15,055

1,136

$55-65k

63,631

52.1%

88.8%

57.6%

8,659

4,317

7,083

6,217

15,238

1,202

$65-70k

22,487

56.0%

89.2%

58.5%

9,512

4,354

7,313

6,388

15,701

1,219

$70-75k

17,933

58.7%

89.0%

57.9%

10,874

3,497

7,210

6,542

15,965

1,198

$75-80k

14,153

60.2%

89.7%

60.1%

11,513

5,377

7,645

6,692

16,369

1,209

$80-90k

19,903

62.4%

89.7%

61.8%

11,124

4,596

7,930

6,934

16,946

1,270

$90-110k

21,514

66.5%

89.4%

62.9%

14,514

4,547

8,211

7,285

17,860

1,208

$110-120k

5,963

69.6%

90.5%

65.4%

14,998

4,959

8,855

7,425

18,194

1,078

$120-130k

4,320

72.5%

90.2%

65.2%

15,190

3,117

8,809

7,670

18,866

1,063

$130-140k

3,253

72.7%

90.6%

69.3%

15,279

5,409

9,485

8,133

19,861

1,148

$140-150k

2,411

74.1%

91.0%

69.2%

15,703

4,150

9,714

8,072

19,800

1,009

$150-160k

2,091

74.2%

90.9%

69.7%

15,853

2,556

9,480

8,043

19,747

1,032

$160-170k

1,571

75.9%

91.6%

71.2%

16,825

3,957

9,643

8,326

20,344

938

$170-180k

1,337

74.7%

92.7%

70.5%

19,536

3,463

10,273

8,503

20,803

981

$180k +

12,502

79.5%

91.2%

77.0%

19,205

2,394

11,785

9,642

23,606

647

Notes: The 2004 cohort is the group of students who would be expected to graduate from high school in June 2004.
A person is associated with a joint filing household if, when he is age 17 (and thus not independent) his household
files jointly. We continue to associate each person with his age 17 household for the purpose of classification owing
to the fact that, after age 17, filing status is endogenous to the person's enrollment in postsecondary school. Year 1 is
the first full tax year after a person would be expected to graduate from high school if he started elementary school
on time, according to his state's compulsory schooling laws, and progressed through school on schedule (with no
retention in grade). Year 1 is the year in which people are most likely to be enrolled in postsecondary school. For
on-time students, it corresponds to the spring of freshman year and fall of sophomore year in college.
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified tax data.

Appendix Page 14

Appendix Table 3
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Deduction Take-up in Year 1
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
larger)
base case (unlikely to be biased
0.584***
0.550***
0.640***
0.238***
by income management)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.013)
Other cases
doughnuthole
$0

polynomial
quintic

bandwidth
$20,000

quintic

$20,000

quintic

$20,000

quintic

$20,000

0.586
(0.004)
0.573
(0.005)
0.576
(0.007)

0.560
(0.002)
0.549
(0.003)
0.547
(0.004)

0.648
(0.003)
0.643
(0.004)
0.642
(0.006)

0.584***
(0.010)
quintic $10,000
0.595
(0.005)
$1,000
quintic $10,000
0.567
(500single)
(0.010)
$2,000
quintic $10,000
0.562
(1000single)
(0.018)
$3,000
quintic $10,000
0.593***
(1500single)
(0.035)
$0
quartic $20,000
0.587
(0.003)
$1,000
quartic $20,000
0.581
(500single)
(0.004)
$2,000
quartic $20,000
0.584
(1000single)
(0.005)
$3,000
quartic $20,000
0.591***
(1500single)
(0.006)
$0
quartic $10,000
0.589
(0.005)
$1,000
quartic $10,000
0.571
(500single)
(0.007)
$2,000
quartic $10,000
0.573
(1000single)
(0.010)
$3,000
quartic $10,000
0.589***
(1500single)
(0.016)
Notes are the same as those attached to Table 2.

0.550***
(0.006)
0.570
(0.003)
0.551
(0.006)
0.542
(0.011)
0.550***
(0.022)
0.551
(0.002)
0.543
(0.002)
0.540
(0.003)
0.540***
(0.004)
0.562
(0.003)
0.547
(0.004)
0.542
(0.006)
0.545***
(0.010)

0.640***
(0.008)
0.657
(0.004)
0.652
(0.008)
0.661
(0.014)
0.680***
(0.028)
0.647
(0.002)
0.644
(0.003)
0.644
(0.004)
0.644***
(0.005)
0.651
(0.004)
0.645
(0.005)
0.645
(0.008)
0.644***
(0.013)

$1,000
(500single)
$2,000
(1000single)
$3,000
(1500single)
$0

Appendix Page 15

2004 through 2008
cohorts
$65,000
threshold
(take
larger)
0.192***
(0.007)

$80,000
threshold

0.296***
(0.011)

0.238
(0.004)
0.226
(0.004)
0.219
(0.005)
0.216***
(0.005)
0.258
(0.005)
0.242
(0.007)
0.232
(0.009)

0.187
(0.002)
0.183
(0.002)
0.181
(0.002)
0.177***
(0.002)
0.198
(0.003)
0.194
(0.004)
0.197
(0.005)

0.301
(0.003)
0.297
(0.004)
0.294
(0.005)
0.295***
(0.005)
0.308
(0.005)
0.303
(0.006)
0.295
(0.008)

0.238***
(0.013)
0.233
(0.003)
0.225
(0.003)
0.220
(0.004)
0.219***
(0.004)
0.251
(0.005)
0.239
(0.005)
0.233
(0.007)
0.236***
(0.008)

0.192***
(0.007)
0.204
(0.001)
0.205
(0.002)
0.208
(0.002)
0.210***
(0.002)
0.193
(0.002)
0.189
(0.003)
0.188
(0.003)
0.184***
(0.004)

0.296***
(0.011)
0.298
(0.003)
0.295
(0.003)
0.293
(0.004)
0.293***
(0.004)
0.301
(0.004)
0.296
(0.005)
0.290
(0.006)
0.290***
(0.007)

Appendix Table 4
Effect of the DTF Threshold on the Deduction Amount in Year 1 (unconditional on taking it up)
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000
$130,000
$160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
threshold
(take
(take
larger)
larger)
base case (unlikely biased by
1573***
1023***
1199***
570***
361***
524***
income management)
(35)
(24)
(15)
(31)
(27)
(21)
Other cases
doughnut

poly-

band-

$0

quintic

$20,000

1594

1103

1225

578

372

620

$1,000

quintic

$20,000

1547

1039

1213

554

365

636

$2,000

quintic

$20,000

1538

1018

1207

537

366

657

$3,000

quintic

$20,000

1573***

1023***

1199***

532***

361***

694***

$0

quintic

$10,000

1641

1168

1247

619

389

549

$1,000

quintic

$10,000

1560

1068

1236

586

377

538

$2,000

quintic

$10,000

1511

1019

1252

558

382

519

$3,000

quintic

$10,000

1657***

1080***

1269***

570***

361***

524***

$0

quartic

$20,000

1584

1064

1220

554

449

543

$1,000

quartic

$20,000

1554

1012

1211

536

459

540

$2,000

quartic

$20,000

1552

993

1207

522

475

539

$3,000

quartic

$20,000

1572***

986***

1203***

517***

489***

542***

$0

quartic

$10,000

1606

1132

1233

604

369

539

$1,000

quartic

$10,000

1540

1057

1218

581

355

530

$2,000

quartic

$10,000

1512

1033

1213

565

349

518

$3,000

quartic

$10,000

1558***

1057***

1199***

572***

329***

520***

2646

1498

1860

2279

1178

1755

change in deduction amount at

Notes are the same as those attached to Table 3.
Appendix Page 16

Appendix Table 5
Effect of the DTF Threshold on College Attendance in Year 1
joint filing households
single filing households

$160,000
threshold

2002 &
2003
cohorts
$65,000
threshold

$65,000
threshold

$80,000
threshold

-0.003
(0.006)

0.000
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.007)

0.005
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.006)

0.019
(0.004)
0.005
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)

0.012
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.001
(0.004)

0.007
(0.003)
0.007
(0.004)
0.009
(0.006)

-0.007
(0.009)
quintic
$10,000
0.031
(0.006)
$1,000
quintic
$10,000
0.007
(500single)
(0.010)
$2,000
quintic
$10,000
0.014
(1000single)
(0.018)
$3,000
quintic
$10,000
-0.043
(1500single)
(0.037)
$0
quartic
$20,000
0.019
(0.003)
$1,000
quartic
$20,000
0.010
(500single)
(0.004)
$2,000
quartic
$20,000
0.013
(1000single)
(0.005)
$3,000
quartic
$20,000
0.008
(1500single)
(0.006)
$0
quartic
$10,000
0.024
(0.005)
$1,000
quartic
$10,000
0.007
(500single)
(0.007)
$2,000
quartic
$10,000
0.011
(1000single)
(0.011)
$3,000
quartic
$10,000
-0.010
(1500single)
(0.017)
Notes are the same those attached to Table 5.

-0.003
(0.006)
0.024
(0.004)
0.014
(0.006)
0.019
(0.012)
0.019
(0.023)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009**
(0.004)
0.017
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.003
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.011)

0.000
(0.008)
0.009
(0.005)
0.011
(0.008)
0.031
(0.015)
0.008
(0.029)
0.008
(0.003)
0.008
(0.003)
0.010
(0.004)
0.006
(0.005)
0.008
(0.004)
0.008
(0.006)
0.013
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.014)

0.005
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.008)
0.015
(0.008)
0.003
(0.010)
-0.000
(0.014)

0.012
(0.003)
0.009
(0.004)
0.005
(0.004)
0.005
(0.005)
0.019
(0.005)
0.017
(0.006)
0.010
(0.008)

0.005
(0.005)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.002
(0.007)
0.012
(0.006)
0.005
(0.008)
0.003
(0.011)

-0.008
(0.018)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.006)
0.012
(0.007)
0.004
(0.008)
0.003
(0.010)
0.001
(0.011)

0.014
(0.011)
0.004
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.004)
0.013
(0.004)
0.009
(0.005)
0.003
(0.006)
0.003
(0.007)

0.015
(0.015)
0.005
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.000
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.008)
0.002
(0.010)

base case (unlikely to be biased by
income management)
Other cases
doughnut
hole

polyno
mial

bandwidth

$0

quintic

$20,000

$1,000
(500single)
$2,000
(1000single)
$3,000
(1500single)
$0

quintic

$20,000

quintic

$20,000

quintic

$20,000

2002 &
2003
cohorts
$130,000
threshold

2004 through 2008
cohorts
$130,000
threshold

-0.007
(0.009)

Appendix Page 17

2004 through 2008
cohorts

Appendix Table 6
Effect of the DTF Threshold on Attending Four-Year College (conditional on attending at all) in Year 1
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2002 &
2004 through 2008
2003
cohorts
2003
cohorts
cohorts
cohorts
$130,000 $130,000 $160,000
$65,000
$65,000
$80,000
threshold threshold threshold threshold threshold threshold
base case (unlikely to be biased by
income management)

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.001
(0.008)

0.007
(0.011)

0.002
(0.007)

0.003
(0.009)

Other cases
doughnut
hole

polynomial

bandwidth

$0

quintic

$20,000

0.027
(0.006)

0.014
(0.004)

0.008
(0.005)

0.009
(0.009)

0.008
(0.005)

0.006
(0.007)

$1,000
(500single)

quintic

$20,000

0.019
(0.008)

0.004
(0.005)

-0.000
(0.006)

0.006
(0.010)

0.007
(0.006)

0.003
(0.008)

$2,000
(1000single)

quintic

$20,000

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.001
(0.008)

0.007
(0.011)

0.002
(0.007)

0.003
(0.009)

$3,000
(1500single)

quintic

$20,000

-0.002
(0.015)

0.009
(0.009)

0.006
(0.011)

-0.005
(0.013)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.010)

$0

quintic

$10,000

0.048
(0.009)

0.022
(0.005)

0.015
(0.007)

0.017
(0.012)

0.013
(0.007)

0.015
(0.010)

$1,000
(500single)

quintic

$10,000

0.053
(0.015)

0.003
(0.009)

-0.004
(0.012)

0.016
(0.016)

0.012
(0.010)

0.012
(0.013)

$2,000
(1000single)

quintic

$10,000

0.009
(0.028)

-0.030
(0.017)

-0.015
(0.022)

0.025
(0.022)

0.003
(0.013)

0.016
(0.017)

$3,000
(1500single)

quintic

$10,000

0.009
(0.057)

-0.003
(0.034)

-0.032
(0.043)

-0.004
(0.029)

-0.021
(0.017)

-0.002
(0.023)

$0

quartic

$20,000

0.010
(0.006)

0.010
(0.003)

0.006
(0.004)

0.005
(0.007)

0.006
(0.004)

0.001
(0.006)

$1,000
(500single)

quartic

$20,000

-0.007
(0.008)

0.003
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.005)

0.003
(0.008)

0.005
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.006)

$2,000
(1000single)

quartic

$20,000

-0.008
(0.010)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.000
(0.006)

0.002
(0.009)

0.002
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.007)

$3,000
(1500single)

quartic

$20,000

0.004
(0.007)

0.006
(0.006)

0.003
(0.007)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.010
(0.008)

$0

quartic

$10,000

0.037
(0.007)

0.019
(0.004)

0.009
(0.006)

0.013
(0.010)

0.009
(0.006)

0.016
(0.008)

$1,000
(500single)

quartic

$10,000

0.033
(0.011)

0.007
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.008)

0.011
(0.012)

0.007
(0.007)

0.015
(0.010)

$2,000
(1000single)

quartic

$10,000

-0.005
(0.027)

-0.004
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.013)

0.014
(0.015)

0.000
(0.009)

0.019
(0.012)

$3,000
quartic
$10,000 0.018***
(1500single)
(0.005)
Notes are the same as those attached to Table 6.

0.021
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.020)

-0.004
(0.018)

-0.013
(0.011)

0.012
(0.015)

Appendix Page 18

