                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TAX EVASION ACROSS INDUSTRIES:
                          SOFT CREDIT EVIDENCE FROM GREECE

                                       Nikolaos Artavanis
                                          Adair Morse
                                       Margarita Tsoutsoura

                                       Working Paper 21552
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21552


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We are grateful for helpful comments from Loukas Karabarbounis, Amit Seru, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
Luigi Zingales, our discussants Michelle Hanlon, Elias Papaioannou, Dina Pomeranz, and seminar
participants at Chicago Booth, Berkeley Haas, INSEAD, Catholica Lisbon School of Business, London
Business School, NOVA School of Business, UBC, LSE, Norwegian School of Economics, Tilburg
University, Erasmus University, UNC, UCLA, Copenhagen Business School, Kellogg, MIT Sloan,
Cleveland Fed, University of Lausanne, NBER Public Economic meeting, Booth-Deutschebank Symposium,
the Political Economy in the Chicago area conference, NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute
and the Western Finance Association meetings. This research was funded in part by the Fama-Miller
Center for Research in Finance, the Polsky Center for Entrepreneurship at the University of Chicago,
Booth School of Business, and the Goult Faculty Research Endowment. Tsoutsoura gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Charles E. Merrill and the PCL Faculty Research Funds at the University
of Chicago, Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Nikolaos Artavanis, Adair Morse, and Margarita Tsoutsoura. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Evasion across Industries: Soft Credit Evidence from Greece
Nikolaos Artavanis, Adair Morse, and Margarita Tsoutsoura
NBER Working Paper No. 21552
September 2015
JEL No. G21,H26

                                              ABSTRACT

We document that in semiformal economies, banks lend to tax-evading individuals based on the bank's
assessment of the individual's true income. This observation leads to a novel approach to estimate
tax evasion. We use microdata on household credit from a Greek bank, and replicate the bank underwriting
model to infer the banks estimate of individuals' true income. We estimate that 43%-45% of self-employed
income goes unreported and thus untaxed. For 2009, this implies 28.2 billion euros of unreported income,
implying foregone tax revenues of over 11 billion euros or 30% of the deficit. Our method innovation
allows for estimating the industry distribution of tax evasion in settings where uncovering the incidence
of hidden cash transactions is difficult using other methods. Primary tax-evading industries are professional
services — medicine, law, engineering, education, and media. We conclude with evidence that contemplates
the importance of institutions, paper trail and political willpower for the persistence of tax evasion.


Nikolaos Artavanis                                    Margarita Tsoutsoura
Isenberg School of Management                         University of Chicago
Amherst, MA 01003                                     Booth School of Business
USA                                                   5807 S Woodlawn Ave
nartavanis@isenberg.umass.edu                         Chicago, IL 60637
                                                      tsoutsoura@chicagobooth.edu
Adair Morse
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu
1         Introduction

Tax evasion is notoriously hard to uncover, particularly when economic exchange occurs
in cash transactions (Slemrod & Weber 2012). Going back at least as far as Cagan (1958),
economists have developed innovative methods to infer the aggregate size of cash transactions
in countries with large black markets based on input observables, such as electricity usage
or money supply (Tanzi (1983), Lackó (1999), Schneider & Enste (2000)), Alexeev & Pyle
(2003)). It is challenging, however, to use such methods to learn about the incidence of tax
evasion across industries, given that users of the observable inputs (i.e. electricity) may not
correlate spatially with hidden income across households. Moreover, input-based methods
may not be well positioned to estimate tax evasion for high-income professionals and service
industries that are characteristic of middle or high-income countries. Other studies, use tax
auditing or consumption inference to estimate tax evasion.1 Although these methods work
well in the very developed economies, when economic exchange is pervasively in cash, as in
semiformal or informal economies, tax audits struggle to uncover hidden income (Slemrod
(2007))2 , and survey data can be fraught with underreporting of expenses (Hurst et al. 2014),
as households hide or distort consumption.3
        In this paper, we develop a new method to estimate tax evasion and its incidence across
industries. Our method is based on the new observation that the formal financial sector
adapts to income being semiformal rather than relegating semiformal finance to the black
market. In particular, in an effort to stay profitable and competitive, banks adapt to semi-
formality by providing credit to individuals based on their inference of individuals’ true
income. We refer to this extending of credit off the soft information of unobservable in-
    1
     Pissarides & Weber (1989), Klepper & Nagin (1989), Clotfelter (1983), Christian (1994), Feinstein (1999),
Lyssiotou et al. (2004), Feldman & Slemrod (2007), Gorodnichenko et al. (2009), Kleven et al. (2011), US
Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service (1988, 1996).
   2
     Semiformal economies are those in which registered businesses (as opposed to black market businesses)
transact in cash, thus evading taxes. In appendix Table 1, we compile a list of countries with large semiformal
sectors, which cover most of southern and eastern Europe, Latin America, China, India, and many countries
in southeast Asia and the Middle East.
   3
     Braguinsky et al. (2014), for example, offers an administrative data solution based on car registrations
in Russia, an interesting consumption-based approach.


                                                      2
come as soft credit. Our paper uses detailed individual-level application and performance
data from household credit products – term loans, mortgages, and overdraft facilities – from
a large Greek bank to estimate the magnitude of tax evasion in Greece and to speak the
industry distribution across the population. Knowing the heterogeneity of hidden income
across industries is essential for policy prescriptions. In the process, our paper also sheds
more light on the phenomenon of semiformality, using tax evasion measurement to help us
better understand the microeconomics of semiformal adaptations.
       Our method adds to the literature in a few key respects. Using bank loan information
and the adaptation of the financial sector, our approach can overcome some of the difficul-
ties of audit and consumption methods in uncovering tax evasion in semiformal economies
where hidden cash transactions permeate. Furthermore, our approach improves upon input
observable and macroeconomy relationship methods by better capturing the huge extent of
tax evasion in high level services.
       We motivate our study with Table 1, which illustrates soft credit at work. The data,
described more fully later, are from a large Greek bank, nationally representative and cov-
ering tens of thousands of applications by individuals for credit products. Column 1 reports
average monthly reported income for the self-employed by industry. Column 2 reports the
monthly payments that individuals must be making to service debt on existing and approved
credit. Column 3 presents the payments-to-income ratio. On average, the data suggest, im-
plausibly, that self-employed Greeks spend 78% of their monthly reported income servicing
debt.4
       The point of Table 1 is to establish that soft-credit adaptation is happening and to
motivate how we use bank data to examine tax evasion. We confirmed with other banks in
southern Europe that it is common practice to use adaptation formulas varying by industry
to adjust clients’ reported income to the bank’s best estimate of true income. Take the
   4
    To put this number in perspective, a typical budget share for spending on just food and housing ranges
from 39% to 62% across countries according to World Bank 2005 International Comparison Program (ICP)
data.



                                                    3
examples of manufacturing, engineering, medicine, education, media, accounting, law, and
proprietors of restaurants, hotels, and retail in Table 1. In all of these industries, the self-
employed individuals appear to be paying nearly-or-over 100% of their reported income flows
for debt servicing. Clearly, this percentage is infeasible.
       Our approach recreates the bank’s underwriting decision model that maps true income
to credit, while controlling for credit risk and soft information for individual wealth, local
conditions, and income risk. We observe credit and ask what level of true income a self-
employed individual must make to support the credit extended by financial institutions.
This method of inverting the mapping function from an outcome to income is parallel to
Pissarides & Weber (1989) (see also Feldman & Slemrod (2007)), who study the relationship
between food consumption and income to uncover tax evasion.
       Our estimating procedure makes a few key assumptions. First, similar to Pissarides
& Weber (1989), we assume wage workers do not evade taxes. We show our results are
robust to this assumption in alternative tests using only wage workers from large private
companies, who do not underreport income as a result of third-party reporting and lack of
employee-employer collusion (Kleven et al. (2011), Braguinsky et al. (2014)). Second, our
procedure assumes the bank determines the level of credit. We therefore focus our analysis on
constrained borrowers, for whom the bank’s supply decision will determine credit capacity.
Third, we assume that after absorbing credit risk, the credit sensitivity to true income is
the same for wage workers and self-employed. We use information on default rates to show
that our results are not driven by unobserved heterogeneity in credit decisions between self-
employed and wage workers that might be correlated with income.
       We estimate that the true income of self-employed individuals is 1.75 to 1.84 times their
reported income.5 Across years 2006-2009, we document annual tax evaded income ranging
   5
    To put some perspective on the magnitudes, Pissarides & Weber (1989) find that on average the true
income of self-employed individuals in Great Britain is 1.55 times their reported income. Feldman & Slemrod
(2007) use the relationship between reported charitable contributions and reported income, and find that
in US tax evasion among self-employed, non-farm small-business, and farm income are 1.54, 4.54, and 3.87
times the reported income, respectively.



                                                    4
from 22.8 to 28.2 billion euros for self-employed individuals, or 9.1 to 11.2 billion euros
in foregone tax revenues. In 2009 the self-employed reported income was 35.7 billion euros,
which according to our lambda multiple estimates corresponds to tax evaded income between
26.8 and 29.9 billion euros, with a median of 28.2. These foregone revenues would account
for at least 30% of the budget deficit for 2009, and much higher proportion of the deficit in
the earlier years, before the deficit reached its peak.
   Our main incidence result is that we consistently find a high tax evasion multiple for
doctors, engineers, educators, media, and lawyers. These professions are highly educated,
usually with strong industry guilds and powerful government representation. Furthermore,
we find that tax evasion is pervasive both in urban and rural areas and across the wealth
distribution.
   We use the estimated distribution to better understand which factors might allow tax
evasion to persist. Much in the spirit of Kleven et al. (2011) and Morse et al. (2009), tax
evasion is high in industries that have low paper trail, mainly professional services with cash
income. Using tax-enforcement data from Greece, we present evidence consistent with a
story that enforcement officials are aware of the incidence of tax evasion, but lack the ability
or the willpower to collect evaded revenues, presumably because of a host of institutional
frictions including state capacity weaknesses and the lack of paper trail to prove violations.
Additionally, the distribution suggests a political economy story. Even excluding lawyers,
sixty percent of parliamentarians are in the top four tax-evading industries, and over eighty
percent come from the top six (out of thirteen) tax-evading industries. The alignment of
the occupational backgrounds of Greek parliamentarians to our top tax-evading industries
is only an association, but may suggest one possible reason behind the lack of willpower to
enact tax reform
   Our paper connects several strands of literature. First, the paper relates to the formal
economy tax-evasion literature. We argue that the consumption (Pissarides & Weber (1989),
Lyssiotou et al. (2004), Feldman & Slemrod (2007)) and audit (e.g.,Klepper & Nagin (1989),


                                               5
Christian (1994), Feinstein (1999), Kleven et al. (2011)) methods may not be always well
suited to estimate tax evasion in cash economy settings. In this literature, our paper is
closest to Braguinsky et al. (2014) and Gorodnichenko et al. (2009), who offer estimates of
tax evasion in Russia, a semiformal economy, using consumption methods.
   Second, we build off the vast literature on informal economies. Important work has been
done not just on understanding the size of informal economies (Cagan (1958), Tanzi (1983),
Schneider & Enste (2000), Alexeev & Pyle (2003),Gorodnichenko et al. (2009), Braguinsky
et al. (2014) ), but also on understanding informality’s implications ((La Porta & Shleifer
(2008), Hasker & Okten (2008),Çule & Fulton (2009), Paula & Scheinkman (2010) , Goel
& Saunoris (2014), Callen & James (2015)). We offer a different approach to understanding
informality that enlightens the incidence of tax evasion across industries, especially high level
ones.
   Recent advances in the literature tax evasion in both formal and informal economies have
focused on compliance, understanding both the behavior of households in complying and the
actions enforcers can do to induce more compliance (Blumenthal et al. (2001), Kleven &
Waseem (2011), Del Carpio (2013), Hallsworth et al. (2014), Fellner et al. (2013), Dwenger
et al. (2014), Pomeranz (2015)). Certainly understanding how evasion responds to tax policy,
audits, third-party information, and social incentives in a setting of semiformality and how
persistence of tax evasion in developed semiformal economies relates to compliance incentives
would be welcome complements to our different goal of setting out a method for estimating
the extent to semiformality and documenting semiformality’s incidence.
   Our paper also relates to the literature on the use of soft information in lending decisions
(Petersen & Rajan (2002), Petersen (2004), Agarwal & Hauwald (2010)). Our results show
that in countries with pervasive hidden income, tax evasion enters as soft information in
bank’s credit decisions.
   Finally, the study adds to the discussion regarding the roots of the recent financial crisis in
Europe, and particularly in Greece. The literature suggests a number of factors leading to the


                                                6
recent European crisis, including the deterioration of competitiveness (Shambaugh (2012)),
the fragility of the financial sector and inefficient policies to address the problem (Brun-
nermeier et al. (2011), Acharya et al. (2014)), and contagion effects (Chudik & Fratzscher
(2011), Ang & Longstaff (2013)). Lane (2012) emphasizes on the failure of states to tighten
their fiscal policies during the preceding period. In this context, tax evasion obviously plays
an important role, as forgone tax revenues weaken the fiscal position of a country. It is
no coincidence that Adjustment Programs for Greece, Portugal and Cyprus included strict
provisions for limiting tax evasion, as a mean to improve their fiscal position.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the lending decision process,
our data from the bank and the tax authority, and our main samples. Section 3 lays out our
methodology. Section 4 reports our empirical results. Section 5 uses the estimated industry
distribution to examine some of the factors and norms that allow tax evasion to persist in
semiformal economies. Section 6 compares our soft-credit method to other approaches, and
section 7 concludes the study.



2     Data and Bank Underwriting Process

2.1    Lending & Underwriting Process

We begin by providing an overview of the bank lending process. When a prospective bor-
rower applies for a loan, a branch officer starts the process by collecting information on the
borrower’s demographics, occupation, employment status, reported income, and outstand-
ing debt. Reported income is the after-tax income from the applicant’s tax form, which is
verified according to the mandatory procedures of the bank. The branch officer, after check-
ing whether the borrower is on the national “black list” of bad accounts, transcribes the
collected information into electronic form. The application is then sent to a central location,
where loan decisions are made. Based on the information collected, the central system uses a
scoring algorithm to compute a credit grade for the application. The credit grade determines


                                               7
the loan’s acceptability.
       If the borrower qualifies, debt-burden rules and interest-rate schedules guide the specifics
of the loan offering, in particular, credit capacity and interest rates. These credit decisions
are the essence of our study and also reside with bank-lending managers at a central loca-
tion. At this point, the adaption to hidden income happens. The central lending managers
adjust up reported income to the bank’s best estimate of true income, according to internal
guidelines. Banks operating in semiformal environments observe years of data of repayment
and performance behavior of the borrowers, which they use to calibrate estimates of true
income. With the estimate of true income in hand, the central lending managers decide how
much debt the applicant’s income can support.
       Note the incentives of loan officers in this process. Compensation of loan officers is
almost entirely based on seniority and promotion. Promotions are thus the incentive system
for Greek bankers. The bank promotes bankers based on the volume of performing loans.
Thus, Greek bankers have the incentive to use soft-credit information to issue more loans,
but only as long as doing so is profitable.


2.2       Bank Data

Our main data are proprietary files from one of the eight large Greek banks, which together
account for 80% of the domestic banking market share. The bank has tens of thousands
of customers, with branches across the country. We are unable throughout to reveal exact
observation counts and other details that might reveal the bank’s identity. On average, one of
these eight banks has 33.4 billion euros in loans outstanding and 373 branches across Greece.
Our dataset is the universe of applications for consumer credit products and mortgages, both
approved and rejected over the period 2003-2009. Consumer credit products include term
loans, credit lines, credit cards, overdraft facilities, and home loans.6
   6
    Appendix Table A4 presents summary statistics for the consumer products used in the analysis. The
missing consumer product is vehicle loans. We have these files, but household identifiers are not linked to
the other information in the bank.



                                                    8
   The dataset includes all information recorded by the bank during the application proce-
dure, including loan characteristics, applicant demographics, and applicant credit-worthiness
data. The loan characteristics data include the date of the application, branch office code,
purpose of the loan, requested and approved loan amounts and durations, debt outstanding at
this bank, total debt outstanding elsewhere, and interest rate charged. Our primary depen-
dent variable will be credit capacity, defined as the approved sum of the current application
and all prior debt outstanding from all sources. Individual characteristics data include re-
ported after-tax income (as reported in the applicant’s tax return and verified by the bank),
the primary applicant’s industry, employment type (wage worker or self-employed), age,
co-applicant’s or spouse’s income, marital status, and number of children. The additional
credit-worthiness variables include years in current job, years at current address, deposits
with the bank, homeownership, and the length of the relationship with the bank. In addition
to application data, we have monthly performance files from the bank. This dataset includes
monthly loan-payment flows, days late on payments, interest rates, and loan amortization
on all the loan products. Appendix Table A2 defines our variables in greater detail and
describes the information collection for mortgage and consumer credit product applications.
   We apply a couple of sample restrictions and filters to the data. First, we drop applica-
tions after October 2009, the beginning of the crisis period in Greece. Our objective is to
focus on the working population of Greece; therefore, we remove applicants under the age of
19 and those over 75 as well as applications by students, pensioners, homemakers, and the
unemployed. We then drop applicants whose job code is bank clerk, to avoid picking up any
special treatment resulting from bank employment. Beyond these sample restrictions, we
trim the sample in three ways. First, we drop applications whose debt balance from other
accounts is missing. Second, we filter out individuals with income under 1,000 euros because
it is likely that they are receiving the loan based on an income base that is not their wages
(e.g., pension, guarantor, etc.). Third, we remove applicants with income over 1.5 million
euros or debt over 1 million euros to remove extreme outliers. Winsorizing these large income


                                             9
or large debt observations does not change any result. All three filters only remove 0.9% of
the sample.
   The bank uses the information collected in the application (loan characteristics, appli-
cant characteristics, and credit-worthiness variables) to construct a credit grade for each
application. As we previously mentioned, the credit grade determines whether the central
system will accept or reject an application. This grade is the main application risk-profile
variable that we use throughout the analysis.
   The credit grade is a scoring whereby the bank assigns points non-parametrically for
certain characteristics of the applicant or loan. We do not have access to the bank’s propri-
etary scoring algorithm; however, we do have the credit grade for each application and the
underlying variables, except histories of any prior accounts. We re-engineer this risk profiling
in appendix Table A3. The dependent variable is the credit grade for each application in our
dataset, including those rejected. We are not permitted to show coefficients, however, in that
it might reveal the bank’s scoring algorithm, which lenders hold as intellectual property. We
instead show the p-values for each coefficient to demonstrate that our variables are significant
and partial r-squares to demonstrate which variables are incrementally important. Column
1 omits occupation industry variables. The model explains 56.5% of the overall variation.
The most important variables are the relationship variables - years in job, age, homeown-
ership, years of relationship with the bank - and a few industries. Inclusion of industries,
column 2, increases the r-square to 66.2%. A second objective of including appendix Table
A3 is to investigate the change in variation explained when we add in the interactions of
industry with self-employment. The r-square does not improve, implying that the bank’s
credit grade algorithm is unlikely to include these variables. The largest partial r-square in
self-employed-industry variables is 0.0017, and most of the partial r-squares are 0.0001 or
less. The analysis renders confidence in our understanding from conversations with the bank
that adaptation to self-employed hidden income is orthogonal to the credit grading, which
is important for our empirical design.


                                              10
2.3    Tax Authority Data

The revenue arm of the tax authority provided us with total annual reported income and total
number of households represented within a zip-code. These data are further broken down
into national income deciles and four occupation classes. These occupation categories are
merchants, self-employed individuals, wage workers, and agriculture. The first two categories
comprise by definition the entirety of the self-employed in Greece, according to the tax
authority’s classification. The income deciles are national income deciles that are static
during our sample. Greece has more than 1,450 zip-codes, which means we have more than
58,000 cells, for which we know the total cell income and number of households. The total
set of tax-reporting households is just over 5 million; thus, our level of aggregation is 86
households.
   At this level of aggregation, we first construct a local economic conditions variable and
proxy for income growth. We measure income growth variable as the lagged annual per-
capita income growth over the prior year in the cell. Second, we construct a measure of
income risk in the cell. To do so, we have to take into account the difference in the number
of people in the cell year to year. Thus, we proxy for income risk with the standard error
(equal to the standard deviation divided by the square root of the observation count) of log
income over the prior 5 years in the cell.
   We further use the tax authority income data to construct weights for making our esti-
mates representative of the population. For the purpose of constructing weights, the level of
disaggregation of the tax authority data is too fine when we apply it to our bank samples.
We apply a weighting scheme that uses quintiles of national income buckets (rather than
deciles), the four occupation categories, and 14 meta-prefecture geographies, which amounts
to 280 cells.
   Finally, the tax authority also provided us with presumed real estate values by building
block. We use these values as a proxy for the wealth of individuals in the zip-code-occupation.
We calculate the proxy using the median of the real estate values at the zip-code level.


                                              11
3         Methodology

Our empirical approach uses the bank’s credit capacity decisions to estimate tax evasion.
In the bank lending process, once an application has been deemed acceptable based on its
credit grade, the bank makes credit capacity decisions based on true income (Y T rue ), credit
grade (Risk), and any local soft information variables (SOF T ):


                              credit decision = f (Y T rue , Risk, SOF T ).


In practice, the natural functional form of a lender’s credit capacity decision is usually
linear. The bank applies debt-to-income ratio rules concerning the amount of income needed
to support debt which implies a linear relationship of credit scaling up with income. Banks
then adjust the capacity according to risk-shifting guidelines and soft information, which
enter credit capacity non-parametrically:


                             creditij = β1j YijT rue + Riski Φ + SOF Tij Ψ,                               (1)


where creditij , is the credit capacity decision for loan applicant i in industry j.7
        Equation (1) includes three determinants of credit capacity. The Risk variable comprises
verifiable (“hard”) information the bank collects at the time of the application and is reflected
in the application credit grade. SOF T is any local soft information that enters the bank’s
credit capacity decisions.8
        The most important determinant of credit capacity is true income, Y T rue , which is not
    7
     The linearity of our credit model differs from Pissarides & Weber (1989) (PW), who write a similar
form for income supporting consumption in a log form. We deviate from PW in this aspect because bank
underwriting does not scale naturally to log form.
   8
     By soft information, we have in mind Petersen (2004)’s definition: ”[Soft information] includes opinions,
ideas, rumors, economic projections, statement of [a household’s] future plans, and [local] commentary.” In
our specification, we proxy for household wealth, local economic conditions, and income risk. These may
be codifiable hard information variables, but these variables proxy for soft extractions of information. For
example, a loan officer might learn whether an area is doing well economically or whether a household is
wealthy is based on bank conversations with households or bank experience with the area.




                                                     12
observable. The bank instead observes reported income, Y R . Like Pissarides & Weber (1989)
(PW), our methodology infers true income from a well-measured dependent variable – in their
case, food consumption, and in our case, extended credit. The PW seminal innovation to
invert an outcome to estimate true income relies on a few key assumptions, which are also
natural for us. In particular, PW assume wage workers do not evade taxes, and true current
income is on average a multiple of reported income for the self-employed. These assumptions
are given by                              
                                          λj YijR , if i is self-employed
                                          
                                          
                             YijT rue =                                                        (2)
                                          YijR ,
                                          
                                                   if i is wage worker

We know the bank (and other banks) uses multipliers applied to reported income, as in
equation (2) to adjust up self-employed income to their best estimate of true income. Banks
calibrate these multipliers based on their long-term experience with different industries.
Thus, this assumption of PW is the same as bank practice.
   Denoting a self-employed individual i by the indicator SEi and combining equations (1)
and (2), the credit-capacity decision is


               creditij = β1j YijR (1 − SEi ) + (β1j λj )YijR SEi + Riski Φ + SOF Tij Ψ,       (3)

or in estimating form:


         creditij = β1j YijR (1 − SEi ) + β2j YijR SEi + f.e.CreditGrade + SOF Tij Ψ + εij .   (4)

Empirically, our objective is to absorb application Risk and SOF T information so that we
can focus on the income-to-credit relationship. Thus, we include fixed effects for 50 appli-
cation credit-grade ( f.e.CreditGrade ) levels. We include SOF T information local variables of
wealth (real estate values), local conditions (lagged income growth), and income risk (the
standard error of log income over the last five years). We write equations (3) and (4) in lev-
els (euros) rather than logs, because debt rules operate as linear scaling, not as percentage


                                                    13
changes. Because we are not working in logs, the multiple of the tax-evasion term interacts
with income.9 Our estimate of λj is the coefficient on self-employed individuals’ income
                                                                 β2j 10
divided by the coefficient on wage workers’ income, λj =         β1j
                                                                     .


3.1      Discussing Estimation Identifying Assumptions

In addition to making the PW assumption that true income is on average a multiple of
reported income for the self-employed, we rely on the following assumptions in order to be
able to interpret the coefficients as identifying λj , the multiple of tax evasion:


   1. Wage workers do not evade taxes.

   2. After absorbing credit risk, the credit sensitivity to true income is the same for self-
        employed as for wage workers.

   3. Credit sensitivity to reported and hidden parts of true income are the same.

   4. Any unobserved heterogeneity affecting credit decisions is orthogonal to reported tax-
        able income.

   5. We can measure credit capacity and not just demand-driven debt outstanding.


3.1.1     Tax Evasion of Wage Earners

We make the standard assumption that wage workers do not evade taxes, and thus that their
reported income is accurate. Greece has third-party income reporting for wage workers’ in-
come; the employer reports the worker wages to the tax authority directly. Kleven, Knudsen,
Kreiner, Pedersen & Saez (2011) show that for income subject to third-party reporting, the
  9
    In PW, the terms separate because of the log form.
  10
    Note the parallel between our specification and that of Pissarides & Weber (1989). PW write an
estimating equation as log f oodij = α0j + α1j log YijR + α2j SEij + εpw
                                                                      ij , where SE is aself-employment
                                                                                             
                                                                                         α2j
dummy. The multiple of tax evasion λj can be backed out of the estimates as λpw
                                     pw
                                                                                j = exp α1j .




                                                  14
tax-evasion rate in Denmark is close to zero. However, in countries with pervasive semi-
formality, like Greece, even wage workers likely do evade taxes in a variety of ways. Firms
and employees may collude with respect to third-party reported income, especially in small
companies (Kleven et al. 2009). Furthermore, employees may evade taxes by taking bribes
or holding side-jobs. To the extent that wage workers do evade taxes, our estimates of β1j
will be overstated. A smaller income will appear to support more credit. Thus, our estimate
of tax evasion will be conservative.
       A potential concern, however, is that wage workers might evade taxes differentially by
industry, implying conservatism might vary by industry. To address this issue, we provide
additional tests in which we exclude all wage workers except those who work in large com-
panies with more than 30 million euros in sales. In these large companies, the probability of
employee-employer collusion with respect to third-party reported income is small, and these
employees are less likely to have self-reported income on the side. We show that the results
we obtain using only employees of large firms as the benchmark are similar to the results we
get when we use all wage workers as the benchmark.11


3.1.2      Use of Credit, Selection to Self-Employment, and Hidden Risk

We assume the use of credit to support one’s lifestyle is similar for the self-employed and wage
workers. A parallel comes from Feldman & Slemrod (2007), who use charitable contributions
to infer true income. They assume that the selection of who is self-employed is unrelated
to one’s charitable inclinations. In our case, if debt were to serve a different role for the
self-employed (supporting income growth) than for wage workers (facilitating consumption
out of permanent income), then a systematic difference between the self-employed and wage
workers could be reflective of risk differentials.
       Two other stories reflect a similar concern for hidden risk differentials between the self-
  11
    A lingering possibility is that the selection of individuals in larger-versus-small companies varies across
industries in a way that correlates with credit risk. However, estimating the wage worker sensitivity of
credit to income, β1j by industry j allows us to isolate these differences. In the next section, we take up
industry-specific selection of who is self-employed.


                                                      15
employed and wage workers. First, being constrained may imply something different for a
self-employed individual than for a wage worker, which in turn implies a selection on hidden
risk. Second, the behavioral or cognitive reasons to select into self-employment may imply
a different risk for the bank.
   We take a couple of steps to address hidden risk. We make the estimating equation econo-
metrically stringent by saturating the model with fixed effects for time, bank branch, and
industry crossed with self-employment. If we lack pertinent soft information characteristic
of localities or if a particular branch caters to (or appeals to) different types of customers,
we now absorb these heterogeneities with bank branch fixed effects. The year fixed effects
capture the impact of the business cycle on underwriting depth. In addition, we allow the
loadings on soft information variables (the variables themselves vary by geography interacted
with four occupation classes and income) to vary by self-employment:


  creditij = β1j YijR (1 − SEi ) + β2j YijR SEi + f.e.CreditGrade + β3 W ealthij + β4 W ealthij SEi

          + β5 IncomeGrowthij + β6 IncomeGrowthij SEi + β7 IncomeRiskij                           (5)

          + β8 IncomeRiskij SEi + f.e.Branch + f.e.Industry∗SE + f.e.Y ear + εij .


In making the model more stringent with fixed effects, however, we no longer are able to
identify the full industry distribution in a model with the β1j differentiating by industry.
The collinearity makes the coefficients implausibly large and small, and the variance inflation
factors are huge. Thus, when we estimate the distribution of tax evasion at our most granular
level of industry, we keep the f.e.Industry∗SE and assume β1j = β1 . This assumption should
not affect the overall level of tax evasion. However, a potential concern is whether it affects
the ranking. We show robustness to this assumption using less granular industry definition,
where we can include f.e.Industry∗SE and β1j .
   A related concern is the use of business accounts to absorb some of the personal con-
sumption. What if, in certain industries, proprietors expense certain items as business use?


                                                 16
In particular, we can consider cars. If a self-employed individual pays for her car through
the business and uses the expense to lower taxes, she might have more cash flow available to
service debt for a given level of income. Including industry fixed effects interacted with self-
employment should address this, unless the absorption of personal consumption is correlated
with income. Although coming up with a few items that proprietors can expense through
the business (e.g., lunches, office supplies, etc.) is easy, coming up with substantial items
that are tax expensible and correlated with income is difficult. Fixed-sum items, such as
cars, will be absorbed in the industry-self employment fixed effects. We cannot totally rule
out this omitted variable, but making the case that it is large enough to drive our results is,
in our opinion, somewhat of a challenge.


3.1.3   Credit Sensitivity to the Reported and Hidden Parts of True Income

A related story might be that the hidden income portions of a self-employed individual’s true
income is more risky. One might argue that hidden income lacks observability and tangibility,
implying collections are less effective. A couple of reasons suggest that hidden income is no
less of a future payments source than reported income. First, given that our main analysis
is on uncollateralized loans, all debt-servicing payments are already made without a forcing
mechanism other than access to future credit. Second, in Greece during this period, laws
did not allow garnishment of wages for credit obligations; thus, neither formal nor informal
income would serve that purpose. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, Greece operates in
the norm of semiformality. A banker would not assume that a proprietor had no income to
make debt payments because the proprietor’s income statement showed no operating profits.
   Even if exceptions existed to these arguments that formal income is no better “collateral”
than informal, violations to this assumption should bias our estimates of self-employed tax
evasion downwards.




                                              17
3.1.4    Unobserved Heterogeneity Affecting Credit Decisions

Although we control for industry interacted by self-employed fixed effects, any unobserved
heterogeneity affecting credit decisions that is correlated with reported income might bias
our results or confound interpretation. One of the advantages of our framework is that we
have information on interest rates and default rates, enabling us to test whether our model
fully adjusts for risk that could potentially vary along the income distribution.
    Default rates are the metric on which underwriting models are gauged and can inform
us the extent to which our model, credit decision = f (Y T rue , Risk, SOF T ), captures un-
observed heterogeneity among borrowers. If unobserved heterogeneities were to remain, we
should see ex-post differences in default rates that correlate with tax evasion. We discuss
bank profitability in greater detail and test this point in section 4.5. We are able to show
that there are not significant ex-post differences in default rates or ex-ante prices of loans
that correlate with the extent of tax evaded income.


3.1.5    Issues of Demand and Application Data: Samples & Selection

Outstanding debt is an artifact of demand decisions as well as supply, but our model is one
of a bank’s decisions regarding the credit capacity of a borrower. We employ two samples
which approximate situations in which debt outstanding is at its capacity.
    Our main sample is a constrained sample, containing all applicants, whose requested
amount is greater than the approved amount for the period 2003-2009. For such individuals,
credit outstanding is likely at capacity.12 However, this sample seemingly introduces two
layers of selection that we are now imposing on the data. First, we are selecting on applicants.
Second, we are selecting on applicants who are constrained. But these people are the selection
  12
     Similar to US, truncation of a loan size request is largely due to income-to-payments mechanical con-
straints. Banks operate with debt-to-income rules; thus approved amount can be lower than requested if
applicants do not have sufficient cash flow from income to cover payments. A lingering possibility is that
approving a lower loan amount than requested reflects the bank’s perception of hidden risk that comes from
the signal of a loan size request. To the extent that this hidden risk does not correlate with income, this
hidden risk should be absorbed by the fixed effects. If it does correlate with income, we should pick up
differences in metrics of risk as we describe in the previous subsection 3.1.4.


                                                    18
that the bank uses over time to calibrate the relative informativeness of reported income
across professions in loan-performance statistics; it informs the bank’s decision at the margin.
Thus, the selection of constrained applicants is the selection we need to uncover the bank’s
estimate of true income.
       The constrained sample may, however, not generalize to the population. Hence, we
implement a second sampling: a mortgage sample. Individuals who take out a mortgage
often choose to buy as much house as their economic situation supports. In the United
States, whereas lower and middle income households check with bankers or online tools to
uncover how much mortgage their incomes can support before buying, higher income U.S.
households may decide on housing consumption based on a host of heterogeneous factors. In
Greece, the home ownership decision is much more deliberately considered for all households,
and the income distribution is much less skewed (see Figure 1). Eighty percent of Greek
households eventually end up owning homes. Families buy a house once in their lives, once
they are established13 , and it is not common to move. Households will choose mortgage
payments (our dependent variable in this sample) to be very near to the capacity that
income flow can support, with a precautionary buffer.
       A caveat is that the home-buying selection may be biased toward individuals who have
positioned themselves favorably in economic accounts to facilitate buying a house. This
should be consistent across individuals in the sample, but affects the generalizability of the
results. However, home buyers are from all spectrums of the workforce in Greece, which
makes the generalizability concern somewhat weaker. In addition, note that this potential
bias is likely to be the opposite of the constrained sample, which consists of individuals who
may be positioned unfavorably in their economic accounts. We cannot prove that either
sample is without biases, but our goal is to provide enough evidence from different angles of
bank underwriting, in this case, samples, to test the robustness of the results.
       Two final advantages of the mortgage sample come from using monthly payments as an
  13
    Young people usually wait a decade or two after school to establish their income trajectory and location
before buying.


                                                    19
alternative dependent variable. By using payments, we first test robustness to our main
dependent variable of credit capacity, and we second have a dependent variable reflecting
risk adjustments from the pricing of a loan. The downside of this sample is that we only
have data for 2006-2009, and the sample is only one-fifth of the observation count of the
constrained sample in a given year. Thus, we are limited as to the detail of analysis we can
perform with this sample.
    Figure 1 presents the reported income distribution of our two samples in conjunction
with the national income distribution, as provided by the tax authorities. Our samples
closely follow the national distribution. As expected, the mortgage sample is slightly more
representative at the upper income levels.



4     Results

4.1     Aggregate Results

In this section, we show the baseline results based on our main sample of constrained in-
dividuals, where we estimate a single coefficient β2 for all self-employed individuals. The
estimating equation is:




    creditij = β1 YiR (1 − SEi ) + β2 YiR SEi + f.e.CreditGrade + β3 W ealthij + β4 W ealthij SEi

            + β5 IncomeGrowthij + β6 IncomeGrowthij SEi + β7 IncomeRiskij                           (6)

            + β8 IncomeRiskij SEi + f.e.Branch + f.e.Industry∗SE + f.e.time + εi .


The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the total debt outstanding plus the loan
amount approved. The specification includes 50 credit-grade fixed effects, year fixed effects,
and 13 industry dummies interacted with self-employment status. We report population-
weighted estimates, using the tax authority distribution and robust standard errors.


                                                 20
   Table 2 reports the results. Column 1 is the simplest version of the model. The first row
of Table 2 reports the coefficient (βb1 ) on reported income for wage workers. A coefficient of
0.3185 implies that for every additional euro of income, wage workers have 32 cents more
credit capacity. The third row of Table 2 reports the coefficient (βb2 ) on reported income
for self-employed individuals. (Note that the level effect of self-employment is absorbed in
the fixed effects.) A coefficient of 0.5575 implies that for every additional euro of income,
the self-employed have 56 cents more credit capacity. Column 1(a) shows that the income
                                 βb2
multiplier λ (defined as λ
                         b =
                                 βb1
                                     )   is 1.75, indicating that the total true income for self-
employed individuals is 1.75 times the reported income, which implies a tax-evasion rate of
                                               Y T rue −Y R       λ−1
43%. (The tax-evasion rate is defined as          Y T rue
                                                              =    λ
                                                                      .)   Given that the average income
of self-employed individuals is 19,478 euros, the average tax-evaded income is 14,608 euros
per self-employed individual in Greece.
   Column 2 adds branch fixed effects, which negligibly change the results. The fact that
our estimates shift around so little when we include branch fixed effects provides at least
some confidence that unobservables might be of lesser concern, as argued by Altonji et al.
(2005). Column 3 adds proxies for income growth, variability of income, and wealth, both
in levels and interacted with self-employment status. The goal of this specification is to
mitigate concerns that differential income growth or wealth between self-employed and wage
workers might drive the results. The coefficients on income growth and variability of income
are not significant in the presence of credit-grade fixed effects. The coefficient on real estate
wealth is positive and significant. The estimated multiple λ changes negligibly compared to
column 2.
   One possible story that would be consistent with the coefficient on income being higher
for the self-employed than for wage workers is that the self-employed may have a higher
preference for debt as their businesses grow. This would imply that the preference for debt
would increase with the income distribution. If true, a mechanical selection might be the
source of our λ. The fact that wealth has a positive, significant coefficient in column 3


                                                  21
is consistent with this, but the fact that the coefficient on self-employed income does not
decline from column 2 to column 3 is not consistent with this theory.14 Finally, in column 4
we consider whether our mean result is driven by outliers, in particular estimating a medians
quintile regression.15 The results are very much in line with the OLS results.
       Related to the concern about a wealth bias, we can also consider robustness to the
assumption that the multiple of tax evasion by industry is linear in reported income. Figure
2 plots estimated credit capacity as a function of reported income, comparing the linear
specification with a spline specification. The spline regression estimates the sensitivity of
credit capacity to reported income for 8 regions of income, separately for wage workers and
the self-employed.16 Also included in the figure is the histogram of reported income in our
sample. The spline model is almost identical to the linear model for wage workers. For
the self-employed, the spline model predicts a higher credit capacity than the linear model
for those with upper income, starting at 25,000 euros, re-converging to the linear model
for extreme high income individuals. The wage worker spline model also exhibits a similar
pattern for upper-reported income individuals, but to a smaller extent. This effect concerns
those in the 83rd to 98th percentiles of reported income, and implies that our estimate of tax
evasion may be somewhat conservative for this range of high reported income individuals.
       Finally we do additional robustness tests of our results. In 6% of our loans there is
a guarantor. Our results do not change when we drop these loans. Also our results are
similar when we only keep uncollateralized loans to account for any differential ability to
post collateral (99.8% of consumer loans is uncollateralized).
  14
      In Section 4.6.2 we go one step further to consider whether the adaptation multiplier varies by wealth,
and we find that λ is stable across the wealth distribution. This addresses not just this point, but also
whether there is a different credit-capacity-to-income relationship for those with more income or wealth. We
should emphasize that income and wealth are highly persistent across generations in Greece and mobility is
low, making these concepts very related.
   15
      We have to estimate the quantiles regression without branch fixed effects to get convergence. We checked
if the OLS results were sensitive to excluding branch fixed effects; they were not, and we decided the results
were informative despite this simplification.
   16
      The linear spline nodes are 1,000, 5,000, 10,000, 15,000, 20,000, and 30,000 euros.




                                                     22
4.2     Aggregate Economy Economic Significance

Overall, Table 2 shows income multipliers (λ) that range from 1.75 to 1.84, which correspond
to a tight range of tax-evasion rates from 43% percent to 45% for the self-employed. Turning
to the aggregate inference for the economy, Table 3 shows the self-employed reported income
from 2006 to 2009 and the implied tax evaded income based on our low, high and median
estimates of λ from Table 2. Across all years, we estimate that tax evasion ranged from 22.8
to 28.2 billion euros.
   If we look at specific years, we can calibrate this magnitude relative to the deficit. In
2009 the self-employed reported income was 35.7 billion euros, which according to our lambda
multiple estimates corresponds to tax evaded income between 26.8 and 29.9 billion euros.
This amount, under a 40% tax rate, implies foregone tax revenues between 10.7 and 12
billion euros, or 30-34% of the deficit of 2009 (44-49% of the primary deficit). Using 2009 de-
emphasizes the importance of forgone tax revenues since during this year the deficit reached
its peak. Foregone tax revenues account for well over 100% of the deficit in 2006 (113%),
trending down as a percent because of the rising deficit in the years immediately prior to
the crisis.
   How does our 43%-45% estimated tax-evasion rate compare with previous studies? Pis-
sarides & Weber (1989) find that, on average, the true income of self-employed individuals
in Great Britain is 1.55 times their reported income, which corresponds to a tax-evasion
rate of 35%. Kleven, Knudsen, Kreiner, Pedersen & Saez (2011) show underreporting of
41.6% in Denmark for self-employed income, while research building off the Tax Compliance
Measurement Program (TCMP, 2001; 2006; Slemrod (2007), Black et al. (2012)) estimate an
underreporting for the U.S. of approximately 50% for the self-employed. Galbiati & Zanella
(2012) report an evasion rate of 46.6% for Italy, whereas Braguinsky, Mityakov & Liscovich
(2014) find 80% tax-evasion rates in Russia.




                                               23
4.3       Robustness: Mortgage Sample & Wage-Worker Evading

In Table 4, we repeat the analysis in the sample of mortgage-approved applicants. The
dependent variable is the approved monthly payment implied by the mortgage amount,
duration, and interest rate. Column 1 presents the simplest version of the model, whereas
in column 2, we add branch fixed effects as well as soft information proxies for income and
wealth. The results are similar to the estimates in Table 2.
       Throughout the analysis, we assume wage workers do not evade taxes. One potential
concern is the robustness of our results if wage workers also evade taxes, which would imply
that our estimates would understate tax evasion for the self-employed. To address this issue,
in columns 3 and 4 of Table 4, we repeat the analysis using as a benchmark only wage
workers that work in large companies. Braguinsky, Mityakov & Liscovich (2014) show that
large firms are more transparent than smaller firms. Wage workers in large companies are
more likely to accurately report their earnings, because in addition to third-party reporting,
for very large firms the probability of employee-employer collusion with respect to third-
party reported income is very small, and these employees are unlikely to have self-reported
income on the side.
       To identify employees of large companies, the bank internally matched the names of
employers from the mortgage-application file to balance-sheet information on the revenues
of the firms. Based on the matching, they provided us with a dummy variable that identifies
whether the wage worker works in a firm with more than 30 million euros in annual sales.17
The estimated λ in column 3(a) is slightly higher, but not statistically significantly different
from the estimated λ in column 1(a). Similarly, the estimated λ in column 4(a) is similar to
that of column 2(a). Thus, our results in Table 4 do not change when we use as a benchmark
the group of employees who work in large companies and for whom the assumption that they
do not evade taxes likely holds.
  17
    The employer name was available only in the mortgage applications; thus, similar analysis can not be
performed in the other samples.




                                                  24
4.4       New Checking Account Sample

One potential bias with the constrained sample is that if the self-employed are more likely
than wage workers to be constrained by the bank, we are getting different sample profiles
across the two groups. We add an additional robustness sample of applicants opening an
overdraft line of credit who have no prior relationship with the bank. Although at first
blush, this group sounds like debt-laden individuals, the opposite is true. These individuals
are opening new checking accounts; overdraft protection is a standard product attached
to new accounts. Table A4 (columns 7-9) reports the summary statistics for this sample.
Reported income in the new customer sample (e21,780) is higher than that of the term-loan
applicants (e13,209) and that of the mortgage applicants (e17,600).18
       The limitation to using this sample is that a different form of selection may be at play.
Individuals opening new bank accounts, especially the self-employed, may belong to an
industry distribution selection of higher-income professions. The overdraft sample is much
smaller and may not have the full distribution of lower-income occupations. Our point is
not to claim this sample is without bias, but to look for robustness to the bank’s decision
on constrained borrowers being endogenous. The estimated multiplier (λ) is 2.96 for the
baseline specification and 2.87 for the specification with income and wealth controls (Table
A6). These results provide additional reassurance that our main estimates based on the
constrained sample are conservative.


4.5       Defaults, Interest Rate, and Tax Evasion

The bank provided us with information on interest rates and defaults, allowing us to test
whether our estimates of tax evasion are picking up an omitted risk characteristic. The
thought experiment is to take the estimates of tax evasion (in euros) for each self-employed
individual in the main, constrained sample. We then regress the loan pricing (interest rate
  18
    The difference in the caliber of these applicants is not reflected in the credit grade, because these
applicants do not have a prior relationship with the bank (having a prior relationship with the bank adds
points to the internal credit grading).


                                                   25
assigned to the loan) or loan performance (whether or not the loan ever goes 90 days delin-
quent) on the estimated tax evasion. If our tax evasion estimates are positively or negatively
related to the default or profitability of loans, then one might argue that our estimates are
picking up an omitted risk heterogeneity related to self-employed income. By contrast, if
the bank is appropriately adjusting for the creditworthiness of the self-employed by using
income multipliers, then our estimated tax evasion should not imply any difference either in
defaults (realized risk) or interest rate charged (ex ante risk).
       In Table 5 we test this idea in a setup of estimating one of these outcomes on our
estimated tax evasion from Column 3 of Table 2. The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is
the dummy variable Defaults, which takes the value 1 if the account is ever more than 90
days delinquent, and 0 otherwise. Thus we have collapsed to one observation per applicant.
We also control for contract terms following Agarwal & Hauwald (2010). All specifications
                                                               19
include fixed effects for the year of the application.
       We find that tax evasion is statistically unrelated to default. The tax evasion coefficient
in column 1 is statistically and economically zero. Even if we compare within credit grade
(column 2), borrowers who evade taxes more do not have different default rates compared
to those with lower tax evasion. Although, in columns 1 and 2 we control for interest rate, a
potential concern is that simple controlling for interest rate linearly might not be sufficient
to absorb the risk pricing-default rate relationship. In columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, we allow
for a nonparametric relationship between interest rate and defaults. We make 20 categories
of interest rates, and enter them into the equation as fixed effects buckets of interest rate.
Our results do not change.
       In Panels B and C, we explore the possibility that our tax evasion estimated may be
picking up a risk heterogeneity related to default that is only relevant at certain levels of ex
  19
     Because tax evasion euros are generated regressors, we bootstrap the standard errors in the first estimat-
ing equation (estimating the tax evasion λ b = βc2 from Eq.(5)) and then take 500 iterations of the estimate
                                                β
                                                c 1
of tax evasion to calculate the additional variance around the estimate of effect of tax evasion on default or
interest rates. We then add in this additional variance to the estimated standard error of the direct OLS
equation of default or interest rates on tax evasion following the procedure in Petrin & Train (2003).



                                                      26
ante risk. We divide individuals into 5 interest rate buckets (panel B) and 5 credit grade
buckets (panel C). We repeat the analysis regressing default on tax evasion within each
quintile to explore whether the relationship between tax evasion and defaults is different
within interest rate buckets or credit grade buckets. We find no statistical or economic
relationship between default and tax evasion in any of the buckets.
   Overall the results in Panels A (column 1-4), and Panels B and C suggest that sound
business decision making drives taking hidden income into account in the credit-supply
decision. Furthermore the results inform the plausibility of our identification assumption that
any unobserved heterogeneity affecting credit decisions is orthogonal to reported income.
   In Panel A columns 5 and 6, we test the flip side of profitability of the bank loan, whether
our estimate of tax evasion lines up with bank pricing of risk via the application interest
rate. The dependent variable is the loan interest rate in percentage points (i.e., a 1.00 is
1%). Consistent with the default results, we do not find any relation between tax evasion
and interest rates.
   Together these results reaffirm our assertions that our tax evasion estimating methodology
is not picking up expected or realized hidden risk.


4.6    Tax Evasion Incidence

In this section we analyze two aspects of the incidence of tax evasion. First, we investigate
whether tax evasion differs between urban and rural areas of the country. Second we analyze
whether there is a difference in tax evasion among high and low wealth people. Exploring the
heterogeneity of tax evasion along a couple of dimensions may facilitate more precision in our
estimation and allows us to offer some further evidence toward considering the distributional
effects of tax evasion.




                                              27
4.6.1    Tax Evasion and Geography

Table 6 repeats the main analysis separately for urban and rural areas of the country. Urban
areas include Athens, Thessaloniki and cities with population higher than 100,000 people.
The rest of areas, including the islands, are rural. Columns 1-3 provide the simple estimates
without the branch fixed effects and other local soft information proxies. We focus on
Columns 4-6, which include all controls. Column 4 repeats the estimates for all of Greece,
while Columns 5 and 6 provide estimates for individuals living in urban and rural areas
respectively. We find an income multiplier λ of 1.78 for urban areas and 1.99 for rural areas.
The difference in these two estimates, although meaningful in magnitude, is not statistically
significant. Tax evasion is evident in both rural and urban areas, and may be even stronger
in rural areas, perhaps because of less formal contracting with large corporations or more
social contracting in smaller communities. Table 6 seemingly confirms the widely accepted
“truth” that tax evasion is pervasive across Greece.


4.6.2    Tax Evasion and Wealth

An equally important question when thinking about the distributional effects of tax evasion is
whether tax evasion resides only with a particular income or wealth profile. We unfortunately
cannot do an analysis by true income, because of the endogeneity of tax evasion. However,
we can use the neighborhood real estate value variable as a proxy for wealth to consider the
wealth incidence of tax evasion.20 Table 7 investigates whether the adaptation multiplier
varies by the wealth quintiles based on the real estate measure of the tax authority. Quintile
1 (Column 1) is the lowest wealth quintile and quintile 5 (Column 5) is the highest wealth
quintile. We find that in lower wealth areas, the self-employed evade taxes at least as much
in percent of income (statistically the same) as they do in the high wealth quintiles.
  20
    In the analysis, we drop the observations whose real estate values appear too frequently in the data to
be representative of the continuous formula the tax authority uses to calculate the scale.




                                                    28
4.7    Industry Distribution Results

In this section, we report estimates of tax evasion by industry. Table 8 presents results from
estimating equation (5). The dependent variable is credit capacity. We limit our across-
industry analysis to the constrained sample because the mortgage sample is only a fifth of the
observation size of the constrained sample, limiting our ability to do industry disaggregation.
Throughout Table 8, we assume all wage workers have an equal credit-capacity sensitivity
to income. We weight observations in estimation to be population-representative using the
tax authority distribution. A final note is that although we include farming as a sector,
our data in this sector are not representative, because most farmers bank with a dedicated
agricultural bank.
   Column 1 is the simplest version of the model, including only year, branch and industry
fixed effects. The first row of Table 8 reports the coefficient (βb1 ) on reported income for
wage workers. A coefficient of 0.308 implies that for every additional euro of income, wage
workers have 31 cents more credit capacity. The next thirteen rows present the coefficients
on the self-employed reported income by industry (the βb2 ’s). Recall that we identify the
                            β         βd
                                       1 λj
income multiplier as λj =
                            c2
                            βb1
                                  =    βb1
                                            .   Column (1.a.) represents the multipliers. To give an
example of interpretation, the first industry is accounting and finance. Column 1 reports a
multiple of 1.71 = 0.526/0.308 for accounting and finance, implying an evasion rate of 42%.
Tax-evaded income in this case is 14, 477 euros, reported in column (1.b.).
   In column 2, we include self-employment crossed with industry fixed effects, as well as
year and branch fixed effects. We also include the proxies for income growth, income risk
and wealth, in levels and interacted with self-employment status. The coefficients on the
income-profiling variables are not significant in the presence of credit grade fixed effects.
The coefficient on the real estate wealth proxy is positive and significant; a one standard
deviation increase in wealth is associated with an additional 487 euros of credit capacity,
an increase of 4% to total capacity. Comparing across columns 1 and 2 shows that the tax
evasion multiple estimates are robust: some of the industries have slightly smaller multiples,


                                                      29
but most of the multiples for the highly-evading industries increase when we control for
wealth and industry interacted with self-employment fixed effects.
       We find that the highest tax evaders in euros are in law, medicine, education, and engi-
neering. In these industries, the self-employed underreport their incomes by 24,000-29,000
euros, on average, according to our first OLS specification. The inclusion of additional wealth
and self-employment controls raises our estimates of underreporting to 36,000-42,000 euros.
Other noteworthy tax-evading industries in euros are the media, lodging and restaurants,
and business services.
       In the final column, we investigate whether the results hold in medians, rather than
means, to ensure extreme values do not drive our results. The results are very much in line
with the OLS results.21 The last two rows, show the aggregate multiplier across all industries
for each specification. The aggregate multipliers range from 1.72 to 1.95, which translates
to tax-evasion rates between 41.80% to 48.71%.


4.8       Robustness of Industry Distribution to Assumptions

Before looking more deeply at the industry distribution of tax evasion, we consider robustness
to the assumptions that wage workers do not evade taxes and that different industries have
the same wage-worker sensitivity of credit to income, β1j = β1 . If wage workers evade taxes,
we underestimate the overall tax evasion for self-employed individuals, but if tax evasion
of wage workers differs in the various industries, the estimated industry distribution of tax
evasion can potentially be affected. The industry distribution may also differ if wage workers
in industries have different β1j ’s.
       The mortgage sample is one-fifth the number of observations in the constrained sample,
and we do not have power to estimate coefficients for all thirteen industries. Instead, we
group industries into three groups for these robustness tests. In the first group, we gather
professional services. In Greece, professional services command a distinction of class/respect
  21
   As before, we have to estimate the quantiles regression without branch fixed effects to get convergence.
We checked if the OLS results were sensitive to excluding branch fixed effects; they were not.

                                                    30
for their traditional high education and prominent role in the economy and social life. The
first group includes Accounting & Financial Services, Education, Medicine, Media & Enter-
tainment, Personal Services, and Law. In the other two groups, we have divided the economy
along its two primary functions. Nearly one-fifth of the Greek GDP comes from tourism and
its associated industries: lodging, retail, business services and trade. These industries form
our second group. We include business services in this category, because professionals in
this industry mainly cater to professionals of the group. Finally, construction, transport,
engineering and manufacturing constitute the third group, that accounts for the core of the
secondary sector of the economy and are characterized by high use of intermediate goods
and paper-trail intensity.
       In Table 9, we allow the β1j ’s (the wage worker income variable coefficient) to be estimated
for each sector. In columns 1 and 2, we report results from the constrained sample; in columns
3 and 4, from the mortgage sample; and in column 5, from a mortgage sample in which we
limit wage workers to be only from large corporations. The emphasis, thus, is on column 5,
because wage workers in column 5 are unlikely to be evading taxes. The first result to note
is that for the constrained sample (columns 1 and 2), the coefficients on wage-worker income
(β1j ’s) range from 0.336 to 0.386, close to the magnitude of β1 in Table 8 (β1 = 0.366). This
result suggests that imposing the assumption that β1j = β1 should not significantly bias the
industry rankings in Table 8. Not surprisingly, the estimated lambdas in columns 1a and 2a
show a pattern similar to Table 8, where the highest tax-evading occupations are those that
are mainly service-oriented.22
       Our main focus is columns 3 to 5. In columns 3 and 4, we repeat the analysis of columns
1 and 2, but now the sample is the mortgage sample. The estimated lambdas for services
are the highest, whereas the estimates lambdas for construction are the lowest, which is
consistent with the evidence in Table 8. Most importantly, in column 5, we repeat the
  22
     In this setup also we repeat the analysis separately for urban and rural areas. We report these estimates
in appendix Table A7. We find that the prior ranking of professional services as an evasive industry is very
strong in both urban and rural areas. In rural areas, which include the islands, we also find a strong effect
for the tourism and related sectors.


                                                     31
analysis excluding all wage workers, except from those employed in large companies, because
the large corporations’ wage workers are unlikely to evade taxes. Comparing columns 4 and
5, we find the estimates are robust when we benchmark against only wage workers who are
employed in large Greek companies. Overall, column 5 suggests our industry ranking of tax
evasion is robust to allowing the sensitivity of credit to true income to vary across industries
not only for the self-employed, but also for wage workers, and to considering the potential
tax evasion of wage workers.


4.9       Economic Significance by Industry & Outside Validation

Table 10 summarizes the industry distribution results. Column 1 ranks the tax-evading in-
dustries in euros from the estimates in Table 8 (the average tax evasion is calculated using
the average of the coefficients in columns 2 and 3). This distribution is not what one would
expect when thinking about tax evasion in very formal economies or very informal economies.
The highest tax evaders are services requiring advanced degrees and certification, and whose
revenue depends on reputation (e.g., doctors, lawyers, engineers, journalists, tutors, accoun-
tants, and financial agents).23 Columns 4 and 5 of Table 10 list the degree requirement and
issuing agency for certification. The distribution suggests semiformal economies are not just
informal economies developing into formal, but have a unique character, with the highly
educated being very much part of the system, perhaps even allowing the semiformal nature
to persist.
       We offer an additional piece of evidence to validate this professional-like distribution. In
2010, a bill was proposed to the Greek Parliament that targeted a group of 11 occupations.
The bill targeted certain professions as most likely to evade, and included provisions for audits
of taxpayers in these professions that reported lower income than a pre-specified threshold
of 20,000 euros. The occupations that the bill targeted were doctors, dentists, veterinarians,
  23
     Education emerges as a big tax-evading industry. To a non-Greek, this emergence may seem odd.
However, the system in Greece is such that anyone with a little excess disposable income hires private tutors
for their children. Not surprisingly, the private sector of tutoring is lucrative and unrecorded.



                                                     32
lawyers, architects, engineers, topographer engineers, economists, business consultants, tax
auditors, and accountants. Our estimates of the big tax offenders coincide very well in
comparison (Table 10, column 3). The Greek Parliament rejected the bill, a point to which
we return to later.



5     Institutions in Semiformal Economies

In this section, we use the estimated industry distribution to better understand some of the
factors and norms that allow tax evasion to persist in semiformal economies.


5.1     Paper Trail

Prior research suggests that tax evasion is higher in cash sectors (Klepper & Nagin (1989);
Morse et al. (2009)) and in situations when individuals think underreporting is less likely
to be uncovered (Dubin et al. (1990), Blumenthal et al. (2001), Alm et al. (2009), Kleven
et al. (2011), Pomeranz (2015)).The implication is that in the cross-section of industries,
compliance should be higher in industries with traceable information. To explore this idea,
we develop a measure of traceability of income based on the positioning of the business in
the upstream-downstream spectrum, in particular, how much the business produces or uses
intermediate input goods. Rather than face the selection and biases of constructing such a
measure in accounting data, we apply a survey instrument. We survey a class of executives in
an executive business program in Greece.24 We asked the participants to score each industry
on a scale of 1-5 on (i) the use of intermediate goods as inputs and (ii) the extent to which
the output is an intermediate good.
    Table 11 (Panel A) presents the mean scores of paper-trail input and output by industry,
where we have de-meaned individuals’ responses to capture any level biases by individuals.
  24
     We conducted the survey at the Executive M.Sc. Program of Banking and Finance at the University
of Piraeus. We chose this program based on the experience of the participants in inflows and outflows of
industries and the accounting thereof.



                                                  33
In Panel B, we form tertiles (High, Medium, and Low) based on paper trail intensities and
report the average tax-evasion of the respective industries. The correlations suggest that
industries with low paper trail align closely with our top tax-evading industries. Figure 3
plots this intuition. Industries with the lowest paper trail include some of our biggest tax
evading professional services: law, education, and medicine. Conversely, an industry such
as transport, which involves bills of laden and other tracking documents displays a lower
tax evasion rate. We do not try to assert causation in this simple correlation exercise, but
we find this evidence consistent with the story of Kleven, Kreiner & Saez (2009), Kleven,
Knudsen, Kreiner, Pedersen & Saez (2011), and Pomeranz (2015) that paper trail is a factor
that contributes to higher compliance.


5.2    Enforcement

We gather data from the tax authority on enforcement cases closed and total assessment
values for each of the 235 Greek tax districts from January 2011 to July 2012. We are
interested in testing (i) whether tax-enforcement offices know about the prevalence of tax
evasion, and (ii) whether they are able to enforce actions against tax offenders. Weak
enforcement may result from the aforementioned story where enforcement is hampered by
the lack of paper trail that makes it harder for tax authorities to prove evasion (Klepper &
Nagin (1989)). However, weak enforcement also results from a host of other stories, including
corruption (Azariadis & Ioannides (2014), Shleifer & Vishny (1993)) and weak state capacity
(Besley & Persson (2010)). Weak state capacity refers to both the general ability of the state
to raise revenues (fiscal capacity), which could relate to paper trail, and the power to enforce
contracts and support markets (legal capacity). Greece suffers from weak state capacity on
both counts (IMF (2014); Council of Europe (2014)). Our goal in this section is simply to
present correlations of enforcement effectiveness and tax evasion which would be consistent
with a number of the causes above, not to pin down the exact bundle of frictions causing
weak tax collection in Greece.


                                              34
       Ideally, we would overlay an industry distribution of households onto the 235 tax-office
districts so that we can compare enforcement statistics with tax evasion implied by industries.
However, our sample is not sufficiently large to be representative at that level. Thus, we
instead study how tax enforcement relates to the density of self-employment and wealth in
each district, since our largest tax-evading industries map to wealthy occupations on average.
       Panel B of Table 12 reports evidence on the closure of tax cases using an OLS elasticity
model (columns 1-3) and a Poisson model (columns 4-6). Columns 1 and 4 show that
the elasticity and the Poisson-rate sensitivity of cases closed are strongly and significantly
positively related to self-employment percentage. In the other specifications of Panel B, we
add the interaction of wealth and self-employment. In columns (3) and (6) we orthogonalize
the variables using the modified Gram-Schmidt procedure of Golub & Van Loan (1996).25 We
find that local tax officials close more cases especially in places with wealthy self-employed
individuals. Panel C repeats the exercise for the assessment amount. Across specifications,
we find the percentage of self-employed individuals explains the location of assessments,
but that assessment amounts do not increase where there is higher wealth or self-employed
wealth. The results collectively suggest that tax enforcers know where tax evasion exists, but
lack the ability or the willpower to collect evaded revenues, because of a host of institutional
frictions and the lack of paper trail to prove violations.


5.3       Semiformality and Political Economy

In 2009, the Greek Parliament introduced a bill, mandating tax audits for declared income
below 20,000 euros on certain self-employed professionals, including doctors, lawyers, and
engineers. The quick dismissal of this bill triggers the question of whether politicians look
out for their own profession or act as functionaries in powerful industry associations and
  25
    This technique gives the heaviest weight to the level variables and lets the interaction try to explain
the variance of what is left over (i.e. ensuring robustness of the interaction coefficient to multicollinearity
concerns). We also report results without orthogonalization in columns (2) and (5); however these results
should be interpreted with caution, because the variance inflation factors (VIFs) are over 200 in our small
sample.



                                                      35
guilds in a way the fails to act on needed tax reform to address the problem.26
       We collect data on the occupational backgrounds of the Greek parliamentarians for the
year 2009 from their official websites to ask whether the distribution of tax-evading industries
correlates to the politician occupational backgrounds. Table 13 presents these descriptive
results, ordered by our tax evasion estimates. Column 5 reports the cumulative distribution
of parliamentary members, excluding lawyers, which is the default profession for politicians.
Out of 13 industries, the four most tax-evading industries (medicine, engineering, education,
and media) account for 61.7% of the non-lawyer Parliamentary votes. If we add in the next
two categories (tourism and accounting/finance), the percentage rises to over 80%, excluding
lawyers, which would also be high on tax evasion. The alignment of the occupational back-
grounds of Greek parliamentarians to our top tax-evading industries is only an association,
but may suggest one possible reason behind the lack of willpower to enact tax reform.27



6        Discussion: Method Contribution

We claim to offer a methodological contribution to the tax evasion estimation literature,
especially relevant in places where cash transactions are pervasive. Our innovation is the
notion that, in such settings, one can use observable private sector adaptions to cash-based
economies as indicators of hidden income. As Table A1 shows, most of the world’s population
lives in semiformal settings. In the paper, we use the adaptation by the banking sector to
develop a new method to estimate tax evasion based on bank loan information. Nevertheless,
our methodological contribution is reproducible with more generally-available data, as we
illustrate in the appendix by applying simple debt-to-income rules in survey data from the
United States in which income may be underreported. In this section, we briefly re-visit
  26
     To our knowledge, little academic research explores political economy stories related to politician occu-
pations. An exception is Faccio (2006), who offers evidence that politicians support their family industries.
  27
     The New York Times, February 2, 2012, reports: “In Greece, the real power is the power of resistance,
the power of inertia”, said Giorgos Floridis, a former member of Parliament from the Socialist Party, who
recently founded a reform-minded civic movement. “Today, the main power centers in Greece - political
parties, business leaders, professional guilds, public sector unions and the media - are fighting to preserve
their privileges, blocking structural changes that could make the economy more functional.”

                                                     36
the arguments that the tax-audit method and the consumption method may lack power to
identify the full extent of tax evasion in semiformal economies and tie these assertions to
what we have shown in our study on factors allowing persistence of tax evasion.
   Prior literature, has identified the difficulties of tax audits to uncover undetectable tax
evasion. Slemrod & Weber (2012) states that tax audits struggle to uncover tax evasion pri-
marily because cash transactions are not only hidden, but unrecoverable. Kleven, Knudsen,
Kreiner, Pedersen & Saez (2011) explain that “despite the large amount of resources spent
on these audits, they are unlikely to uncover all tax evasion for all taxpayers.” Tax audits
would naturally be even less effective in many semiformal countries where tax authorities are
resource constrained. Kleven et al. (2011) continue, “The same issue arises in the TCMP
[tax compliance] studies, which blow up detected tax evasion by a multiplier of 3.28 to ar-
rive at the official U.S. tax evasion estimates. Unfortunately, this multiplier is large and
has a very large measurement error, so that total evasion rates are at best rough approxi-
mations.” In the prior section, we reported a negative correlation between paper trail and
our estimated tax evasion across industries. This correlation would be consistent with this
literature-based understanding of cash transactions being not just hidden, but unrecoverable
in many instances, rendering tax audits without amble power to prove hidden income. We
also show correlations suggesting that tax-enforcement officials are unwilling or unable to
issue more assessments and fines for evasion cases in places where they seem to know that
tax evasion exists. Such correlations are consistent with the arguments of Slemrod & Weber
(2012) that enforcement officers cannot prove tax evasion magnitudes, although many other
reasons may be at work why tax collections are low.
   A final note on tax audits concerns the reality that, in countries with pervasive tax
evasion, tax officials often resort to consumption audits as indicators of income. However,
when tax officials audit consumption in their procedures to uncover hidden income, a norm
emerges of populations hiding and distorting consumption. This is a trademark of semiformal




                                             37
economies.28
       Measuring tax evasion off consumption is the other primary tax evasion method. In all
but the most formal economies, consumption surveys are rare due to the expense and the
difficulties involved. Even if costs were not a constraint, these consumption surveys would
likely be fraught with underreporting of expenses, because of the hiding norm in semiformal
               29
economies.



7        Conclusion

We start with the insight that in semiformal economies, the private sector adapts to the
culture of semiformality. Using this observation, we develop a new methodology to estimate
tax evasion. We observe the credit extended by the banks, and estimate the true income
that these credit capacities imply.
       Using individual-level household-lending data across different credit products and sam-
ples, we conservatively estimate that at least 26.8 billion euros of income went untaxed in
Greece for 2009. At the tax rate of 40%, the foregone tax revenues account for 30% of the
county’s deficit. Ranked by tax-evaded euros, the largest offending industries are medicine,
engineering, education, accounting and financial services, and law. We provide a host of
  28
     For example, in 2010, the Greek tax authorities attempted to uncover part of the unreported income
by imposing taxes on presumed income, based on wealth criteria. One of these criteria was the ownership
of a swimming pool. Only 324 taxpayers reported on their tax returns that they owned a swimming pool;
however, the use of Google maps revealed almost 17,000 swimming pools across the country (“Greek Wealth
Is Everywhere but Tax Forms,” New York Times, May 1st, 2010).
  29
     We conduct an illustrative exercise of estimating the PW consumption equation using car loan application
data from Greek bank, with the dependent variable log cari being the car collateral value measured one time
per individual i. We estimate:

log car consumptioni = .337 log YiR + .118 SEi + .146 log age + .110 male + .131 homeowner − .146 log dependents
                        [.016]         [.017]     [.0356]        [.011]      [.012]             [.150]

 +.035 log realestate + .003 log sd + .101 log inc.growth + f.e.(year ∗ geography).
    [.022]              [.006]       [.233]

with a vector of control variables Z that includes LogAge, Gender, Homeownership, LogDependents, the
income variance local proxy (LogStDevLogIncome), the wealth proxy  (LogRealEstate),    and local conditions
                                                                   α2         .118
                                                       pw
                                                                                   
(LogIncomeGrowth). Using the PW derivation that λ = exp α1 = exp .337 , we find that true income
is 1.42 times reported income, a smaller tax evasion rate of 29.5% relative to our bank method estimate of
45%. We repeat the caveat that this exercise is only illustrative due to our data limitations.


                                                     38
tests and delve in detail into the underwriting and lending processes of the bank to en-
sure our estimates are robust to adjusting for risk, wealth, or other differences between the
self-employed and wage workers or differences among the industries.
   The estimated industry distribution offers valuable insights. The highest tax evaders are
the highly educated and powerful professions in Greece. We show that these professions
together hold the majority of the Greek Parliament, and that they are governed by strong
professional guilds. We document this association as suggestive of one possible reason tax
evasion may persist, but also to highlight some of the differences in thinking about semiformal
settings.
   Another thought emerging from the distribution of tax-evading industries concerns po-
tential measures that policymakers could take. Slemrod (2007) notes that “good tax policy
should be designed with the realities of evasion in mind”. Understanding the realities of
tax evasion can foster good tax policy and efficient enforcement. Presumed income-tax ini-
tiatives, under which the government mandates a minimum tax reporting by occupation,
are politically unsavory. However, policy professionals might consider whether occupation
licenses for tax-evading industries might line up with our rankings. City authorities world-
wide use business licenses to collect revenues, and in Greece, the list of professions evading
taxes is strongly related to the existence of mandatory industry associations, providing a
potential forum for collections.
   A final thought concerns the welfare implications of banks issuing soft credit. In a Coasian
or De Soto view of the world, the fact that banks give an entitlement to informal income
provides a property right that allows individuals to use borrowing to optimally smooth
lifetime consumption or overcome shocks. A negative side is that access to soft credit reduces
the costs to informality, but we would be surprised if the negative outweighs the positive in
the second-best world of a norm of semiformality.




                                              39
References

Acharya, V., Drechsler, I. & Schnabl, P. (2014), ‘A pyrrhic victory? bank bailouts and
  sovereign credit risk’, The Journal of Finance 69(6), 2689–2739.

Agarwal, S. & Hauwald, R. (2010), ‘Distance and private information in lending’, Review of
  Financial Studies 23(7), 2757–2788.

Alexeev, M. & Pyle, W. (2003), ‘A note on measuring the unofficial economy in the former
  soviet republics1’, Economics of Transition 11(1), 153–175.

Alm, J., Jackson, B. R. & McKee, M. (2009), ‘Getting the word out: Enforcement informa-
  tion dissemination and compliance behavior’, Journal of Public Economics 93(3), 392–402.

Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E. & Taber, C. R. (2005), ‘Selection on observed and unobserved
  variables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools’, Journal of Political Economy.

Ang, A. & Longstaff, F. A. (2013), ‘Systemic sovereign credit risk: Lessons from the us and
  europe’, Journal of Monetary Economics 60(5), 493–510.

Azariadis, C. & Ioannides, Y. M. (2014), Thinking about corruption in Greece, Technical
  report, Department of Economics, Tufts University.

Besley, T. & Persson, T. (2010), ‘State capacity, conflict, and development’, Econometrica
  78(1), 1–34.

Black, T., Bloomquist, K., Emblom, E., Johns, A., Plumley, A. & Stuk, E. (2012), ‘Federal
  tax compliance research: tax year 2006 tax gap estimation’, IRS Research, Analysis &
  Statistics Working Paper.

Blumenthal, M., Christian, C., Slemrod, J. & Smith, M. G. (2001), ‘Do normative appeals
  affect tax compliance? evidence from a controlled experiment in minnesota’, National Tax
  Journal pp. 125–138.


                                             40
Braguinsky, S., Mityakov, S. & Liscovich, A. (2014), ‘Direct estimation of hidden earnings:
  Evidence from russian administrative data’, Journal of Law and Economics 57(2), pp.
  281–319.

Brunnermeier, M., Garicano, L., Lane, P., Pagano, M., Reis, R., Santos, T., Van Nieuwer-
  burgh, S. & Vayanos, D. (2011), ‘European safe bonds (ESBies)’.

Cagan, P. (1958), The demand for currency relative to total money supply, in ‘The Demand
  for Currency Relative to Total Money Supply’, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, pp. 1–37.

Callen, M. & James, D. (2015), ‘Institutional corruption and election fraud: Evidence from
  a field experiment in Afghanistan’, American Economic Review 105(1), 354–81.

Christian, C. W. (1994), ‘Voluntary compliance with the individual income tax: Results
  from the 1988 TCMP study’, The IRS Research Bulletin 1500, 35–42.

Chudik, A. & Fratzscher, M. (2011), ‘Identifying the global transmission of the 2007–2009
  financial crisis in a gvar model’, European Economic Review 55(3), 325–339.

Clotfelter, C. T. (1983), ‘Tax evasion and tax rates: An analysis of individual returns’, The
  review of economics and statistics pp. 363–373.

Çule, M. & Fulton, M. (2009), ‘Business culture and tax evasion: Why corruption and the
  unofficial economy can persist’, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 72(3), 811–
  822.

Del Carpio, L. (2013), ‘Are the neighbors cheating? evidence from a social norm experiment
  on property taxes in peru’, Working paper.

Djankov, S., Ganser, T., McLiesh, C., Ramalho, R. & Shleifer, A. (2010), ‘The effect of cor-
  porate taxes on investment and entrepreneurship’, American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 2, 31–64.

                                             41
Dubin, J. A., Graetz, M. J. & Wilde, L. L. (1990), ‘The effect of audit rates on the federal
  individual income tax, 1977-1986’, National Tax Journal pp. 395–409.

Dwenger, N., Kleven, H. J., Rasul, I. & Rincke, J. (2014), ‘Extrinsic and intrinsic motivations
  for tax compliance: Evidence from a field experiment in germany’, Working paper.

Faccio, M. (2006), ‘Politically connected firms’, The American Economic Review 96(1), 369–
  386.

Feinstein, J. S. (1999), ‘Approaches for estimating noncompliance: Examples from federal
  taxation in the united states’, The Economic Journal 109(456), 360–369.

Feldman, N. E. & Slemrod, J. (2007), ‘Estimating tax noncompliance with evidence from
  unaudited tax returns’, The Economic Journal 117(518), 327–352.

Fellner, G., Sausgruber, R. & Traxler, C. (2013), ‘Testing enforcement strategies in the
  field: Threat, moral appeal and social information’, Journal of the European Economic
  Association 11(3), 634–660.

Galbiati, R. & Zanella, G. (2012), ‘The tax evasion social multiplier: Evidence from Italy’,
  Journal of Public Economics 96(5), 485–494.

Goel, R. K. & Saunoris, J. W. (2014), ‘Global corruption and the shadow economy: spatial
  aspects’, Public Choice 161(1-2), 119–139.

Golub, G. H. & Van Loan, C. F. (1996), ‘Matrix computations’, Johns Hopkins studies in
  mathematical sciences.

Gorodnichenko, Y., Martinez-Vazquez, J. & Peter, K. S. (2009), ‘Myth and reality of flat
  tax reform: Micro estimates of tax evasion response and welfare effects in Russia’, Journal
  of Political Economy 117(3), pp. 504–554.




                                              42
Hallsworth, M., List, J., Metcalfe, R. & Vlaev, I. (2014), The behavioralist as tax collector:
  Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance, Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hasker, K. & Okten, C. (2008), ‘Intermediaries and corruption’, Journal of Economic Be-
  havior & Organization 67(1), 103–115.

Hurst, E., Li, G. & Pugsley, B. (2014), ‘Are household surveys like tax forms? Evidence from
  income underreporting of the self-employed’, Review of economics and statistics 96(1), 19–
  33.

Klepper, S. & Nagin, D. (1989), ‘The anatomy of tax evasion’, Journal of Law, Economics
  and Organization 5, 1.

Kleven, H. J. & Waseem, M. (2011), ‘Tax notches in pakistan: Tax evasion, real responses,
  and income shifting’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.

Kleven, H. J., Knudsen, M. B., Kreiner, C. T., Pedersen, S. & Saez, E. (2011), ‘Unwilling
  or unable to cheat? Evidence from a tax audit experiment in Denmark’, Econometrica
  79(3), 651–692.

Kleven, H. J., Kreiner, C. T. & Saez, E. (2009), Why can modern governments tax so much?
  An agency model of firms as fiscal intermediaries, Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

La Porta, R. & Shleifer, A. (2008), ‘The unofficial economy and economic development’,
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2008(2), 275–363.

Lackó, M. (1999), Do power consumption data tell the story?: Electricity intensity and
  hidden economy in post-socialist countries, Inststitute of Economics, Hungarian Academy
  of Sciences.




                                             43
Lane, P. R. (2012), ‘The european sovereign debt crisis’, The Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 26(3), 49–67.

Lyssiotou, P., Pashardes, P. & Stengos, T. (2004), ‘Estimates of the black economy based
  on consumer demand approaches*’, The Economic Journal 114(497), 622–640.

Morse, S. C., Karlinsky, S. & Bankman, J. (2009), ‘Cash business and tax evasion’, Stanford
  Law and Policy Review 20.1, 37–68.

Paula, . d. & Scheinkman, J. A. (2010), ‘Value-added taxes, chain effects, and informality’,
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Petersen, M. A. (2004), Information: Hard and soft, mimeo, Northwestern University.

Petersen, M. A. & Rajan, R. G. (2002), ‘Does distance still matter? The information revo-
  lution in small business lending’, The Journal of Finance 57(6), 2533–2570.

Petrin, A. & Train, K. (2003), Omitted product attributes in discrete choice models, Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pissarides, C. A. & Weber, G. (1989), ‘An expenditure-based estimate of Britain’s black
  economy’, Journal of Public Economics 39(1), 17–32.

Pomeranz, D. (2015), ‘No taxation without information: Deterrence and self-enforcement in
  the value added tax’, American Economic Review 105(8), 2539–69.

Schneider, F. & Enste, D. (2000), Shadow Economies Around The World-Size, Causes, and
  Consequences, Vol. 196, International Monetary Fund.

Shambaugh, J. C. (2012), ‘The euro’s three crises’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
  pp. 157–207.

Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R. W. (1993), ‘Corruption’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  108(3), 599–617.

                                            44
Slemrod, J. (2007), ‘Cheating ourselves: the economics of tax evasion’, The Journal of
  Economic Perspectives pp. 25–48.

Slemrod, J. & Weber, C. (2012), ‘Evidence of the invisible: toward a credibility revolution
  in the empirical analysis of tax evasion and the informal economy’, International Tax and
  Public Finance 19(1), 25–53.

Tanzi, V. (1983), ‘The underground economy in the united states: Annual estimates, 1930-
  80’, IMF Staff Papers 30(2), 283–305.




                                            45
Figure 1: National & Sample Reported Income Distributions
The graph presents the distribution of national reported income based on all taxpayers in Greece,
along with the distribution of reported income for the (a) constrained and the (b) mortgage sample.
Tax-authority data refer to the personal income reported to the tax authority by all taxpayers
for the year 2009 and is from the the annual statistical bulletin of the Ministry of Finance. The
reported income of the constrained and the mortgage sample is from the loan applications of the
bank. Applicants with income over e1.5 million or under e1,000 are removed from the estimation
samples. Income buckets become wider as income increases following the reporting standards of
the annual statistical bulletin.




                  (a) National & Constrained Sample Reported Income Distributions




                   (b) National & Mortgage Sample Reported Income Distributions
Figure 2: Linear and Spline Specification of Credit Capacity
The figure plots estimated credit capacity as a function of reported income, comparing the linear
specification to a spline specification, implementing equation (5). The dependent variable is
credit extended and the independent variables include reported income for wage workers, reported
income for the self-employed, self-employment indicator, credit grade buckets, and the proxies
for local conditions and income risk, interacted with self-employment. The sample consists of
applicants whose approved loan amount is lower than the amount requested (constrained sample).
The vertical axis presents the prediction from this model for a linear regression, and a regression
that takes 8 linear spline regions with nodes of 1,000, 5,000, 10,000, 15,000, 20,000, and 30,000
euros for wage worker and self-employed reported income. Spline estimates are depicted by dashed
lines according to the legend. Also included in the figure is a histogram of reported income for the
constraint sample from the loan applications of the bank.




                                                47
Figure 3: Paper-Trail Intensity and Industry Tax Evasion
The figure presents the paper-trail intensity with respect to the estimated tax-evaded income
in euros across industries. Paper-trail intensities (x-axis) are defined as the sum of input and
output intensities from Table 11. The intensities come from a survey of executives in a managerial
educational program in Greece. The scale is from 1 to 5 (low to high intensity) and answers are
demeaned at the respondent level to remove any individual biases. The estimates of tax-evaded
income (y-axis) are from Table 10.




                                               48
Tables

Table 1: Monthly Reported Income & Debt Servicing by Industry
The bank data are from a large Greek bank, with industry, income distribution, and geography weighted to
be representative to the population of Greece using the tax authority distribution. Data are from 2003-2009.
The sample consists of mortgage and non-homeowner consumer loan applicants. Monthly reported income is
the verified income reported to the tax authority. Monthly debt payments is the servicing on the loans, with
the interest rate equal to the applicable rate for new consumer loans and new mortgages. For term-loan,
non-homeowner customers, we assume the prior debt has an outstanding term of 3 years, because much of
this debt may be other term-loans. We assume a median rate of 11% for these obligations. For mortgage
applicants, we impose a prior-debt maturity of 10 years and rate of 6% (conservative averages). The last
column reports the mean of the payment-to-income ratio for applicants in each industry.

                                     Mean Monthly           Mean Monthly Debt         Mean Ratio of
              Industry
                                   Reported Income (e)        Payments (e)           Payment/Income
   Accounting & Fin. Services              1,762                    1,072                   1.30
   Business Services & Trade               1,359                     916                    0.75
   Construction & Transport                1,190                     549                    0.51
   Education                               1,330                    1,098                   1.09
   Engineering & Science                   1,506                    1,117                   0.91
   Farming                                 1,000                     424                    0.42
   Law                                     1,792                    1,559                   1.17
   Lodging & Tourism                       1,440                    1,183                   1.16
   Manufacturing                           1,475                    1,150                   0.97
   Media & Entertainment                   1,486                    1,098                   0.93
   Medicine                                1,660                    1,282                   1.39
   Personal Services                       1,053                     654                    0.95
   Retail                                  1,642                    1,362                   1.25
   Overall                                 1,339                     884                    0.78




                                                    49
    Table 2: Tax-Evasion Estimation of Self-employed (Constraint Sample)
    The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), (3) and (4)] from equation (5). Columns (1a), (2a),
    (3a), and (4a) present lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for self-employed divided
    by the coefficient for the wage worker. The sample consists of applicants, whose loan amount approved is
    lower than the amount requested (constrained sample). The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined
    as the sum of outstanding debt and the approved loan. Income refers to the after-tax reported income
    verified by the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate the employment type
    of the applicant. The vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior
    5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk), the per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)),
    and the median presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEstateW ealth).
    Models (1)-(3) are OLS, whereas model (4) presents results of a quantile regression. All specifications
    include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects, year fixed effects, and industry interacted with self-
    employment fixed effects. Models (2)-(4)include additionally branch fixed effects. The two last rows report
                                                                       T rue
                                                                             −Y R
    the aggregate lambda and the tax-evasion rate, defined as Y Y T rue           . Observations are weighted to be
    population-representative using the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors
    are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
    respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.
                    Dependent Variable: Credit Capacity = Outstanding Debt + Approved Loan
                              (1)        (1a)       (2)       (2a)       (3)      (3a)      (4)                  (4a)
                              OLS         λ        OLS         λ        OLS        λ      Quantile                λ
Income*Wage Worker          0.3185***              0.3235***               0.3391***              0.3610***
                             [0.0467]               [0.0491]                [0.0544]               [0.0023]
Income*SE                   0.5575***    1.75***   0.5755***    1.78***    0.6257***    1.84***   0.6490***    1.79***
                             [0.0602]               [0.0569]                [0.0514]               [0.0025]
IncomeRisk                                                                    1,811                  -663
                                                                             [2,983]                 [671]
SE*IncomeRisk                                                                 1,564                   878
                                                                             [3,197]                 [821]
Lag(Income Growth)                                                            1,729               -8,501***
                                                                             [9,857]                [1,434]
SE*Lag(Income Growth)                                                         8,336                9,814***
                                                                            [10,517]                [1,810]
Real Estate Wealth                                                         0.9400***              0.1968***
                                                                            [0.3193]               [0.0576]
SE*Real Estate Wealth                                                       -0.1045                 0.0608
                                                                            [0.5807]               [0.1255]
Credit Grade F.E.              Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Industry*SE F.E.               Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Branch F.E.                    No                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Year F.E.                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Adj. R2                       0.100                   0.118                  0.120                   0.140
Tax Evasion Rate                         42.85%                 43.82%                  45.65%                 44.13%




                                                          50
Table 3: Aggregates at the Economy Level
The table presents aggregate estimates of tax evasion at the economy level. The lambda multiples (λ)
are from Table 2. The aggregate reported income for the self-employed is from the annual bulletin of the
Ministry of Finance. A range of economy-wide tax evaded income for the self-employed individuals and
foregone taxes is calculated based on low and high estimated lambda multiples from Table 2. Estimations
based on the median lambda multiple are provided in parentheses. Foregone taxes are estimated under a
40% tax rate. Total and primary (in parentheses) deficits are from Eurostat. Amounts are in billions of euros.

                                                    Low                  Median             High
                      Lambda Estimate:              1.75                   1.79              1.84

                       Reported Income      Tax Evaded Income        Foregone Taxes         Deficit
                       (Self-Employed)      Low-High (Median)      Low-High (Median)      (Primary)

         Year 2006           28.8                21.6 - 24.2            8.64 - 9.68          8.0
                                                   (22.8)                 (9.10)            (3.6)

         Year 2007           30.4                22.8 - 25.5           9.12 - 10.21         14.8
                                                   (24.0)                 (9.60)            (5.0)

         Year 2008           32.4                24.6 - 27.6           9.84 - 11.02          23.3
                                                   (25.9)                (10.36)            (12.1)

         Year 2009           35.7                26.8 - 29.9          10.71 - 12.00          35.4
                                                   (28.2)                (11.28)            (24.3)




                                                     51
Table 4: Tax-Evasion Estimation of the Self-employed (Mortgages) & Large Firm Test
The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), (3), and (4)] from equation (5). Columns (1a), (2a), (3a),
and (4a) present lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for the self-employed divided by the
coefficient for the wage worker. The sample consists of mortgage applicants (mortgage sample). The dependent
variable is monthly payments of the approved mortgage. Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by
the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate the employment type of the applicant. The
vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk),
the per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)), and the median presumed real estate value
of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEstateW ealth). Models (3) and (4) repeat the analysis of models
(1) and (2), using as “benchmark” only wage workers that work in large companies with more than e30 million in
annual sales. All specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed
                                                                                                    T rue
                                                                                                          −Y R
effects. The two last rows report the aggregate lambda and the tax-evasion rate, defined as Y Y T rue          . Observations
are weighted to be population-representative using the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard
errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.

                                           Dependent Variable: Monthly Payment of Approved Mortgage

                                          All Wage Workers                            Wage Workers in Large Firms
                                (1)         (1a)       (2)         (2a)           (3)         (3a)        (4)         (4a)
                                OLS          λ         OLS          λ             OLS          λ          OLS          λ

Income*WageWorker            0.0306***               0.0286***                 0.0298***               0.0281***
                              [0.0106]                [0.0103]                  [0.0091]                [0.0088]
Income*SE                    0.0548***     1.79**    0.0540***    1.89**       0.0558***     1.87**    0.0549***    1.95**
                              [0.0092]                [0.0092]                  [0.0093]                [0.0093]
IncomeRisk                                              46.95                                             132.6
                                                       [133.2]                                           [118.0]
SE*IncomeRisk                                          -16.21                                            -111.0
                                                       [144.6]                                           [131.2]
Lag(Income Growth)                                   1,792***                                           1,114***
                                                       [432.1]                                           [282.6]
SE*Lag(IncomeGrowth)                                 -1,917***                                         -1,229***
                                                       [448.4]                                           [309.5]
Real EstateWealth                                    0.0951***                                         0.0873***
                                                      [0.0233]                                          [0.0166]
SE*Real Estate Wealth                                  0.0059                                            0.0177
                                                      [0.0330]                                          [0.0303]
Credit-Grade F.E.               Yes                    Yes                        Yes                     Yes
Branch F.E.                     Yes                    Yes                        Yes                     Yes
Year F.E.                       Yes                    Yes                        Yes                     Yes
Adj. R2                        0.0903                 0.0957                     0.0931                  0.0982
Tax-Evasion Rate                          44.13%                  47.09%                    46.52%                  48.71%




                                                             52
Table 5: Defaults, Interest Rates, and Tax Evasion
The sample consists of self-employed applicants, whose loan amount approved is lower than the amount
requested (constrained sample). The sample collapses to one observation per applicant. The dependent
variable in columns (1)-(4) of Panel A and Panel B is the dummy variable Defaults, which takes the value
1 if the account is ever more than 90 days delinquent and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable in columns
(5)-(6) of Panel A and Panel C is the loan interest rate. Interest rates are in percentage points (i.e., a
1.00 is 1%). Tax evasion for each applicant is calculated based on the estimates from equation 5 and is
expressed in 10,000’s euros. Because tax evasion euros are generated regressors, we bootstrap the standard
errors in the first estimating equation (estimating the tax evasion λ    b =β c2 /β
                                                                                  c1 from Eq.(5)) and then take
500 iterations of tax evasion estimate to calculate the additional variance around the estimate of effect of
tax evasion on interest rates or default. We then add in this additional variance to the estimated standard
error of the direct OLS equation of interest rates or default on tax evasion following the procedure in Petrin
& Train (2003). Loan amount is the approved loan amount and duration is the approved duration of the
loan (in months). In Panels B and C the sample is separate in interest rate and credit grade quintiles
respectively. All specifications include year fixed effects. Specifications in columns (2), (4) and (6) of Panel
A and Panel B include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects. Specifications in columns (3) and (4)f
Panel A and Panel C also include 20 interest-grade buckets as risk fixed effects. Heteroscedasticity robust
standard errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***,
**, and *, respectively.
                                                         Panel A
        Dep.Variable:          Defaults      Defaults     Defaults     Defaults    Interest Rate   Interest Rate
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
        Tax Evasion            -0.00451      0.00226      -0.00380     0.00162       -0.0267         -0.0135
                               [0.00479]    [0.00485]    [0.00461]    [0.00466]      [0.0375]        [0.0355]
        Interest Rate         0.0193***     0.0172***
                              [0.00350]     [0.00349]
        Loan Amount            -0.0169       0.00715      -0.0188      0.00178      -0.502***       -0.473***
                               [0.0140]      [0.0145]     [0.0131]     [0.0130]       [0.170]         [0.170]
        Duration              0.00307***    0.00299***   0.00185***   0.00180***    0.0133***       0.0128***
                               [0.00055]     [0.00055]   [0.000568]   [0.000561]    [0.00259]       [0.00260]
        Credit Grade F.E.           No         Yes          No           Yes            No             Yes
        Interest Rate F.E.          No         No           Yes          Yes            No              No
        Year F.E.                   Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
        Adj. R2                    0.0187     0.0494       0.168        0.188         0.160           0.1674

                                                         Panel B
        Dep.Variable:                        Defaults     Defaults     Defaults      Defaults        Defaults
        Interest Rate Quintiles:              (Q1)         (Q2)         (Q3)           (Q4)            (Q5)
        Tax Evasion                          -0.00105      0.0132      -0.00187      -0.00449        -0.00679
                                            [0.00515]     [0.0107]     [0.0228]      [0.0125]        [0.0148]
        Credit Grade F.E.                      Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
        Year F.E.                              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
        Adj. R2                               0.067        0.041         0.17         0.072           0.028

                                                         Panel C
        Dep.Variable:                        Defaults     Defaults     Defaults      Defaults        Defaults
        Credit Grade Quintiles:               (Q1)         (Q2)         (Q3)           (Q4)            (Q5)
        Tax Evasion                          0.00381      -0.00627     -0.00529       0.0177         0.00155
                                             [0.0216]     [0.0114]     [0.0177]      [0.0147]        [0.00643]
        Interest Rate F.E                      Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
        Year F.E.                              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
        Adj.   R2                             0.174        0.022       0.00668        0.015           0.011
Table 6: Tax-Evasion Estimation of the Self-employed (Constrained) & Urban vs Rural Test
The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6)] from equation (5). Columns (1a), (2a), (3a), (4a), (5a) and (6a) present lambdas (λ),
defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for the self-employed divided by the coefficient for the wage worker. The sample consists of applicants, whose
loan amount approved is lower than the amount requested (constrained sample). The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the sum of outstanding
debt and the approved loan.. Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that
indicate the employment type of the applicant. The vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax cell
(IncomeRisk), the per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)), and the median presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s
residence (RealEstateW ealth). The “All” columns refer to the entire sample, the “Urban” columns include applicants inhabiting in Athens, Thessaloniki and
cities with population higher than 100,000 people and the “Rural” columns all other areas. All specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects,
industry interacted with self-employment fixed effects and year fixed effects. Specifications (4)-(6) include branch fixed effects. Observations are weighted to be
                                                                                                                         T rue
                                                                                                                               −Y R
population-representative using the tax authority distribution. The last row reports the tax-evasion rate, defined as Y Y T rue     . Heteroscedasticity-robust standard
errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical
difference from unity.


                                       All                   Urban                  Rural                     All                   Urban                    Rural
                               (1)            (1a)       (2)         (2a)     (3)           (3a)        (4)          (4a)       (5)         (5a)       (6)           (6a)
                               OLS             λ         OLS          λ       OLS            λ          OLS           λ         OLS          λ         OLS            λ

Income*WageWorker            0.3204***                 0.3325***            0.2803***                0.3416***                0.3486***             0.3148***
                              [0.0465]                  [0.0699]             [0.0536]                 [0.0543]                 [0.0793]              [0.0631]
Income*SE                    0.5561***       1.74***   0.5304***   1.60**   0.5673***   2.02***      0.6239***      1.83***   0.6201***   1.78***   0.6277***    1.99***
                              [0.0596]                  [0.0923]             [0.0783]                 [0.0511]                 [0.0773]              [0.0676]
IncomeRisk                                                                                              1,824                    1,218                 1,187
                                                                                                       [2,980]                  [4,099]               [3,320]
SE*IncomeRisk                                                                                           2,073                   11,412                 1,700
                                                                                                       [3,179]                  [8,789]               [3,454]
Lag(Income Growth)                                                                                      1,841                   28,110                -13,030
                                                                                                       [9,877]                 [21,291]               [8,904]
SE*Lag(Income Growth)                                                                                   8,060                  -13,114              22,170**
                                                                                                      [10,549]                 [23,312]               [9,706]
Real Estate Wealth                                                                                   0.9500***                 0.7244*                 0.5811
                                                                                                      [0.3200]                 [0.4009]              [0.6587]
SE*Real Estate Wealth                                                                                 -0.2321                   1.2281               -1.2751*
                                                                                                      [0.5858]                 [1.1145]              [0.7489]

Credit-Grade F.E.              Yes                       Yes                  Yes                       Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Industry*SE F.E.               Yes                       Yes                  Yes                       Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Branch F.E.                     No                        No                   No                       Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Year F.E.                      Yes                       Yes                  Yes                       Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Adj. R2                       0.1001                    0.0847               0.1287                   0.11200                  0.1859                 0.1475
Tax-Evasion Rate                             42.53%                37.50%               50.49%                      45.36%                43.82%                 49.75%
     Table 7: Tax Evasion Estimation of the Self-employed (Constrained) by Wealth Quintile
     The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5)] from equation (5), and lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for the self-employed
     divided by the coefficient for the wage worker [col. (1a), (2a), (3a), (4a) and (5a)] for wealth quintiles based on the real estate measure of the tax authority. The sample
     consists of applicants, whose approved loan amount is lower than the amount requested (constrained sample). We drop observations whose real estate values appear too
     frequently in the data to be representative of the continuous formula the tax authority uses to calculate the scale.The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the sum
     of outstanding debt and the approved loan. Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate
     the applicant’s employment type. The vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk), the per-capita
     annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)), and the median presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEstateW ealth). All
     specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects,industry interacted with self-employment fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Model (2)
                                                                                                                   T rue   R
                                                                                                                    −Y
     includes additionally wealth and income controls. The last row reports the tax-evasion rate, defined as Y Y T rue  . Observations are weighted to be population-representative
     using the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **,
     and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.

                                                Quintile 1                   Quintile 2                   Quintile 3                    Quintile 4                  Quintile 5

                                              (1)           (1a)          (2)            (2a)           (3)            (3a)          (4)           (4a)          (5)           (5a)
                                           Estimate          λ         Estimate           λ          Estimate           λ         Estimate          λ         Estimate          λ
         Inc.*Wage Worker                 0.3484***                    0.3418***                    0.3742***                    0.4321***                   0.4431***
                                           [0.0488]                     [0.0380]                     [0.0491]                     [0.0638]                    [0.0908]
         Income*SE                        0.6850***       1.96***      0.7170***       2.09***      0.7168***        1.92***     0.7616***       1.76***     0.7448***       1.68***
                                           [0.0838]                     [0.0862]                     [0.1652]                     [0.1057]                    [0.1505]
         IncomeRisk                         -5,914                        3,621                       -3,578                       -1,121                      -2,403




55
                                            [7,958]                      [5,185]                      [5,434]                      [4,976]                     [4,578]
         SE*IncomeRisk                       3,853                       -1,671                        6,831                        7,918                      21,844
                                            [8,080]                      [5,530]                      [6,039]                      [7,988]                    [17,885]
         Lag(IncomeGrowth)                   7,560                    -30,398***                       4,831                       -8,486                      17,570
                                            [8,804]                      [8,658]                     [10,557]                     [13,505]                    [20,539]
         SE*Lag(IncomeGrowth)                -781                     28,446***                      25,293*                       10,865                      -1,393
                                            [9,729]                     [10,632]                     [15,265]                     [20,733]                    [29,985]
         Real Estate Wealth                -8.1618                     -5.4639**                   -17.1447***                    -3.1358                      2.4906
                                           [5.1054]                     [2.7156]                     [4.5174]                     [2.1118]                    [1.5323]
         SE*Real Estate Wealth              4.0382                      9.0504*                      10.0573                       2.4578                     -1.9669
                                          [10.3917]                     [4.7931]                     [9.6845]                     [4.2574]                    [3.9890]

         Credit Grade F.E.                    Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes                         Yes
         Industry*SE F.E.                     Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes                         Yes
         Branch F.E.                          Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes                         Yes
         Year F.E.                            Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes                         Yes
         Adj. R2                             0.175                       0.164                         0.108                        0.142                       0.100
         Tax-Evasion Rate                                 48.98%                       52.15%                        47.92%                      43.18%                      40.48%
            Table 8: Tax-Evasion Estimation by Industry (Constrained Sample)
            The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), and (3)] from equation (5). Columns (1a), (2a), and (3a) present lambdas (λ),
            defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for the self-employed divided by the coefficient for the wage worker. Columns (1b), (2b),
            and (3b) report the estimated tax-evaded income. The sample consists of applicants whose approved loan amount is lower than the amount
            requested (constrained sample). The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the sum of outstanding debt and the approved loan.
            Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate the
            employment type of the applicant. The vector of control variables includes 13 industry dummies, the standard error of Log(income) over
            the prior 5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk), the per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)), the median presumed
            real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEstateW ealth). Models (1) and (2) are OLS, whereas model (3) presents
            results of a quantile regression. All specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed
            effects. Model (1) includes industry fixed effects and models (2) and (3) include industry fixed effects crossed with self-employment status.
            The two last rows report the aggregate lambda and the tax-evasion rate. Observations are weighted to be population-representative using
            the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
            levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.

                                                               Dependent Variable: Credit Capacity = Outstanding Debt + Approved Loan

                                                       OLS                                        OLS                                      Quintile
                                           (1)        (1.a)         (1.b)             (2)        (2.a)       (2.b)              (3)        (3.a)         (3.b)
                                                                 Tax-Evaded                               Tax-Evaded                                  Tax-Evaded
                                        Estimate        λ          Income          Estimate       λ         Income           Estimate        λ          Income
            Income*WageWorker           0.308***                                   0.313***                                  0.366***
                                        [0.0487]                                   [0.0529]                                  [0.00399]
             *Accounting & Finance      0.526***      1.71*         14,477         0.600***      1.92        18,732          0.670***      1.83*        16,971
                                         [0.138]                                    [0.233]                                   [0.0279]
              *Bus.Services & Trade     0.627***    2.04***         17,654         0.690***    2.20***       20,508          0.620***     1.69***       11,833
                                        [0.0656]                                   [0.0821]                                  [0.00940]
              *Constr. & Transport      0.571***    1.85***         11,555         0.649***    2.07***       14,508          0.705***     1.93***       12,522
                                        [0.0600]                                   [0.0959]                                   [0.0202]
                         *Education     0.781***    2.54***         24,689         1.028***    3.29***       36,687          0.821***     2.24***       19,971
                                         [0.105]                                    [0.228]                                   [0.0608]
             *Engineering & Science     0.756***    2.46***         28,306         0.996***    3.18***       42,477          0.703***     1.92***       17,913
                                         [0.129]                                    [0.212]                                   [0.0198]
                           *Farming       0.182      not sig          –             0.0910      not sig         –            0.552***      1.51*        6,121
Income*SE




                                         [0.125]                                   [0.0799]                                   [0.0103]
                                 *Law   0.716***    2.33***         29,415         0.871***    2.79***       39,557          0.762***     2.08***       23,965
                                         [0.116]                                    [0.119]                                   [0.0193]
                *Lodging & Tourism      0.496***      1.61          9,952          0.866***    2.77***       28,700          0.660***     1.80**        13,059
                                         [0.186]                                    [0.178]                                   [0.0240]
                    *Manufacturing      0.403***      1.31          5,382          0.393***      1.26         4,457          0.617***       1.69        11,975
                                        [0.0884]                                    [0.112]                                   [0.0123]
                  *Media & Entert.      0.587***      1.91*         15,039         0.904***    2.89***       31,290          0.691***     1.89**        14,718
                                         [0.158]                                    [0.155]                                   [0.0566]
                          *Medicine     0.683***    2.22***         29,346         0.811***     2.59**       38,275          0.826***     2.25***       30,021
                                         [0.129]                                    [0.233]                                   [0.0142]
                  *Personal Services    0.343***      1.11          1,661          0.470***      1.50         7,329          0.620***       1.69        10,131
                                         [0.111]                                    [0.176]                                   [0.0714]
                             *Retail    0.468***     1.52**         10,342         0.480***     1.53**       10,635          0.634***     1.73**        14,588
                                        [0.0451]                                   [0.0630]                                   [0.0103]
            Self-Employed (SE)           -1,213                                   absorbed                                   absorbed
                                         [1,061]
            IncomeRisk                                                               764.3                                      288.0
                                                                                    [1,910]                                    [791.7]
            SE*IncomeRisk                                                            3,274                                      -143.7
                                                                                    [2,258]                                    [1,149]
            Lag(Income Growth)                                                       5,840                                    -5,526**
                                                                                    [9,004]                                    [2,265]
            SE*Lag(Income Growth)                                                    3,418                                     6,656**
                                                                                    [9,583]                                    [2,970]
            Real Estate Wealth                                                     0.987***                                    0.174*
                                                                                    [0.310]                                    [0.104]
            SE*Real Estate Wealth                                                   -0.183                                      0.0831
                                                                                    [0.544]                                    [0.225]
            Industry F.E.                  Yes                                       No                                         No
            Industry*SE F.E.               No                                        Yes                                        Yes
            Branch F.E.                    Yes                                       Yes                                        No
            Year F.E.                      Yes                                       Yes                                        Yes
            R2                            0.118                                     0.122                                      0.159
            Aggregate multiple (λ)                  1.76***                                    1.95***                                    1.72***
            Tax-Evasion Rate                        43.18%                                     48.71%                                     41.80%
     Table 9: Tax-Evasion Estimates with Flexible (by Industry group) Sensitivities of Credit to Income
     The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5)] from equation (5). Columns (1a), (2a), (3a), (4a), and (5a) present lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of
     the coefficient on income for the self-employed divided by the coefficient for the wage worker. Models (1) and (2) refer to the constrained sample that consists of applicants, whose
     approved loan amount is lower than the amount requested, and use as a dependent variable the credit capacity. Models (3)-(5) examine the mortgage sample with the monthly
     mortgage payments as the dependant variable. Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that
     indicate the employment type of the applicant. The vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk), the
     per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)) and the median presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEstateW ealth).
     Models (1) and (3) present the baseline specification. Models (2) and (4) additionally include wealth and income controls. Model (5) repeats the analysis of model (4),
     using as a benchmark only wage workers that work in large companies with more than e30 million in annual sales. All specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk
     fixed effects, industry interacted with self-employement fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The two last rows report the aggregate lambda and the tax-
                                 T rue
                                       −Y R
     evasion rate, defined as Y Y T rue     . Observations are weighted to be population-representative using the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors
     are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.

                                                               Constrained              Constrained                 Mortgages                Mortgages              Mortgages by
                                                               by Industry              by Industry                by Industry              by Industry         Industry (Large Firms)
                                                              (1)         (1a)         (2)        (2a)            (3)         (3a)         (4)         (4a)         (5)          (5a)
                                                           Estimate        λ        Estimate       λ           Estimate        λ        Estimate        λ        Estimate         λ
        Income*Wage Worker Interacted with:
        *Construction, Engineering & Manufacturing          0.386***                0.385***                   0.0691***                0.0661**                 0.0624**
                                                             [0.133]                 [0.136]                    [0.0262]                 [0.0260]                [0.0301]
                *Lodging, Tourism and Retail                0.336***                0.339***                   0.0272***                0.0256***               0.0256***
                                                            [0.0578]                [0.0607]                    [0.00947]               [0.00913]                [0.00924]
                     *Professional Services                 0.365***                0.363***                    0.0354**                0.0332**                 0.0319**
                                                            [0.0562]                [0.0590]                    [0.0171]                 [0.0164]                [0.0162]
        Income*Self-Employed Interacted with:
        *Construction, Engineering & Manufacturing          0.508***      1.32      0.554***      1.44         0.0872***      1.26*     0.0867***     1.31*     0.0867***       1.39*
                                                            [0.0966]                 [0.107]                    [0.0322]                 [0.0322]                [0.0323]




57
                *Lodging, Tourism and Retail                0.480***     1.43*      0.662***    1.95***        0.0551***      2.02*     0.0548***     2.13*     0.0547***       2.14*
                                                             [0.130]                [0.0681]                    [0.0123]                 [0.0127]                [0.0127]
                     *Professional Services                 0.641***    1.75***     0.698***    1.92***        0.0790***     2.23**     0.0753***     2.26**    0.0755***       2.36**
                                                            [0.0808]                [0.0826]                    [0.0148]                 [0.0149]                [0.0150]
        Self-Employed (SE)                                   533.2                   -103.3                     182.8***                167.6***                 163.4***
                                                             [1,786]                 [1,686]                     [25.73]                 [44.49]                  [45.65]
        IncomeRisk                                                                    2,287                                               116.5                    126.1
                                                                                     [3,775]                                             [116.3]                  [132.1]
        SE*IncomeRisk                                                                -164.1                                               -52.29                  -61.67
                                                                                     [4,332]                                             [145.0]                  [157.6]
        Lag(Inc.Growth)                                                               1,024                                             1,096***                 1,115***
                                                                                    [13,556]                                             [280.9]                  [290.7]
        SE*Lag(Inc.Growth)                                                            9,374                                             -1,080***               -1,089***
                                                                                    [14,768]                                             [329.8]                  [338.4]
        Real Est.Wealth                                                              0.796*                                             0.0897***               0.0899***
                                                                                     [0.425]                                             [0.0175]                [0.0187]
        SE*Real Est.Wealth                                                           -1.059                                              0.0178                   0.0188
                                                                                     [0.870]                                             [0.0340]                [0.0342]
        Industry*SE F.E.                                      Yes                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes
        Branch F.E.                                           Yes                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes
        Year F.E.                                             Yes                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes
        Adj. R2                                              0.112                    0.114                      0.123                    0.129                    0.126
        Aggregate multiple (λ)                                          1.51***                 1.74***                      1.93**                  1.96**                    2.05**
        Tax-Evasion Rate                                                33.95%                  42.53%                       48.18%                  49.08%                    51.21%
Table 10: Tax-Evasion Estimation Summarized with Education and Legislation
The table presents the industries sorted on tax evasion in euros (in descending order) and information
on anti-tax-evasion legislation targeting and the source of professional rights. The mean tax evasion
is calculated as the average of the estimates from specifications (1)-(3) of Table 8.“Anti-Tax Evasion
Legislation” indicates whether the industry was targeted by the anti-tax evasion legislative bill proposed
in 2010. “Degree Requirement” indicates whether a degree is required to follow the occupation. The last
column shows whether the job permit is issued by the government or a union.

                                     (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                  Mean Tax             Anti-Tax Evasion     Degree       Job Permit
                                 Evasion (e)    λ        Legislation      Requirement     Issued by
    Medicine                       32,548      2.35          Yes              Yes           Union
    Law                            30,979      2.40          Yes              Yes           Union
    Engineering & Science          29,565      2.52          Yes              Yes           Union
    Education                      27,116      2.69                           Yes        Government
    Media & Entertainment          20,349      2.23
    Lodging & Tourism              17,237      2.06
    Accounting & Finance           16,727      1.82          Yes              Yes
    Business Services & Trade      16,665      1.98         Mixed            Mixed       Government
    Construction & Transport       12,862      1.95                          Mixed
    Retail                         11,855      1.60                                      Government
    Manufacturing                   7,271      1.42
    Personal Services               6,374      1.44                          Mixed       Union/Gov.
    Farming                         6,121      1.51




                                                      58
Table 11: Paper-Trail Intensity
The table presents the results of the survey on the paper-trail intensity in various industries. Industries
are sorted on average tax evasion in euros (in descending order), calculated as the average of the estimates
from specifications (2) and (3) of Table 8. Columns (3) and (4) report the results from Question 1: “What
percentage of expenses goes towards buying intermediate goods or services as inputs? ”. Columns (5) and
(6) report the results from Question 2: “How often the output is used by clients as intermediate good? ”.
Columns (3) and (5) report the demeaned paper-trail score, along with significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, of the difference of the responses from the median (3), indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. The
higher the scale the higher the paper-trail intensity. Panel B classifies paper-trail scale into three levels:
Low (L), Medium (M), and High (H). The correlation of the paper-trail scale with the tax-evasion amount
and lambda is provided.

                                             Panel A: Paper Trail Statistics
                                                                    High Question Scale = High Paper Trail
                                                                Question 1: Use of        Question 2: Output
                                                               Intermediate Goods           is Intermediate
                                                                    as Inputs                     Good
                                     (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)
                                    Tax
                                                     λ           Scale         Intensity     Scale     Intensity
                                   Evasion
     Medicine                       32,548         2.35         0.382*            M        -0.412**       L
     Law                            30,979         2.40        -1.049***          L        -0.169**       M
     Engineering & Science          29,565         2.52          0.048            M         0.555*        H
     Education                      27,116         2.69        -0.781***          L        -0.474**       L
     Media & Entertainment          20,349         2.23        -0.837***          L        -0.278**       L
     Lodging & Tourism              17,237         2.06        0.540**            H        -0.263**       M
     Accounting & Fin. Services     16,727         1.82        -0.893***          L        -1.105***      L
     Business Services & Trade      16,665         1.98        -0.948***          L          0.105        M
     Construction & Transport       12,862         1.95        0.698***           H        0.340**        H
     Retail                         11,855         1.60        0.804***           H          0.316        M
     Manufacturing                  7,271          1.42        1.382***           H        0.778**        H
     Personal Services              6,374          1.44          0.257            M        -0.368***      L
     Farming                        6,121          1.51        0.593***           H         0.684*        H
     Corr. with Tax Evasion                                     -0.521                      -0.345
     Corr. with λ                                               -0.568                      -0.311

                                  Panel B: Average of Tax Evasion by Input Ranking
                                                                  Input-Paper-                Output-Paper-
                                                                  Trail Ranking               Trail Ranking
     Tax Evasion In:                                            Euros          Multiple     Euros      Multiple
     Low Paper Trail                                            22,367           2.22       20,623       2.11
     Medium Paper Trail                                         22,829           2.10       19,184       2.01
     High Paper Trail                                           11,069           1.70       16,183       1.99




                                                          59
Table 12: Enforcements
The unit of observation in the table is the tax office district. Tax-enforcement data are from the year 2011
and observed at a daily frequency. Cases are assigned by the central tax office, based on an automatic
formula. Panel A presents summary statistics. Closed cases are the sum of cases closed by the tax office
during the year. Amount assessed is the total value (in euros) of assessments for the year. One tax office
has an assessment sum 10 times larger than the other. This observation is winsorized to the second-highest
value. Percent self-employed is the percent of tax filers who are either merchants or self-employed in the
tax files. The wealth proxy is a variable constructed based on the presumed value of real estate, in the
jurisdiction of the tax office; it provides a relative ranking and has no cardinal meaning. In Panel B, the
dependent variable in columns (1)-(6) is the number of closed cases. In Panel C, in columns (7)-(9) the
dependent variable is the average assessment per closed case and in columns (10)-(12) is total assessments
by tax office. All columns present OLS results of the elasticities (logs) of the the dependent variables,
except columns (4)-(6) which report results from a Poisson model. In columns (3), (6), (9), and (12) we
use the modified Gram-Schmidt procedure of Golub & Van Loan (1996) to orthogonalize the wealth and
self-employment variables, due to high correlation. Robust standard errors are in brackets. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

     Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                   Mean        St.Deviation    Skewness    Min.   Median           Max.         Obs.
     Closed Cases                933.0             859.3           2.16      1       742            6,267        235
     Assessments               2,124,272         4,880,819         11.5     40    1,268,537      68,700,000      226
     Assessed/Close              3,098            20,604           14.9    12.0     1,517         311,044        226
     Taxfilers                  23,851             18,305          1.03    676     19,083          90,532        235
     % Self Employed             0.192             0.060           3.73    0.11     0.181           0.651        235
     Wealth Proxy                10.68              4.64           1.08     4.5      8.94           27.48        235

     Panel B: Analysis of Enforcements, Cases Closed
     Dep. Variable:                             Ln Closes                                  Closes - Possion Model
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
     Taxfilers                  0.990***         1.015***       1.015**                   Taxfilers is absorbed
                                [0.0645]         [0.0684]       [0.0684]                  as exposure variable.
     (Ortho-)%Self-Employed     1.049***          -6.021*      0.299***            4.384***      -0.0366      0.236***
                                 [0.233]          [3.370]       [0.0411]            [0.832]       [1.840]     [0.0319]
     (Ortho-)Wealth              0.227*           -1.586*       0.0729*            0.00911      -0.0361**      0.0373
                                 [0.118]          [0.877]       [0.0432]          [0.00680]      [0.0177]     [0.0285]
     (Ortho-)%SE*Wealth                           0.609**       0.0717**                         0.231**      0.0831**
                                                  [0.292]       [0.0344]                         [0.0903]     [0.0325]
     Constant                  -8.935***           11.84       -3.504***          -4.202***     -3.360***    -3.253***
                                 [0.959]          [9.781]        [0.687]            [0.164]       [0.329]     [0.0384]
     R2 /Pseudo R2                 0.741           0.744           0.744            0.271          0.293        0.293

     Panel C: Analysis of Enforcements, Assessments
     Dep. Variable:                       Ln (Assessment / Close)                             Ln Assessments
                                    (7)             (8)             (9)             (10)            (11)         (12)
     Taxfilers                  0.290***         0.261***      0.261**             0.224*          0.176         0.176
                                [0.0647]         [0.0678]      [0.0678]            [0.134]        [0.135]       [0.135]
     Closes                                                                       1.065***       1.082***      1.082***
                                                                                   [0.154]        [0.151]       [0.151]
     (Ortho-)%Self-Employed     0.996***           8.462       0.256***           0.928***         9.000       0.232***
                                 [0.262]          [5.988]      [0.0560]            [0.265]        [6.097]      [0.0628]
     (Ortho)-Wealth              0.0451            1.958        0.0255             0.0298          2.098        0.0193
                                 [0.103]          [1.507]      [0.0387]            [0.118]        [1.529]      [0.0430]
     (Ortho-)%SE*Wealth                           -0.642        -0.0757                           -0.696        -0.082
                                                  [0.505]      [0.0595]                           [0.515]      [0.0607]
     Constant                       1.024          -20.9       4.728***             1.621         -21.97       5.031***
                                   [1.194]        [17.64]       [0.692]            [1.684]        [17.89]       [0.628]
     R2 /Pseudo R2                 0.203           0.211           0.211            0.801          0.803        0.803


                                                              60
Table 13: Tax-Evasion and Parliamentarians’ Occupational Backgrounds
The table reports the distribution of the occupational backgrounds of Parliament members in Greece
(2009). The occupational background information was hand collected from the members’ official websites.
Industries are sorted on average tax evasion in euros (in descending order), calculated as the average of the
estimates from specifications (1)-(3) of Table 8. Column 4 presents the percentage of parliament members in
each occupation, and column 5 presents the cumulative density. We exclude lawyers as the natural default
profession for politicians.

                                             (1)          (2)      (3)     (4)         (5)
                                         Tax Evasion       λ        N    Density   Cum. Density
           Medicine                        32,548         2.35     40     0.174       0.174
           Engineering & Science           29,565         2.52     43     0.187       0.361
           Education                       27,116         2.69     28     0.122       0.483
           Media & Entertainment           20,349         2.23     31     0.135       0.617
           Lodging & Tourism               17,237         2.06      3     0.013       0.630
           Accounting & Fin. Services      16,727         1.82     40     0.174       0.804
           Business Services               16,665         1.98     20     0.087       0.891
           Construction                    12,862         1.95      7     0.030       0.922
           Retail                          11,855         1.60      3     0.013       0.935
           Manufacturing                    7,271         1.42      1     0.004       0.939
           Personal Services                6,374         1.44      5     0.022       0.961
           Farming                          6,121         1.51      8     0.035       0.996
           Other                              -             -       1     0.004       1.000
                                                                  230     1.000
           Law (excluded)                   30,979        2.40     70




                                                     61
Appendix: Reproducibility Exercise in US Household Debt Data

In this appendix, we implement an illustrative exercise using data from the U.S. Survey of
Consumer Finance (SCF) to demonstrate that our method is reproducible. In the United
States, formal lenders do not provide credit on hidden income; however, people underreport
income in surveys. Using consumption-to-income relationships, Hurst, Li & Pugsley (2014)
find that self-employed survey participants underreport income by 25%. We use Hurst et al.
(2014) as a benchmark exercise to examine whether we can reproduce hidden-income using
a different dataset, the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), by applying our debt method.
       We apply a simple version of our method, a debt-burden rule whereby lenders will not
offer credit to an applicant whose monthly debt payments exceed a threshold percent of
monthly income. The threshold that lenders apply varies according to whether the household
is a homeowner or renter. Thus, we differentiate households by home ownership and apply
two different ratios. For homeowners, we employ the so-called Ability-to-Pay Rule of the
US Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, which states that for a mortgage to be deemed
a “qualified mortgage”, post-loan debt-servicing obligations cannot be larger than 43% of
income.30 For renters, a typical threshold rule is that non-housing debt servicing obligations
should not be more than 20% of income.31 We apply these rules to uncover hidden income
as a simple inversion; we divide debt payments reported in the SCF by the appropriate rule
(43% or 20%) to generate a debt-burden estimate of true income. By definition, if households
are not maxed out on debt, the rule will give a conservative estimate of true income, and,
thus, will understate hidden income.32
       Panel A of appendix Table A8 presents debt payment and income summary statistics
  30
     See http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201312 cfpb mortgagerules.pdf.
This is often called the “back-end ratio” in mortgage parlance. The standard used to be 36%; however, we
use the new, higher ratio to be conservative.
  31
     In the US, this ratio can be called the “gap ratio”, measuring the amount of that debt-servicing gap
that is not mortgage related for potential home-buyers. The gap ratio standard is 15% (Los Angeles Times,
January 27, 2002). Yahoo Finance (“7 Signs Your Credit Card Debt Is About to Implode”; January 11, 2013)
advocates having revolving credit payments less than 15%. We use a conservative 20% (Credit Sesame).
  32
     If the income resulting from this estimation procedure is less than reported income, we assume the
household is not underreporting income. This also may be conservative.


                                                   62
(weighted using the SCF survey weights) for households in the United States in the 2001,
2004, and 2007 SCFs. Monthly payments comprise 26.1% of monthly income for the self-
employed. Panel B reports our reproducibility exercise findings. The main finding of this
exercise is reported in Panel B, that the underreporting rate in the SCF is 19.1% for the
self-employed, with a confidence band around this estimate ranging from 15% to 23%. This
magnitude is quite similar to the 25% tax evasion rate of Hurst, Li & Pugsley (2014).




                                            63
Appendix Tables

Table A1: Semi-Formality and Credit Depth Info
The table presents the percentage of firms underreporting sales and the average of reported sales are from
the 2002-2005 Enterprise Surveys and measures of semi-formality across 33 countries ranked on the size of
their informal sector according to Djankov et al. (2010). Credit info refers to an index of credit depth of
information index (World Bank (2005)) that measures rules affecting the scope, accessibility, and quality of
credit information available through public or private credit registries (0=low to 6=high).

                                   Firms          Average sales
                                                                  Size of Inf. Sector   Credit Info
                               Underreporting       reported
             Brazil               73.58%             67.35%            35.83%               5
             Dom. Republic        70.33%             50.73%            34.17%               5
             Turkey               62.72%             63.66%            36.25%               5
             Panama               50.36%             62.88%            27.50%               6
             Mexico               48.77%             76.26%            36.67%               6
             Georgia              47.90%             76.52%            32.50%               0
             India                47.87%             73.07%            29.17%               2
             Argentina            42.56%             82.53%            34.58%               6
             Russia               37.35%             83.38%            37.50%               0
             Uruguay              36.96%             85.34%            28.75%               5
             Ecuador              35.48%             75.95%            31.67%               4
             Greece               34.86%            88.95%             27.92%               4
             Bulgaria             31.82%             86.51%            31.25%               4
             Colombia             30.43%             82.93%            28.33%               5
             Czech Republic       29.73%             88.24%            19.17%               5
             Lithuania            29.60%             87.50%            16.67%               6
             Hungary              28.91%             88.65%            27.50%               5
             Poland               28.67%             90.21%            25.83%               4
             Latvia               25.57%             90.45%            24.17%               3
             Slovenia             25.56%             88.22%            17.08%               3
             Portugal             25.10%             91.83%            21.67%               5
             Croatia              24.86%             90.37%            30.42%               0
             Ukraine              24.60%             87.67%            37.08%               0
             Romania              22.99%             91.49%            25.42%               5
             South Africa         21.96%             90.40%            29.58%               5
             Kazakhstan           21.20%             90.46%            33.33%               0
             Slovak Republic      20.68%             92.00%            20.83%               3
             Jamaica              20.55%             88.20%            37.50%               0
             Armenia              15.98%             94.03%            31.25%               3
             Germany              15.86%             94.31%            17.50%               6
             Chile                15.12%             91.81%            15.00%               5
             Spain                12.67%             96.33%            21.25%               5
             Ireland              11.02%             96.16%            16.25%               5




                                                    64
Table A2:Variables, Definitions
The table presents a comprehensive list of variables used in analysis with detailed definitions. The list
includes variables from loan applications and variables constructed from the tax authority dataset.

 A.Income & Other Debt (in euros)
 Reported Income: After-tax (disposable)income of the applicant as shown in the tax-return form in the year of application.
 Credit Capacity: Total debt outstanding immediately following the loan-application decision.
 Debt Outstanding: Total debt outstanding at the time of application.
 Mean Monthly Payments: Monthly payments of approved mortgage.

 B. Occupation Information
 Type of Employment (WW or SE): Employment classification (self-employed, wage-worker). We exclude retirees,
 students, unemployed and other.
 Occupation: Description of occupation according to internal detailed classification.
 Employer : Name of the company that employs the applicant (available only for mortgages).
 Years in Job: Number of years that the applicant is working under the same employer (wage workers) or is employed in
 the same occupation (self-employed).

 C. Credit History
 Agree to Credit Check : Takes the value 1 if the applicant agrees to credit check, and 0 otherwise.
 Years in Address: Number of years that the primary applicant resides at the same address.
 Years of Coop. with Bank : Number of years of the existing relationship of the applicant with the bank.
 Existing Bank Customer : Takes the value 1 if the applicant is a current customer of the bank, and 0 otherwise.
 Delinquent Existing Bank Customer : Takes the value 1 if the applicant is a customer of the bank but has a delayed
 payment in the last 6 months, and 0 otherwise.
 Other Banks: Indicator of the existing relationship of the applicant with other banks.
 Previous Customer : Takes the value 1 if the applicant was a customer of the bank in the past, and 0 otherwise.
 Previous Homeowner : Takes the value 1 if the mortgage applicant is a homeowner, and 0 otherwise.
 Deposits: Total amount of deposits of the applicant in the bank. It includes amounts in any accounts the applicant holds
 with the bank (checking, savings, time-deposits, investment accounts).
 Home-ownership: Takes the value 1 if the applicant is a homeowner, and 0 otherwise.

 D.Demographics
 Marital Status: Takes the value 1 if the applicant is married, and 0 otherwise.
 Number of Dependants: The number of the applicant’s dependents at the time of the application.
 Age: Age of applicant at the time of the application.
 Address: The address of the applicant’s primary residence.

 E.Loan Characteristics
 Type of Application: Indicator of new loan application or restructuring.
 Product Description/Code: The description and the code of the product.
 Purpose of Loan: The purpose of the loan according to internal classification (MA only).
 Requested Amount: The requested amount of the loan.
 Interest Rate: The interest rate of the loan and its type (fixed or floating), spread.
 Maturity: The maturity of the loan in months.
 Duration: Duration of loan (in months).
 Has Collateral with Bank : The applicant has posted collateral with the bank.
 Loan To Value: Ratio of the approved mortgage relative to the value of the real estate property. Available only for
 mortgages and calculated only for approved applications.
 Solo Application: Indicator that takes the value 1 if the application has no co-signers, and 0 otherwise.

 F.Soft Information
 Real Estate Value, Zip Level: The median “presumed real estate value of the region where the primary applicant resides
 (specified by zip code). “Presumed real estate values are periodically published by tax authorities and used to determine
 real estate taxes. The values here come from the most recent release published in 2007.
 Car Value, Mean Zip Level: The mean value of automobiles by zip code, as calculated from the car-loan dataset of the
 bank.
 Car Loan-to-Value by Zip: Average loan-to-values of new cars by zip-code.
 Tax Cell: Each tax cell is defined at the zip-code level (1,450 zip-codes) broken down into national income deciles and into
 the four occupations classes of the tax authority classification.
 Lag Income Growth by Tax Cell: Per-capital annual income growth of the prior year at the level of the zip code crossed
 with the four occupation-levels and the 10 income deciles.
 Income Risk by Tax Cell: Measure of the variability of income growth, defined as the standard deviation of income
 divided by the square root of the number of people in the zip-income decile-occupation cell.
Table A3: Recreation of Credit Grade
Three OLS regressions are reported. The dependent variable is the credit grade of the bank. We do not
report coefficients for proprietary reasons, but instead we report the partial-R2 and p-values. The point is to
show the overall variation explained by the different demographics. The sample is all consumer loan-product
applications (not including homes and vehicles), both accepted and rejected, from 2003-2009.

                                               (1)                          (2)                       (3)
                                     Partial-R2      P-value      Partial-R2      P-value   Partial-R2      P-value
       Income                         0.0044          0.00         0.0028          0.00      0.0028          0.00
       Debt Outstanding Other         0.0005          0.00         0.0001          0.00      0.0001          0.00
       Debt Outstanding at Bank       0.0019          0.00         0.0008          0.00      0.0008          0.00
       Solo Application               0.0006          0.00         0.0002          0.00      0.0002          0.00
       Grace period Requested         0.0007          0.00         0.0001          0.00      0.0001          0.00
       Years in Job                   0.0196          0.00         0.0096          0.00      0.0089          0.00
       Requested Amount               0.0009          0.00         0.0003          0.00      0.0002          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 1     0.0000          0.34         0.0000          0.44      0.0000          0.35
       Requested Duration Level 2     0.0039          0.00         0.0030          0.00      0.0030          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 3     0.0008          0.00         0.0006          0.00      0.0006          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 4     0.0047          0.00         0.0036          0.00      0.0036          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 5     0.0010          0.00         0.0007          0.00      0.0007          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 6     0.0059          0.00         0.0047          0.00      0.0047          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 7     0.0013          0.00         0.0010          0.00      0.0010          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 8     0.0063          0.00         0.0056          0.00      0.0056          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 9     0.0045          0.00         0.0039          0.00      0.0039          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 10    0.0082          0.00         0.0071          0.00      0.0072          0.00
       Requested Duration Level 11    0.0013          0.00         0.0007          0.00      0.0007          0.00
       Bank Relationship Years        0.0117          0.00         0.0081          0.00      0.0082          0.00
       Relationship with Bank         0.0218          0.00         0.0252          0.00      0.0254          0.00
       Age                            0.0157          0.00         0.0219          0.00      0.0224          0.00
       Gender                         0.0009          0.00         0.0004          0.00      0.0003          0.00
       Single                         0.0020          0.00         0.0018          0.00      0.0018          0.00
       Married                        0.0067          0.00         0.0072          0.00      0.0073          0.00
       Divorced                       0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.06      0.0000          0.11
       Widowed                        0.0002          0.00         0.0003          0.00      0.0003          0.00
       Renter                         0.0419          0.00         0.0384          0.00      0.0377          0.00
       Guest                          0.0125          0.00         0.0120          0.00      0.0122          0.00
       Other Housing                  0.0158          0.00         0.0137          0.00      0.0137          0.00
       Num. of dependents 1           0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.64      0.0000          0.80
       Num. of dependents 2           0.0000          0.62         0.0000          0.01      0.0000          0.00
       Num. of dependents 3           0.0000          0.06         0.0000          0.30      0.0000          0.32
       Num. of dependents 4           0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.00      0.0000          0.00
       Num. of dependents 5           0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.00      0.0000          0.00
       Year 2004                      0.0000          0.00         0.0002          0.00      0.0001          0.00
       Year 2005                      0.0002          0.00         0.0005          0.00      0.0005          0.00
       Year 2006                      0.0002          0.00         0.0011          0.00      0.0011          0.00
       Year 2007                      0.0006          0.00         0.0018          0.00      0.0018          0.00
       Year 2008                      0.0044          0.00         0.0074          0.00      0.0074          0.00
       Year 2009                      0.0439          0.00         0.0481          0.00      0.0477          0.00
       App. Month Feb                 0.0001          0.00         0.0000          0.00      0.0000          0.00
       App. Month Mar                 0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.05      0.0000          0.04
       App. Month Apr                 0.0000          0.01         0.0000          0.45      0.0000          0.56
       App. Month May                 0.0000          0.00         0.0000          0.45      0.0000          0.62
       App. Month Jun                 0.0000          0.02         0.0000          0.16      0.0000          0.23
       App. Month Jul                 0.0000          0.14         0.0000          0.35      0.0000          0.44
       App. Month Aug                 0.0000          0.16         0.0000          0.12      0.0000          0.19
       App. Month Sep                 0.0000          0.10         0.0000          0.00      0.0000          0.00
       App. Month Oct                 0.0004          0.00         0.0004          0.00      0.0004          0.00
       App. Month Nov                 0.0013          0.00         0.0012          0.00      0.0012          0.00
       App. Month Dec                 0.0020          0.00         0.0020          0.00      0.0020          0.00




                                                             66
              Table A3: Recreation of Credit Grade (continued)
                                          (1)                        (2)                       (3)
                                Partial-R2      P-value    Partial-R2      P-value   Partial-R2      P-value
Accounting & Fin. Services       0.0123           0.00      0.0052          0.00      0.0036          0.00
Business Services                0.0000           0.00      0.0000          0.92      0.0000          0.00
Construction                                                0.0024          0.00      0.0008          0.00
Education                                       0.565202    0.0256          0.00      0.0242          0.00
Engineering & Science                                       0.0112          0.00      0.0067          0.00
Farming                                                     0.0019          0.00      0.0014          0.00
Law                                                         0.0050          0.00      0.0025          0.00
Lodging & Tourism                                           0.0195          0.00      0.0198          0.00
Manufacturing                                               0.0050          0.00      0.0041          0.00
Media & Entertainment                                       0.0009          0.00      0.0007          0.00
Medicine                                                    0.0116          0.00      0.0096          0.00
Personal Services                                           0.0046          0.00      0.0042          0.00
Retail                                                      0.0394          0.00      0.0392          0.00
Self-employed (SE)                                          0.0007          0.00      0.0000          0.00
SE*Accounting & Fin. Services                                                         0.0001          0.00
SE*Business Services                                                                  0.0001          0.00
SE*Construction                                                                       0.0009          0.00
SE*Education                                                                          0.0000          0.30
SE*Engineering & Science                                                              0.0000          0.01
SE*Farming                                                                            0.0000          0.02
SE*Law                                                                                0.0000          0.00
SE*Logding & Tourism                                                                  0.0017          0.00
SE*Manufacturing                                                                      0.0000          0.03
SE*Media & Entertainment                                                              0.0000          0.01
SE*Medicine                                                                           0.0001          0.00
SE*Personal Services                                                                  0.0001          0.00
SE*Retail                                                                             0.0012          0.00
Total R2                         0.5652                     0.6623                    0.6629
Table A4: Summary Statistics of Samples
The table reports statistics (means, medians, and standard deviations) for variables of the three samples
used in our analysis. Columns 1-3 report summary statistics for term loans, columns 4-6 for mortgages term
loans, and columns 7-9 for overdraft term loans.

      Sample:               Term Loans                        Mortgages                    Overdraft Facilities
                         (Non-homeowners)                   (Homeowners)              (New Checking Customers)
                       (1)     (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)      (6)            (7)      (8)        (9)
                     Mean Median St.Dev.              Mean     Median St.Dev.         Mean Median St.Dev.
 Reported Income     13,209 11,500     13,609         17,600   14,585   13,340        21,780 18,706        14,834
 Total Credit        11,448   6,166    22,241        112,739 90,000 116,162           12,472    5,000      34,212
 Prior Debt           5,626     0      20,780        18,814       0     78,694         7,304       0       34,372
 Approved Loan       5,822    4,308     5,066        93,925    80,000   77,561         5,168    5,000       3,306
 Credit Grade         89.3     88.0     10.0          136.3     136.0    22.0           90.1     91.0        7.3
 Monthly Income      1,101     958     1,134          1,467     1,215    1,112         1,815    1,559       1,236
 Mon. Debt Paym.       265     163       457           944       561     1,727          360      200         720
 Monthly Rate        0.0095 0.0103     0.0016        0.0034    0.0031   0.0010




                                                   68
     Table A5: Summary Statistics of Constrained Sample
     The table reports summary statistics (means, medians, and standard deviations) of variables for the constrained sample, defined as the term-loan
     applicants, whose approved loan amount is lower than the amount requested. Means and standard deviations are reported for self-employed and
     wage workers, separately. Means are also provided for the 13 industries used in the analysis.

                                                        Reported    Credit    Credit     Self                     Lag       Real Estate
                                                         Income    Capacity   Grade    Employed    IncomeRisk    Growth    Wealth (Index)
               All                          Mean         17,253     12,520      92.4      0.22        0.0256      0.0085        1,165
                                            Median       14,400     7,900       92.0      0.00        0.0096      0.0054        1,021
                                         St.Deviation    14,095     27,056       9.1      0.41        0.0772      0.0284         477

               Wage Workers                 Mean         17,575     12,341      92.7      0.00        0.0154      0.0095        1,195
                                         St.Deviation    13,277     26,561      9.2       0.00        0.0506      0.0210         484

               Self-Employed                Mean         16,083     13,171      91.1      1.00        0.0639      0.0048        1,055
                                         St.Deviation    16,681     28,771      8.8       0.00        0.1301      0.0463         436




69
               Accounting & Finance         Mean         20,230     18,713      95.9      0.45        0.0305      0.0100        1,258
               Bus. Services & Trade        Mean         18,481     13,720      92.9      0.13        0.0213      0.0094        1,231
               Constr. & Transport          Mean         14,048     10,391      91.4      0.34        0.0353      0.0063        1,063
               Education                    Mean         20,003     14,978     101.8      0.06        0.0238      0.0120        1,193
               Engineering & Science        Mean         21,580     19,312      99.7      0.43        0.0373      0.0096        1,263
               Farming                      Mean         11,249      7,383      87.1      0.57        0.0273      0.0078         787
               Law & Order                  Mean         18,908     13,521      97.6      0.04        0.0180      0.0075        1,104
               Lodging & Restaurants        Mean         13,939     11,063      90.4      0.50        0.0580      0.0063        1,075
               Manufacturing                Mean         17,745     12,468     91.0       0.32        0.0317      0.0099         974
               Media & Entertainment        Mean         20,393     17,356      91.6      0.37        0.0342      0.0090        1,456
               Medicine                     Mean         19,969     15,709      96.3      0.11        0.0200      0.0099        1,247
               Personal Services            Mean         17,474     13,561      96.0      0.19        0.0209      0.0083        1,119
               Retail                       Mean         15,874     13,974      89.8      0.29        0.0161      0.0080        1,221
Table A6: True Income Estimated of the Self-employed in the Overdraft Sample
The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1) and (2)] from equation (5). Columns (1a) and (2a)
present lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of the coefficient on income for the self-employed divided by the
coefficient for the wage worker. The sample consists of applicants who have overdraft protection in their
checking accounts (overdraft sample). The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the sum of
outstanding debt and the approved loan. Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the
tax return. W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate the applicant’s employment type.
The vector of control variables includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax
cell (IncomeRisk), the per-capita annual income growth by tax cell (Lag(Inc.Growth)), and the median
presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence (RealEst.W ealth). All specifications
include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Model (2)
includes additionally wealth and income controls. The last row reports the tax-evasion rate, defined as
Y T rue −Y R
   Y T rue
             . Observations are weighted to be population-representative using the tax authority distribution.
Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from
unity.

               Dependent Variable: Credit Capacity = Outstanding Debt + Approved Loan
                                                (1)          (1.a)       (2)           (2.a)
                                            Estimate           λ     Estimate            λ
               Income*Wage Worker            0.1982**                 0.1968**
                                             [0.0869]                 [0.0876]
               Income*SE                    0.5872***        2.96*   0.5658***         2.87*
                                             [0.2137]                 [0.2177]
               IncomeRisk                                              -2,110
                                                                       [4,161]
               SE*IncomeRisk                                            8,932
                                                                      [30,383]
               Lag(IncomeGrowth)                                       12,229
                                                                      [20,181]
               SE*Lag(IncomeGrowth)                                    25,838
                                                                      [96,644]
               Real Estate Wealth                                      0.1867
                                                                      [0.8379]
               SE*Real Estate Wealth                                    5.129
                                                                      [10.039]
               Branch F.E.                     Yes                      Yes
               Year F.E.                       Yes                      Yes
               Adj. R2                        0.074                    0.070
               Tax-Evasion Rate                          66.20%                       65.10%




                                                        70
Table A7: Tax-Evasion Estimates by Geography with Flexible (by Industry
group) Sensitivities of Credit to Income
The table presents estimated coefficients [col. (1) and (2)] from equation (5) lambdas (λ), defined as the ratio of the coefficient
on income for the self-employed divided by the coefficient for the wage worker [col. 1a) and (2a)] for applicants in urban
and rural areas. The “Urban” columns include applicants inhabiting in Athens, Thessaloniki and cities with population
higher than 100,000 people and the “Rural” columns all other areas.The sample consists of applicants, whose approved loan
amount is lower than the amount requested (constrained sample). The dependent variable is credit capacity, defined as the
sum of outstanding debt and the approved loan Income refers to the after-tax reported income verified by the tax return.
W ageW orker and SE are dummy variables that indicate the employment type of the applicant. The vector of control variables
includes the standard error of Log(income) over the prior 5 years by tax cell (IncomeRisk), the per-capita annual income
growth by tax cell (Lag(IncomeGrowth)) and the median presumed real estate value of the zip code of the applicant’s residence
(RealEstateW ealth). All specifications include 50 credit-grade buckets as risk fixed effects, industry interacted with self-
employment fixed effects, branch fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Observations are weighted to be population-representative
using the tax authority distribution. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are presented in brackets. Significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Significance of lambdas refers to statistical difference from unity.

                                                                             Urban                          Rural
                                                                        (1)           (1a)             (2)          (2a)
                                                                     Estimate          λ            Estimate         λ
         Income*Wage Worker Interacted with:
         *Construction, Engineering & Manufacturing                  0.3537**                       0.385***
                                                                     (0.1742)                        [0.136]
                  *Lodging, Tourism and Retail                      0.3613***                       0.339***
                                                                     [0.0578]                       [0.0607]
                       *Professional Services                       0.3613***                       0.339***
                                                                     [0.0633]                       [0.0590]
         Income*Self-Employed Interacted with:
         *Construction, Engineering & Manufacturing                 0.5282***         1.49          0.554***        1.40
                                                                     [0.1342]                        [0.107]
                  *Lodging, Tourism and Retail                      0.6427***       1.77***         0.662***      2.08***
                                                                     [0.0888]                       [0.0681]
                       *Professional Services                       0.7277***       1.89***         0.698***      1.96***
                                                                     [0.0803]                       [0.0826]
         Self Employed (SE)                                          -3,237*                         -103.3
                                                                      [1,913]                        [1,686]
         IncomeRisk                                                    1,491                          2,287
                                                                      [4,279]                        [3,775]
         SE*IncomeRisk                                                 9,099                         -164.1
                                                                      [9,063]                        [4,332]
         Lag(Income Growth)                                           28,362                          1,024
                                                                     [20,933]                       [13,556]
         SE*Lag(Income Growth)                                       -14,406                          9,374
                                                                     [22,986]                       [14,768]
         Real Estate Wealth                                          0.6221*                         0.796*
                                                                     [0.3725]                        [0.425]
         SE*Real Estate Wealth                                        1.4321                         -1.059
                                                                     [1.0930]                        [0.870]
         Credit Grade F.E.                                             Yes                            Yes
         Industry*SE F.E.                                              Yes                            Yes
         Branch F.E.:                                                  Yes                            Yes
         Year F.E.:                                                    Yes                            Yes
         Adj. R2                                                      0.1837                         0.1441
Table A8: Estimates of Hidden Income in the US Survey of Consumer Finances
The table presents self-employed summary statistics of household income and debt-servicing payments for
the United States across the SCF waves 2001, 2004, and 2007, weighted to be nationally representative.
The right part of the table presents the underreporting rate in the population, following Hurst et al. (2014)
by way of the debt-burden rules. The debt-burden rule threshold is that debt can be no larger than 43% of
income for homeowners and 20% of income for renters. Reported in brackets is the standard error from a
test that the estimate equals zero underreporting.

                               United States: Self-Employed(household level)

                    Monthly      Monthly Debt      Ratio (Payments           Underreporting Rate
                    Income      Serv. Payments       to Income)          (% of Income Under-reported)
                      (1)             (2)                 (3)                       (4)
           Mean       12,488         1,904                0.261          Estimate    0.191     [0.019]
          Median       5,717         1,200                                Lower      0.153
    St. Deviation     48,220         3,800                                Upper      0.229
                                      Number of Observations: 2,053




                                                     72
