                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE GLOBAL PRODUCTIVITY SLUMP:
                      COMMON AND COUNTRY-SPECIFIC FACTORS

                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                          Donghyun Park
                                           Kwanho Shin

                                       Working Paper 21556
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21556


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




This paper was prepared as background material for the Asian Development Outlook 2015 Update.
We thank Yooran Shin and Jisoo Kim for their excellent research assistance, and the Asian Development
Bank for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Barry Eichengreen, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Global Productivity Slump: Common and Country-Specific Factors
Barry Eichengreen, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 21556
September 2015
JEL No. E0,E1,O3

                                           ABSTRACT

Productivity growth is slowing around the world. In 2014, according to the Conference Board’s Total
Economy Data Base, the growth of total factor productivity (TFP) hovered around zero for the third
straight year, down from 1 per cent in 1996-2006 and ½ per cent in 2007-12. In this paper we identify
previous episodes of sharp and sustained decelerations in TFP growth using data for a large sample
of countries and years. TFP slumps are ubiquitous: we find as many as 77 such episodes, depending
on definition, in low-, middle- and high-income countries. Low levels of educational attainment,
unusually high investment rates and weak political systems are among the significant country-specific
correlates of TFP slumps, while increases in risk (higher TED spreads) and energy-price shocks are
among the significant global factors.


Barry Eichengreen                                 Kwanho Shin
Department of Economics                           Korea University
University of California, Berkeley                Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall 3880                               Seoul 136-701
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Korea
and NBER                                          khshin@korea.ac.kr
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Donghyun Park
Economics and Research Department
Asian Development Bank
Manila, Philippines
dpark@adb.org
      1. Introduction
        Productivity growth is slowing around the world. In 2014, according to the
Conference Board’s Total Economy Data Base, the growth of total factor productivity (TFP)
hovered around zero for the third straight year, down from 1 per cent in 1996-2006 and ½ per
cent in 2007-12. This is one of the most disturbing and, no doubt, important phenomena
affecting the world economy.
         In seeking to understand this problem, it is tempting to invoke the global financial
crisis, which disrupted the availability of credit, which is important for innovation, and which
slowed the growth of international trade, with which increases in productivity and technical
efficiency are associated historically. But the slump in TFP growth is widespread; it is not
limited to or even differentially evident in countries most directly affected by the financial
crisis. In the advanced countries, where the deceleration in productivity growth predates the
financial crisis, some observers have invoked the hypothesis of secular stagnation, suggesting
that productivity growth has slowed because of a decline in innovation or, possibly,
inadequate spending on the demand side (Summers 2014).
        But the decline in TFP growth is not limited to the advanced countries plausibly
subject to this secular-stagnation problem. TFP growth has also been falling in China. It is
negative in Brazil and Mexico. For these countries it is tempting to invoke the so-called
middle-income trap, where growth, including TFP growth, is thought to slow as former low-
income countries achieve middle-income status and are no longer able to boost productivity
simply by shifting labor from agriculture to manufacturing.
         Again, however, the deceleration in TFP growth is not limited to emerging markets
that have attained middle-income status. TFP growth in 2014 was barely positive in India. It
has declined and is near zero in a number of relatively poor countries that are still far from
middle-income status. TFP growth fell in Sub-Saharan Africa from 1999-2006 to 2007-2012
and again in 2013-14. It fell in Russia, Central Asia, Southeastern Europe and Latin America
as a whole.1 And, in addition, recall, there is the fact that the phenomenon is not limited to
developing and emerging markets; it afflicts the advanced economies as well.
        Interpreting this phenomenon is not easy. While it may be possible to get some
purchase on the explanatory power of competing hypotheses by comparing and contrasting
the extent of the TFP growth slowdown in different countries in recent years, this approach
has limitations. It is not possible to distinguish the importance of global and country-specific
factors, for example, since all countries experienced the same changes in the state of the
global economy in, say, 2014. Limiting one’s attention to the recent spate of TFP slumps
does not enable one to gauge to what extent current trends are unprecedented or have been
witnessed before. This approach does not permit more than crude conjectures about whether
the current productivity slump will persist.
        In this paper we seek to take advantage of the fact that there have been productivity
slumps before. We build a comprehensive data base of a large number of countries, focusing
on episodes in which the rate of TFP growth has declined. We look at the distribution of per-
capita incomes at which these slumps have occurred. We consider the distribution of TFP
slumps over time. We then examine the global and country-specific correlates of these TFP
slumps. Finally we inquire into the question of persistence; specifically, we ask whether it is
possible to find cases where TFP growth rates, having declined, accelerate subsequently.


1
    Again according to the estimates of the Conference Board.

                                                        2
        The study closest to ours is Ferriera et al. (2010). Using a different methodology than
ours, the authors identify breaks in TFP growth rates in a sample of 77 countries from 1950 to
2000. They find that breaks were mainly concentrated in the early 1970s in the advanced
countries but that they have been much more diverse in terms of timing in developing
countries. They interpret this as suggesting that slumps in TFP growth in the advanced
countries are mainly associated with external (global) factors – in particular, with energy
price shocks – whereas in developing countries TFP growth slowdowns are mainly
attributable to country-specific sources.
        The current paper is also related to our own earlier work on growth slowdowns
(Eichengreen, Park and Shin 2012). But where in that earlier work we were concerned with
slowdowns in the rate of growth of GDP, which can be rooted in slower growth of the capital
stock, slower growth of the labor force, slower technical progress and other factors, here we
focus exclusively on the rate of growth of TFP.2
        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the extensive if not
entirely conclusive literature on productivity slowdowns, much of which was motivated by
the productivity problems in the United States and to a lesser extent other advanced countries
in the 1970s. Sections 3 and 4 then describe our data and empirical analysis, respectively.
Section 4, in concluding, attempts to draw out the implications.
    2. Previous Literature
         A large literature considers possible sources of the sharp slowdown in productivity
growth affecting the U.S. economy in the 1970s. In an influential study summarizing the
author’s own extensive earlier research, Denison (1985) pointed to end of the reallocation of
labor from low productivity agriculture and self-employment to higher productivity jobs, in
manufacturing in particular, and to the negative impact of the early 1970s-recession on
productivity growth. The association between TFP growth and employment in
manufacturing is a well-known regularity, tracing back at least to Kuznets (1966). The
association of TFP growth slowdowns with recessions is more controversial. First, there is
the possibility that the decline in the level or rate of growth of TFP reflects mismeasurement
– that it is really a decline in the effective capital stock due to lower utilization that is not
captured by standard growth-accounting methods (Basu, Fernald and Kimball 2006). In
addition, there is the fact that not all recessions are associated with slower productivity
growth. The Great Depression of the 1930s famously saw an acceleration of TFP growth in
the United States (Field 2012), consistent with the recessions-as-reorganizations view (Hall
1991, Caballero and Hammour 1994).
        Subsequent authors emphasized the association between slower TFP growth and
macroeconomic volatility generally, focusing on variables like the level and variability of
inflation. Looking across countries, Lindbeck (1983) documented an association between
macroeconomic volatility and TFP growth in the 1970. That slowdown and the rise in
macroeconomic volatility certainty appear to coincide. But the hypothesis that the


2
 Where both Ferriera et al. (2010) and Eichengreen, Park and Shin (2012) look for significant breaks in the time
series behavior of GDP, we identify those breaks differently. In addition, Ferriera et al. construct TFP by
subtracting a weighted measure of investment from GDP, we use a more complex and hopefully more accurate
measure of TFP as estimated directly in subsequent versions of the Penn World Tables. An alternative measure
of TFP constructed by the Conference Board, referred to above, starts only in 1990. Our sensitivity analysis
confirms that TFP measures by the Penn World Tables and the Conference Board are quite consistent with each
other.

                                                       3
association is causal can be questioned, since other factors affecting the economy negatively
could have plausibly brought about slower TFP growth and higher inflation simultaneously.
        Jorgenson, Gollop and Fraumeni (1987) emphasized declining (or more slowly rising)
labor quality as a factor in the 1973-79 TFP growth slowdown. This period saw women and
young workers with less human capital enter the U.S. labor force, where they went
disproportionately into low-paying, relatively low productivity jobs. There may have also
been some decline in the quality of education in the United States beginning in the 1960s.
According to some authors, the observed decline in Standardized Achievement Test (SAT)
scores is indicative of this tendency. But the accuracy of those SAT-based measures has been
questioned. And whether this is properly viewed as an actual decline in TFP growth or
growing mismeasurement of labor input (when the latter is not adjusted for quality) is
debated.
        In a classic contribution, Jorgenson (1984) showed that energy prices can affect TFP
growth if technical progress is energy using (i.e. biased toward the use of energy). He
confirmed the existence of this bias for the U.S. but found that the magnitude of the effect
was small. A related literature explores the possibility that energy price volatility results in
the obsolescence of a portion of the existing capital and perhaps, along with it, a portion of
the stock of previously accumulated knowledge. However, Moomaw and Williams (1991)
looked across U.S. states, which vary in their energy intensity, and found no impact on
differential TFP growth slowdowns in the 1970s and after. Hulton, Robertson and Wykoff
(1987) looked directly at the price of used capital equipment and found little evidence of an
obsolescence effect.
        Information technology (IT) is a prominent suspect in the recent productivity
slowdown. Attributing a role to IT takes some ingenuity, however, since IT is popularly
credited for the acceleration in productivity growth, most markedly in the U.S. but more
generally, in 1995-2005 as well as being blamed for the subsequent slowdown. It could be
that the development and diffusion of new IT come in waves or clusters, where a first wave
was developed but not yet successfully deployed prior to 1995, while a second wave is being
developed but has not yet been commercially applied since 2005. Consistent with this view,
Fernald (2014) finds that the post-2004 slowdown in TFP growth in the U.S. is heavily
concentrated in sectors that use IT intensively or produce it.
        On the other hand, Carderelli, Roberto and Lusine Lusinyan (2015), looking across
U.S. states, find no differences between IT intensive and other states in the extent of the TFP
slowdown after 2005. Their analysis suggests, rather, that states with high educational
attainment have tended to have higher and faster growing TFP in recent years. In their earlier
study, Moomaw and Williams (1991) similarly found that differential state investments in
education significantly shaped states’ success in maintaining TFP growth.
        The literature on other countries is equally extensive. A prominent case in point is
Japan, where average TFP growth fell from 1.84% in the 1980s to 0.42 per cent in the 1990s
and 0.16 per cent in the first decade of the 20th century. Muto et al. (2013) emphasize the
role of financial disruptions in preventing firms with high-productivity projects from
accessing external finance. One might also point to the role of banks in keeping low-
productivity zombie firms alive. An awkward observation for this last hypothesis, however,
is that many of these zombie firms were in sectors like real estate, construction, retail and
wholesale, while the slowdown in TFP growth was most pronounced in manufacturing.
       Fukao and Kwon (2005) therefore examine the role of R&D spending on productivity
growth. There is some decline in R&D intensity in Japan, as elsewhere, starting in the early

                                                4
1990s, reflecting among other things weak demand growth, financial distress and credit-
market disruptions. Comin (2009) similarly notes that R&D expenditures stopped growing in
Japan in the 1990s, while the speed of diffusion of new technologies slowed down. More
generally, the slowdown in TFP growth in Japan appears to have been most pronounced in
firms and sectors with relatively low R&D intensity. Kuroda, Motohashi and Shimpo (2007)
blame Japanese underinvestment in IT for the failure of TFP growth to pick up after 1995 as
quickly as in the United States. They find that TFP growth was maintained in the 1990s in
Japan only in IT-using electrical machinery and communication services, “reflecting the IT
revolution.”
        As for the persistence of the TFP slump into the subsequent period when Japanese
investment in IT picked up, Nishimura and Shirai (2003) find some tendency for IT to have a
negative indirect effect on productivity. In the past, they argue, the technological and
managerial strengths of Japanese firms were based on learning by doing in the workplace.
But as knowledge management systems improve as a result of IT and knowledge is easily
transferred across international borders, Japan may no longer have the same advantage as
before.
        There is also some evidence for both Japan and Europe that the slump in TFP growth
is greatest for sectors and countries whose international transactions have been growing most
slowly. For Europe the evidence suggests that countries where the share of tradeables has
fallen by less have done better in terms of maintaining earlier rates of TFP growth.
        The literature on TFP growth in emerging markets is spottier, reflecting the
limitations of the data. Young (1994) and Krugman (1994) famously argued that the problem
of low TFP growth in East Asian emerging markets was of long standing, a conclusion
challenged on grounds of mismeasurement by Hsieh (2002). More generally, there is no
consensus on how TFP growth will develop in emerging markets, creating a temptation, as
Tsounta (2014) notes, to extrapolate the experience of the recent past. In projecting future
growth rates, Tsounta himself assumes that the rate of TFP growth experienced in the 2000-
12 period will continue to prevail in coming years.
        Other investigators have taken the available estimates at face value and considered
trends and fluctuations of TFP growth rates over time. Kim (2001) compares changes in TFP
growth between 1960-73 and 1973-94 across regions (advanced Europe and North America,
emerging Latin America, South Asia and East Asia alike). According to his tabulations,
every region other than South Asia and East Asia showed a marked decline between these
periods (where TFP growth in South Asia had been very low, barely positive, in 1960-73, and
where TFP growth in East Asia declined only slightly)
       What general conclusions are to be drawn from these patterns? We now turn to this
question, starting with some empirical regularities in the next section.
      3. Basic Patterns
        We take data on TFP growth from the Penn World Tables 8.1, the instalment that
covers the period ending in 2011. This is the second PWT release including estimates of
TFP.3
        We seek to isolate both episodes where TFP growth slows significantly and
persistently as well as episodes where it first slows significantly and persistently but then
recovers. Intuitively, the first set of TFP slumps is “permanent,” while the second is
3
    PWT 8.1 also includes an alternative “welfare-based” TFP measures which we do not utilize here.

                                                        5
“transitory.” We consider all countries with per capita GDPs in purchasing power parity
terms of at least $4,000 in constant 2005 US dollars. Countries with very low incomes tend
to have unusually volatile output and TFP growth rates, reflecting idiosyncratic country-
specific factors such as climatic variations and civil unrest. We therefore exclude them from
our analysis.
        We identify TFP slumps and recoveries using a methodology in the spirit of our
earlier work on growth slowdowns. We consider successive 5, 7 and 10 year periods
(alternatively) and isolate episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per cent or
1.5 per cent lower (alternatively) on average in the second period than the first. In addition,
to qualify as a TFP slump, TFP in the first of the two periods must have been growing at a
respectable rate (where “respectable” is taken as the mean growth rate in the sample of
countries and years).
       Similarly, for accelerations we focus on observations where the growth rate of TFP
averaged (at least) 1.0 or 1.5 per cent more in the second period than the first. Again, for an
episode to qualify as a recovery, TFP in the second period had to be growing by at least the
sample average.
        In some cases this methodology identifies a string of consecutive years as TFP slumps
(or accelerations).4 One way of dealing with this is to simply count each entry in this series
as a slowdown year. The alternative is to use a Chow test for structural breaks to select one
year of the series as “the TFP slump year. We consider both approaches in what follows.
        For straightforward reasons, the shorter the period and lower the cut-off, the more
slump and recovery episodes we identify. We identify 77 countries that have experienced a
TFP slump when using the 5 year - 1 per cent criterion. By comparison, 52 countries qualify
as having experienced TFP slumps when we use the most restrictive criterion of 10 years and
a 1.5 per cent threshold. 75 countries experience a TFP acceleration in the 5 year – 1 per cent
case, compared to 43 when we consider 10 year periods and a 1.5 per cent threshold. Finally
there are 66 countries where TFP growth first slows but then recovers according to the most
permissive criterion and just 27 such countries according to the strictest criterion. Table 1
shows comparable numbers for all 6 definitions.
        Readers may worry that we are simply capturing the same slowdowns in GDP growth
as in Eichengreen, Park and Shin (2012), since TFP (as opposed to capital and labor input) is
the component of gross output whose rate of increase often falls most abruptly when the rate
of growth of aggregate output slows. In fact, although growth slowdowns and TFP slumps
do sometimes coincide, there are also many instances where they do not. Recall for example,
the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, following which the rate of GDP growth slowed noticeably
across the region. In some countries, that slowing was associated with an abrupt downshift in
the rate of growth of TFP, as we show. But in other instances it was associated instead with a
downshift in the investment rate.
         Consider for example our least demanding definition of TFP slowdowns: slowdowns
of at least 5 year’s duration in which TFP growth falls by 1 percentage point. We have a total
of 1,052 country-year observations that qualify by these criteria.5 Ask now how many of
these years are also categorized as a growth slowdown, and to bias the results in the direction



4
    In what follows we avoid repeating the “or accelerations” proviso for brevity.
    The number of observations is based on the approach where we include all consecutive years as TFP slumps.
5



                                                        6
of overlap include also growth slowdowns in the preceding or successive year. The answer is
455, less than a half of our TFP-slowdown country-year observations.6
        Figures 1, 2 and 3 show histograms for TFP slumps, accelerations and recoveries
(where, recall, a recovery is a slump followed by an acceleration) for the least restrictive
definition, a 1 per cent deceleration over successive 5 year periods. For slumps (Figure 1),
we see three modes around $4,000 US, $11,000 US and $33,000 US.7 It is tempting to
interpret these in terms of the productivity problems of poor countries (where productivity is
affected by climatic variations, political turmoil etc.), of middle-income countries (where the
challenges of transition from “extensive” to “intensive” growth are sometimes thought to
create the danger of a middle-income trap), and of high-income countries (which have
relatively high old-age dependency ratios and slowly growing populations and face the
additional challenges of raising productivity when they are already at or near the
technological frontier).
        Figure 2, the histogram for accelerations, looks broadly similar in the sense that we
have a first mode around the same level of per capita GDP as in Figure 1. The second mode
appears to occur a little earlier, at around $10,000 US.8 The third mode occurs much earlier,
at around $16,000-$18,000. Evidently accelerations are extremely unlikely once the per
capita GDP exceeds $30,000 US.
       Figure 3 for TFP recoveries (cases where TFP growth first slumps and then recovers)
shows a similar pattern as the figure for accelerations.
         Figure 4 shows the distribution of TFP slumps by calendar year. Consistent with the
earlier literature (and casual observation), a cluster of such episodes is evident in the early
1970s at the time of the global productivity slowdown. We see another cluster in the late
1980s and early 1990s, just prior to the 1995-2005 acceleration in productivity growth
popularly associated with the IT revolution, and a third cluster in the second half of the 1990s
in the run-up to the Asian crisis.9 There is then a fourth cluster in the mid-2000s, at the point
in time when the 1995-2005 IT-related productivity surge petered out just prior to the global
financial crisis. That many of these episodes are clustered at particular points in time is
suggestive of a role for global factors in TFP-growth slowdowns.
         For the advanced countries, in particular, it is tempting to associate productivity
slowdowns with the oil shocks of the 1970s and early 1980s (as in much of the earlier
literature). Column 1 in Table 2 confirms that a large majority of the advanced countries
experienced productivity slowdowns in these two oil-shock periods. However, Column 2
also shows that slowdowns in this period account for only a minority of all productivity
growth slumps experienced by the advanced countries between the 1950s and 2011. The
story for the advanced countries, in other words, involves more than just oil shocks.

6
  The ratio is even lower (40.3 per cent) for 7 year periods and again when we use 10 year periods ((44.1 per
cent).
  While the third mode around $33,000 is less visible for the most restrictive definition, the three modes are
7

clearly visible in other five definitions including the one shown in Figure 1. See the online appendix for figures
for the other five definitions.
  This is especially true if we look at Figure 2 (B) where we plot the density function based on the Chow test
8

points.
  Of the 35 countries that experienced slowdowns in 1997-8, Asian countries in fact account for 6 observations:
9

China, India, Indonesia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan. As noted above, there were also a number of other
Asian countries that saw slower GDP growth following the crisis, but in their cases the growth slowdown
reflected sharply lower investment rates rather than a downshift in TFP growth. In addition, Korea experienced
slowdowns in 1989-91, Malaysia, in 1991-95, and Thailand in 1989-96.

                                                        7
        To gain a sense of which of these time spans and thresholds are most informative for
empirical work, it helps to consider some well-known cases. As described above, Denison
(1985) showed that TFP growth in the U.S. slowed in the late 1960s and early 1970s; more
recently Fernald (2014) has established that TFP growth in the U.S. accelerated around 1995
and then slowed after 2005. We identify a TFP acceleration for the U.S. in 1995 only when
we use 5-year averages with a 1 per cent cut-off. The 5-year average TFP growth rate before
and after 1995 is 0.8 per cent and 2.0 per cent respectively. When we use 7-year averages,
the TFP growth rate before and after1995 is 0.8 and 1.5 per cent, respectively, rendering the
difference less than the 1 per cent cut-off. When we use 10-year averages, the TFP growth
rates are again 0.8 per cent and 1.5 per cent.
        Interestingly, the 5-year 1-per cent cut-off places the earlier productivity slowdown
for the U.S. as occurring in 1965-66, following the earlier post-World War II golden age of
rapid productivity growth.10 Longer periods tend to place this earlier productivity slump as
occurring somewhat later and perhaps in two steps; for example, the 10-year 1-per cent
criterion identifies as TFP slump years 1966-8 and 1972-3.11
        For China, where TFP growth is more volatile, the 5-year 1-per cent criterion picks up
an acceleration in 1976-1983 coincident with the first wave of reforms, a slump in the second
half of the 1980s, a recovery in the first half of the 1990s, another slump in the second half of
that decade, and another recovery in the period 2001-4. The more restrictive 10-year 1.5 per
cent criterion points only to an acceleration in 1978-1985 followed by a slump in 1993-1996.
For Greece, another currently prominent case, the 10-year 1.5 per cent criterion points to a
long sequence of TFP slump years between 1965 and 1980 and then to a second slump in
2001. For Germany it produces a first TFP growth slowdown in 1960 (at the end of the
“Wirtschaftswunder”) and a second slump in 1972-79 (at the time of the 1970s productivity
slowdown).
        Although generalization is difficult, we are inclined to argue that less restrictive
definitions (shorter periods distinguished by smaller changes in the average rate of TFP
growth) are picking up more signal than noise (that they are likely to capture more of the
episodes of interest).
     4. Circumstances in which TFP Slumps Occur
         We now attempt to shed light on the circumstances in which TFP slumps occur. We
relate the incidence of slumps to a variety of country characteristics. Specifically, we
consider per capita GDP in U.S. dollars (in levels and squared to pick up nonlinearities), the
investment rate, economic openness as measured by the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP,
a measure of real exchange rate undervaluation (the deviation of the real exchange rate from
the value predicted by regressing the real rate on per capita GDP, demographic controls, and
a vector of time dummies), years of schooling as a measure of educational attainment, the
investment rate, the share of employment in manufacturing, two measures of the dependency
ratio (old-age dependency and both old-age-and-youth dependency); two measures of
political stability and development (how the country ranks in terms of rule of law and its
Polity2 ranking), two measures of macroeconomic volatility (average inflation and the

10
   The analysis in Amador and Coimbra (2007) is consistent with this timing. Hulton (2001) similarly refers to
the productivity slowdown in the U.S. that started in “the late 1960s or early 1970s.” Phelps (2013) is another
study of the U.S. that dates the country’s productivity slowdown as commencing in the second half of the 1960s.
11
   Nordhaus (2004) regresses a long historical time series on TFP growth for the United States on rolling 5 year
and 10 year dummy variables. His estimated coefficients are consistent with the picture of a two-step slowdown
occurring in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

                                                       8
volatility of inflation as captured by its coefficient of variation over the preceding five years),
and two measures of energy prices (real gas and electricity costs). On the rationale for
focusing on these variables, see the discussion in Section 2 above.
       Table 3 shows average values for these variables in years when TFP growth begins to
decelerate significantly, compared to other years. Sources and definitions are listed in
Appendix A.
       To avoid spurious precision, we include the year immediately preceding (t-1) and the
year immediately following (t+1) the slump year in the treatment group (along with the year t
in question). We also drop all data for years             of the growth slowdown episode to
contrast more clearly slump years and other years.
        Starting with Panel A (all countries with per capita incomes above $4,000 US and all
consecutive TFP slowdown points), we see that per capita GDP is lower in slowdown cases
than in the control group. However this pattern is reversed in the sample of relatively
advanced countries (Panels C and D). We also see that the educational attainment (as proxied
by years of schooling) is significantly lower in slowdown cases than the control group,
consistent with the idea that education is positive for productivity growth. In addition,
investment is significantly higher in slowdown years, consistent with the notion of a tradeoff
between the extensive and intensive margins of growth. Slowdown cases have also weaker
political systems as measured by their Polity2 scores. These differences will come through
clearly in the regression analysis below.
        TFP slowdowns episodes tend to be marked by lower energy costs than control group
cases; this is inconsistent with the argument, deriving from the experience of the 1970s, that
productivity slowdowns are associated with energy shocks, but consistent with the view that
subsidized energy prices distort resource allocation and hinder productivity growth. Note,
however, that our International Energy Agency data for energy costs, which vary by country,
start only in 1979 and therefore exclude the first oil shock. They may reflect cross-country
differences in taxes and subsidies as much (or more) than changing global energy prices. We
will return to this below.
       While old-age dependency ratios are significantly lower in TFP slump cases, overall
dependency ratios tend to be higher. In addition, the openness of countries experiencing TFP
slumps on average increases more rapidly than that of members of the control group.
However this feature disappears in the sample of relatively advanced countries (Panels C and
D).
        Productivity slumps are also more likely in countries where the share of employment
(or value-added) in manufacturing is high and growing slowly. They appear to be
accompanied by higher rates of inflation but lower levels of inflation variability (less
macroeconomic volatility, so measured), where recall that inflation variability here is the
coefficient of variation of the inflation rate. We will want to examine the robustness of this
contrast in what follows.
       Panel B shows that these differences are broadly similar when we limit the treatment
group to the TFP slump years identified by the Chow-test criterion. The patterns are also
broadly similar when we limit the sample to countries with per capital GDP above $10,000
US in 2005 prices – as in Panel C. The differences basically remain the same, with slump
episodes displaying lower levels of educational attainment, higher investment rates, higher
manufacturing employment shares, higher manufacturing value added, lower Polity2 scores
and lower energy prices. One important difference is that productivity slumps are more

                                                 9
likely in countries where the rule-of law is low. In addition, productivity slumps are more
likely in countries where the real exchange rate is more undervalued.
     5. Regression Analysis
        For purposes of regression analysis, the dependent variable takes a value of 1 for the
three years centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We drop all data pertaining to
years                of the TFP slump episode as a way of removing the remainder of the
slump period to which either 0 or 1 may not be appropriately assigned. We include among
the treatment-group cases all (consecutive) TFP slump years, and define slumps by
considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP
was at least 1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first.
        The control group then consists of the countries that did not experience a TFP
slowdown in that same year. We also removed the observations for the 2007-2011 period
entirely because that period is too short (four years rather than five) to determine whether
they are in the treatment or control group.12
        The sample again includes only countries with per capita GDP is above $4,000 in
constant 2005 US dollars, and oil exporting countries are also excluded. In alternative
regressions focusing on advanced countries, we also consider only countries with per capita
incomes above $10,000 US. Probit regressions do not allow for country fixed effects, so we
report logit regressions that do.13 (Results using probit are reported in the text where they
make a significant difference – see Tables 6 and 7 – and a complete set of probit regression
are in Appendix B.) A few of the estimates do not converge and are hence not reported. We
also provide an analogous set of regressions for TFP accelerations and recoveries in
Appendix C, although we focus in the text on TFP slumps as the phenomenon of special
interest.
        Regression results tending to be overly influenced by outliers, we removed outliers in
openness and inflation, variables where the outlier problem was particularly severe. In the
case of openness, we removed observations where the sum of imports and exports was more
than 200 per cent of GDP. For inflation we removed observations where the annual inflation
rate exceeded 50 per cent, while for inflation variability we removed cases where the
coefficient of variation over the past five years exceeded 2. We return to the importance of
extreme values of these variables further at the end of this section.
        Consider the variables that are significant in one or more columns of Table 4.14 The
probability of a TFP slowdown appears to peak (in Panel A) at a per capita income of
$11,000-$15,000 US.15 This resembles an appropriately weighted average of the three modes
at $4,000, $11,000 and $33,000 apparent in the raw data.
       In addition, years of schooling are negatively (and in some cases significantly)
associated with the incidence of TFP slumps. This is consistent with the notion that countries

12
   We also removed the observations for the 2007-2011 period entirely when we report t tests in Table 3.
13
   The advantage of probit regressions is robust standard errors, which are reported in parentheses. Note that
logit regressions with fixed effects do not allow for robust standard errors.
   Note that a number of variables that uniformly enter with coefficients indistinguishable from zero have been
14

removed from the table. Examples are the country-specific measures of energy costs (for which, recall, we have
data only starting in 1979, which significantly reduces the sample size).
15
   These numbers are based on the probit regression results reported in Table B1. The peak is estimated to be at
the minimum of per capita income level, $11,164 in column 12 and at the maximum of per capita income level,
$14, 425 in column 8.

                                                      10
that invest heavily in education are best able to continue moving up the technological ladder
and to stay close to the technical frontier.
        Strikingly, high investment rates are positively associated with the likelihood of TFP
slumps. This is consistent with the idea that countries relying on brute-force capital
accumulation may do so at the expense of productivity, insofar as extensive investment
means investment in low-productivity, low-return projects. This observation is also
consistent with worries that countries like China relying on investment for growth may be
substituting capacity expansion for increases in efficiency.
        There is also some evidence that the rate of increase in the share of employment in
manufacturing in the preceding 5 years is associated with the likelihood of a TFP slump.
Shifting labor from agriculture to manufacturing has been an important way of sustaining
productivity growth historically. The higher the speed of the change in the past, the more
difficult it becomes to raise it still further in both an economic and arithmetic sense. The
patterns in Table 4 are broadly consistent with this view.
         It would appear that countries with stronger, more contestable political systems
(higher Polity2 scores) are less susceptible to TFP slumps. This is consistent with the idea
that efficient political systems that give voice to stakeholders are better able to agree on
reforms and policies that sustain productivity growth. The quality of political institutions
comes through more clearly in Table 4, which includes developing countries, than in Table 5,
which is limited to relatively advanced countries.
        We also see in Table 4 some sign that more open economies are more susceptible to
TFP slumps. This pattern comes through even more clearly when we controls for global
factors (in Table 8). The intuition for this pattern is not obvious; we return to it below. Also
surprising is that a number of plausible explanations for TFP slumps, such as macroeconomic
variability, do not register significantly in these regressions.
        In Table 5, where we focus on countries with per capita GDPs above $10,000 US
(“advanced economies” for present purposes), the results are generally consistent with those
in Table 4. Here, however, the rate of increase in years of schooling in the preceding 5 years
appears to be associated with less likelihood of a TFP slump. In addition, countries with high
share of employment in manufacturing are more susceptible to TFP slumps. We will return to
this in Table 8 where we consider global factors as well as country-specific factors.
         In Tables 6 and 7 we analyse the impact of openness and macroeconomic volatility a
bit further. In Table 6 we remove very high values of openness, cases where the sum of
export plus imports exceeds 80 per cent of GDP.16 Now the coefficient on openness is
negative and occasionally significant, not positive and significant as before.17 It would
appear that more open economies, where international competition is more intense, are less
prone to TFP slumps up to a threshold level, but above that level any additional benefit of
openness, in terms of TFP growth resiliency, disappears.
        In Table 7 we also remove high values of inflation variability, where the coefficient of
variation of inflation is greater than 0.5.18 Now the effect of inflation variability is positive
and often highly significant, as if macroeconomic volatility makes TFP slowdowns more



16
   This reduces the number of observations for openness from 1,604 to 1,263.
17
   One column is missing because the estimates do not converge.
18
   This reduces the number of observations for inflation variability from 1,923 to 1,118.

                                                       11
likely.19 It would appear that volatility makes TFP slowdowns more likely as it rises up to a
threshold level, but above that level its impact, like that of openness, vanishes.
        The year fixed effects, when included, are jointly significant. They are telling us that
global (as opposed to the country-specific factors included in the specifications) are important
in helping to explain the incidence of productivity slumps. In Figures 5-6 and Table 8 we
therefore consider the role of global factors more closely, focusing on world oil prices, world
trade growth, LIBOR and the TED spread. The increase in global oil prices and world trade
are shown in Figure 5, while LIBOR and the TED spread are shown in Figure 6.
        The problem with analysing factors that vary over years but not across countries is
that we are forced to remove the time fixed effects, creating the danger that our global factors
may also be picking up time-varying, country-invariant omitted factors. Be that as it may,
Table 8 shows a higher TED spread is positively associated with the incidence of TFP
slumps. This result is striking in that the prominent instance of higher TED spreads, in the
global financial crisis, is not considered here because the last slump year considered in our
analysis is 2006, given the five-year window.
         In addition the coefficient on the rate of change of world oil prices is positively and
significantly associated with the incidence of TFP slumps, consistent with the oil-shock
interpretation of the 1970s and early-1980s productivity slowdowns. Note however that this
result is not robust to including the full set of controls.
       More puzzling is that world trade growth is positively and significantly associated
with TFP slumps; it could be that world trade is standing in for the global business cycle and
that TFP growth tends to weaken around the business cycle peak.
       The other country-specific effects are unchanged with one notable exception. A high
manufacturing employment share now appears to make a TFP slump less likely, at least for
countries with per capita GDPs above $10,000 US. This is consistent with the notion that, for
advanced countries, a TFP slowdown is less likely as long as the share of the high-growing
manufacturing sector is large.
         It is natural to hypothesize that global factors will appear even more important once
we have the data needed to treat 2007-12 as a slump period (recall that our Penn World
Tables data, on which we rely for estimates of TFP, currently end in 2011). For the moment,
what we can do is examine successive four year rather than five year periods.20 When we do,
it turns out that fully 5.7% of total TFP slowdowns occur in 2007, which becomes the mode
of the distribution of TFP slumps by calendar year. Once the large number of slowdowns in
2007 is added, the coefficient on LIBOR becomes positive and significant. The coefficient
on the TED spread remains positive and is now more consistently significant than before.
There is more evidence that oil shocks are significant. Reassuringly, world trade growth,
with its peculiar sign, is no longer significant in the specifications in Table 8.21
     6. Conclusion
       Slowing total factor productivity growth is raising concern around the world. After
running at approximately 1 per cent per annum worldwide in the decade leading up to the

19
   One column is again missing because the estimates do not converge.
20
   The worry being, of course, that the shorter the period the greater the likelihood that what we are picking up is
the cyclical behavior of productivity rather than secular TFP slumps.
21
   Previously, recall, world trade growth entered positively. That positive effect now disappears since world
trade plummeted in 2009.

                                                        12
global financial crisis, TFP growth fell sharply and has now dropped to zero, where it has
remained for three years. This phenomenon is evident in advanced countries like the U.S.
and UK as well as in emerging markets like China, Brazil and Mexico. It is evident in Latin
America, Southeast Europe and Central Asia. Discussion of these troubling trends is
organized under a number of headings. These include the secular stagnation hypothesis, the
question of whether the global financial crisis has permanently damaged the growth capacity
of the world economy, and whether the heyday of emerging markets is over. These are
without doubt the critical debates of our day.
         The key questions are whether this phenomenon of sharply lower productivity growth
is unprecedented, whether it is likely to last, which countries are most susceptible, and what if
anything can be done about it. To shed light on the answers, we have isolated TFP growth
slumps in countries with per capita GDPs of at least $4,000 US (2005 prices) since the 1950s.
It turns out that productivity slumps, defined as episodes when the rate of TFP growth fell
sharply and persistently, are far from unprecedented. We have identified such episodes in the
first half of the 1970s (the period commented upon most extensively in the literature on this
subject) but also in the late 1980s and early 1990s, in the late 1990s, and on the eve of the
global financial crisis.
       We have identified TFP slumps in low-, middle- and high-income countries alike.
Specifically, we observe clusters at per capita incomes of $4,000, $11,000 and $33,000.
Evidently, no country, rich or poor, and no period of time are immune from the risk of
productivity slumps.
        Our statistical analysis also points to policies that should be pursued and others best
avoided by countries seeking to minimize this risk. We find a negative association between
the incidence of TFP slumps and educational attainment as measured by average years of
schooling. Countries with stronger political systems as measured by their Polity2 scores are
less susceptible to TFP slumps. In contrast, countries with high investment shares of GDP
are more susceptible to TFP slumps, consistent with a tradeoff between extensive and
intensive growth that places a priority on, respectively, capacity expansion and productivity
growth.
        The distinction between global and country-specific correlates of TFP growth
slowdowns is clearly important. Recall how the oil shocks of the 1970s and 1980s and the
global financial crisis (as well as other periods marked by sharply higher TED spreads)
adversely affected the productivity of all countries, although some countries were hit harder
than others. By the same token, the information and communication technology revolution of
the 1990s contributed to higher productivity across the world.
        While TFP slumps affect rich and poor countries alike, it is nonetheless useful to
distinguish different groups of countries by their level of per capita income, for the nature of
productivity slumps is likely to differ across countries at different income levels. For
example, in middle-income countries slower TFP growth is likely to be associated with the
process of reallocation of labor from agriculture to manufacturing having run its course.
Productivity slumps in high-income countries, in contrast, are likely to be associated with the
transition to services, where productivity gains are more difficult to achieve.
        Slowing TFP growth is especially worrisome for China and developing Asia
generally. Sustained rapid growth has transformed Asia from a predominantly low-income to
an increasingly middle-income region. While the transition from low to middle income was
driven to a large part by investment and factor accumulation, the more challenging transition


                                               13
from middle income to high income typically depends to a greater extent on improving
productivity.
         If the region is to continue growing, productivity growth will have to play a larger
role in the future, given rapid population ageing and much of Asia’s gloomy demographic
prospects. While Asia reaped a sizable demographic dividend in the past, the region as a
whole is now experiencing population aging. East Asia in particular is suffering the fallout of
a sharp decline in fertility and strong wage pressures are emerging in parts of China.
        Moreover, the transformation of developing Asia, especially East Asia, from a capital-
scarce to a capital-abundant region – the legacy of the high-saving, high-investment paradigm
– implies that the marginal returns to physical capital accumulation will decline. TFP growth
will thus be vital. Asia’s rapid technological catch-up in the past means that further
technological progress will have to rely more on indigenous innovation.
        Perhaps our most widely relevant finding is the need for strong political systems. For
poor countries, TFP slumps and economic stagnation more generally are often associated
with poor governance – i.e. ineffective governments that fail to build schools, hospitals, and
roads. In the U.S., to take a very different case, polarized politics are blocking sensible
debate on immigration reform, even though immigrants and their reservoir of entrepreneurial
energy have contributed importantly to U.S. productivity and economic growth. TFP slumps
are not pre-determined, and there is significant scope for sound policies and institutions to
prevent or arrest them.
        The determinants of productivity growth and productivity slumps are notoriously
elusive. It follows that the patterns described here are necessarily suggestive. There is no
guarantee that countries investing heavily in education, avoiding excessive investment, or
developing relatively strong political systems will necessarily avoid TFP slumps. The good
news is that there are in the historical record not just TFP growth slowdowns but also TFP
growth accelerations and even recoveries (accelerations following slumps). Whether such
accelerations and recoveries are now on the horizon only time will tell.




                                              14
                                        References
Amador, Joao and Carlos Coimbra (2007), “Total Factor Productivity Growth in the G7
Countries: Different or Alike,” Working Paper no. 9/2007, Estudos e Documentos de
Trabalho, Banco de Portugal (April).
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald and Miles Kimball (2006), “Are Technology Improvements
Recessionary?” American Economic Review 96, pp.1418-1448.
Caballero, Ricardo and Mohamed Hammour (1994), “The Cleansing Effect of Recessions,”
American Economic Review 84, pp.1350-1368.
Carderelli, Roberto and Lusine Lusinyan (2015), “U.S. Total Factor Productivity Slowdown:
Evidence from U.S. States,” IMF Working Paper 15/116 (May).
Comin, Diego (2009), “An Exploration of the Japanese Slowdown during the 1990s,”
Working Paper 09-065, Harvard University.
Conference Board (2015), “Global Productivity Growth Stuck in the Slow Lane with No
Recovery in Sight,” Total Economy Database – Key Findings, New York: Conference Board.
Denison, Edward (1985), Trends in American Economic Growth 1929-82, Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Eichengreen, Barry, Donghyun Park and Kwanho Shin (2012), “When Fast-Growing
Economies Slow Down: International Evidence and Implications for China,” Asian Economic
Papers 11, pp.42-87.
Fernald, John (2014), “Productivity and Potential Output Before, During and After the Great
Recession,” NBER Working Paper no.20248 (June).
Ferriera, Pablo, Antonio Galvao, Fabio Reis Gomez and Samuel Pesoa (2010), “The Effects
of External and Internal Shocks on Total Factor Productivity,” unpublished manuscript,
Getulio Vargas Foundation.
Field, Alexander (2012), A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic
Growth, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Fukao, Kyoji and Hyeog Kwon (2005), “Why Did Japan’s TFP Growth Slow Down in the
Lost Decade? An Empirical Analysis Based on Firm-Level Data of Manufacturing Firms,”
RIETI Discussion Paper no.05-E-004 (February).
Hall, Robert (1991), “Recessions as Reorganizations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Hsiah, Chang-Tai (2002), “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence
from Factor Markets,” American Economic Review 92, pp.502-526.
Hulton, Charles (2001), “Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography,” in Charles Hulten,
Edwin Dean and Michael Harper (eds), New Developments in Productivity Analysis,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.1-54.
Hulton, Charles, James Robertson and Frank Wykoff (1987), “Energy, Obsolescence and the
Productivity Slowdown,” NBER Working Paper no.2404 (October).
Jorgenson, Dale (1984), “The Role of Energy in Productivity Growth,” American Economic
Review 74, pp.26-30.


                                             15
Jorgenson, Dale, Frank Gollop and Barbara Fraumeni (1987), Productivity and U.S.
Economic Growth, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Kim, Jong-Il (2001), “Total Factor Productivity Growth in East Asia: Implications for Future
Growth,” unpublished manuscript, Dongguk University Seoul.
Krugman, Paul (1994), “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” Foreign Affairs 73, pp.62-78.
Kuroda, Masahiro, Kazuyuki Motohashi and Kazushige Shimpo (2007), “Investing
Productivity Slowdown in the 1990s by using the KLEM Database in Japan,” in Dale
Jorgenson, Tasahiro Kuroda and Kazuyuki Motohashi (eds), Productivity in Asia: Economic
Growth and Competitiveness, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp.7-26.
Kuznets, Simon (1966), Modern Economic Growth: Rate Structure and Spread, New Haven:
Yale University Press,
Lindbeck, Assar (1983), “The Recent Slowdown of Productivity Growth,” Economic Journal
93, pp.13-34.
Moomaw, Ronald and Martin Williams (1991), “Total Factor Productivity Growth in
Manufacturing : Further Evidence from the States,” Journal of Regional Science 31, pp.17-
34.
Muto, Ichiro, Nao Sudo and Shunichi Toneyama (2013), “Productivity Slowdown in Japan’s
Lost Decades: How Much of It is Attributed to Financial Factors?” unpublished manuscript,
Bank of Japan and Boston College (July).
Nishimura, Kiyohiko and Masato Shirai (2003), “Can Information and Communication
Technology Solve Japan’s Productivity Slowdown Problem?” Asian Economic Papers 2,
pp.86-113.
Nordhaus, William (2004), “Retrospective on the 1970s Productivity Slowdown,” NBER
Working Paper no.10950 (December).
Phelps, Edmund (2013), Mass Flourishing, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Summers, Lawrence (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and
the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics 49, pp.65-73.
Tsounta, Evridiki (2014), “Slowdown in Emerging Markets: Sign of a Bumpy Road Ahead?”
IMF Working Paper 14/205 (November).
Young, Alwyn (1994), “Lessons from the East Asian NICS: A Contrarian View,” European
Economic Review 38, pp.964-973.




                                             16
                                                    Figure 1. TFP Slumps
                                                         (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points
          2.0e-05 4.0e-05 6.0e-05 8.0e-05 1.0e-04
Density




                                                          0




                                                               0           10000          20000         30000           40000          50000
                                                                                      per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)


                                                         (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
          1.0e-04
          8.0e-05
          6.0e-05
Density
          4.0e-05
          2.0e-05


                                                          0




                                                               0           10000          20000         30000           40000          50000
                                                                                      per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)


                                                    Note: Panel (A) shows the frequency distribution of all consecutive slumps by per capita income, while Panel
                                                    (B), the same frequency distribution after only one slowdown is selected out of the consecutive slumps by
                                                    employing a Chow test for structural breaks. We define slumps by considering successive 5 year periods and
                                                    isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period
                                                    than the first. Countries whose per capita GDP is below $4.000 are removed in both graphs. Oil countries are
                                                    not included.

                                                                                                          17
                    Figure 2. TFP Accelerations
                        (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points
          1.5e-04
          1.0e-04
Density
          5.0e-05


                          0




                               0           10000          20000         30000          40000
                                                      per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)



                        (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
          1.5e-04
          1.0e-04
Density
          5.0e-05


                          0




                               0           10000          20000         30000          40000
                                                      per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)


                    Note: Panel (A) shows the frequency distribution of all consecutive accelerations by per capita income, while
                    Panel (B), the same frequency distribution after only one acceleration is selected out of the consecutive
                    accelerations by employing a Chow test for structural breaks. We define TFP accelerations by considering
                    observations where the growth rate of TFP averaged at least 1.0 per cent more in the second period compared to
                    the first. Countries whose per capita GDP is below $4.000 are removed in both graphs. Oil countries are not
                    included.


                                                                          18
                    Figure 3. TFP Recoveries
                        (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points
          1.5e-04
          1.0e-04
Density
          5.0e-05


                         0




                              0           10000          20000         30000          40000
                                                     per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)




                        (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
          1.5e-04
          1.0e-04
Density
          5.0e-05


                         0




                              0           10000          20000         30000          40000
                                                     per capita GDP (cgdpo/pop)


                    Note: Panel (A) shows the frequency distribution of all consecutive recoveries by per capita income, while Panel
                    (B), the same frequency distribution after only one recovery is selected out of the consecutive recoveries by
                    employing a Chow test for structural breaks. We define TFP recoveries in the same way as accelerations, but to
                    qualify for a recovery, we require another condition that the particular country should experience a slowdown
                    beforehand. Countries whose per capita GDP is below $4.000 are removed in both graphs. Oil countries are not
                    included.

                                                                          19
          Figure 4. Years TFP Slumps Started
                  (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points
            .06
            .04
Density


            .02
                  0




                      1950     1960         1970        1980          1990        2000        2010
                                                        year


                  (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
              .1
            .08
            .06
Density


            .04
            .02
                  0




                      1950     1960         1970        1980          1990        2000        2010
                                                        year


          Note: The bars indicate the frequency distribution of years when a TFP slump began. We define slowdowns by
          considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per
          cent lower on average in the second period than the first. A Chow test episode is selected out of the consecutive
          slowdowns by employing a Chow test for structural breaks. Oil countries are not included.



                                                                 20
          Figure 5. Years TFP Slumps Started and Growth Rates of Oil Prices and World Trade
               (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points




                                                                                                   1.5
              .06




                                                                                                   1
              .04
Density




                                                                                                   .5
              .02




                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.5
                    0




                        1950    1960        1970        1980        1990        2000        2010
                                                        year

                                                   Density
                                                   oil price growth rate
                                                   world trade growth rate


               (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points


                                                                                                   1.5
                .1
              .08




                                                                                                   1
              .06
Density




                                                                                                   .5
              .04




                                                                                                   0
              .02




                                                                                                   -.5
                    0




                        1950    1960        1970        1980        1990        2000        2010
                                                        year

                                                   Density
                                                   oil price growth rate
                                                   world trade growth rate



          Note: The bars indicate the frequency distribution of years when a TFP slump began. We define slumps by
          considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per
          cent lower on average in the second period than the first. A Chow test episode is selected out of the consecutive
          slumps by employing a Chow test for structural breaks. ). Oil prices are crude oil prices per barrel in 2014
          dollars, collected from Statistical Review of World Energy 2015. World trade is world trade in merchandise in
          current US dollars, collected from WTO and then deflated by the US CPI. Oil countries are not included.



                                                                 21
          Figure 6. Years TFP Slumps Started, LIBOR and TED Spread
                  (A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points




                                                                                                 10
            .06




                                                                                                 8
            .04




                                                                                                 6
Density




                                                                                                 4
            .02




                                                                                                 2
                  0




                                                                                                 0
                      1950    1960        1970        1980        1990        2000        2010
                                                      year

                                           Density
                                           3 month LIBOR based on US dollar
                                           TED spread



                      (B) Countries whose per capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
                                                                                                 10
              .1
            .08




                                                                                                 8
            .06




                                                                                                 6
Density


            .04




                                                                                                 4
            .02




                                                                                                 2
                  0




                                                                                                 0




                      1950    1960        1970        1980        1990        2000        2010
                                                      year

                                           Density
                                           3 month LIBOR based on US dollar
                                           TED spread



          Note: The bars indicate the frequency distribution of years when a TFP slump began. We define slowdowns by
          considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per
          cent lower on average in the second period than the first. A Chow test episode is selected out of the consecutive
          slowdowns by employing a Chow test for structural breaks. Oil countries are not included.



                                                                 22
Table 1. Number of Countries Experiencing Slumps, Accelerations and Recoveries
                                                          Number of countries experiencing
Definitions                                         TFP slump         TFP           TFP recovery
                                                                  acceleration
1% over successive 5 year periods                      77              75                66
1% over successive 7 year periods                      70              70                53
1% over successive 10 year periods                     59              54                38
1.5% over successive 5 year periods                    74              71                59
1.5% over successive 7 year periods                    68              64                44
1.5% over successive 10 year periods                   52              43                27
Note: We identify TFP slumps, accelerations and recoveries by considering successive 5, 7 and 10 year periods
(alternatively) and isolate episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per cent or 1.5 per cent less
(alternatively) on average in the second period than the first. The sample includes only those countries whose
per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil-exporting countries are not included.




Table 2. Oil Shocks and TFP Slumps in Advanced Countries

period
first oil shock                         18/21 (=0.86)                                 19/92 (=0.21)
(1968-1975)
second oil shock                        6/21 (=0.29)                                  7/92 (=0.08)
(1977-1983)
both oil shocks                         18/21 (=0.86)                                 26/92 (=0.28)
 Note: The total number of advanced countries is 21. Advanced countries include all founding members of the
OECD except Turkey, Iceland and Luxembourg. Turkey is excluded due to its low income level. Iceland and
Luxembourg are excluded due to data availability. Advanced countries also include Japan, Finland, Australia
and New Zealand that joined the OECD during the next 12 years. The first column is the ratio of the number of
advanced countries that experienced a slump during the particular period to the total number of advanced
countries. The second column is the ratio of the number of slumps experienced by advanced countries during the
particular period to the number of slumps experienced by advanced countries during the entire period. The
number of slumps is calculated by the slumps identified by the Chow test.




                                                       23
Table 3. Differences Between Slump Years and Other Years
(A) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Consecutive Points
                                             slowdown      other     difference   p value
                                                years      years
per capita GDP                                   13,205     14,580        1376        0.00
years of schooling                                  7.82      8.34         0.53       0.00
change in years of schooling
                                                    0.01     0.01          0.00       0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
investment rate                                     0.25     0.23         -0.02       0.00
manufacturing employment share                     27.99    26.39         -1.60       0.00
change in manufacturing employment
share                                              -0.12     -0.30        -0.18       0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
manufacturing value-added share                    33.79    31.66         -2.13       0.00
change in manufacturing value-added
share                                               0.14     -0.15        -0.30       0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
polity2                                             6.03     7.89         1.86        0.00
rule of law                                         0.56     0.44        -0.12        0.13
real electricity cost                              0.053    0.059        0.005        0.02
real gas cost                                      0.014    0.019        0.005        0.00
dependency rate (old)                              14.85    15.49         0.63        0.05
dependency rate (young&old)                        59.96    57.28        -2.68        0.00
openness                                           59.38    58.47        -0.91        0.62
change in openness (average from t-5 to t)          1.57     1.25        -0.32        0.00
terms of trade                                    106.13   104.96        -1.16        0.51
undervaluation                                      0.02    -0.03        -0.05        0.00
inflation                                           0.08     0.07        -0.01        0.00
inflation variability                               0.48     0.52         0.04        0.02




                                             24
(B) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $4,000: Chow Test Points
                                              slowdown       other    difference   p value
                                                 years       years
per capita GDP                                     13,902    13,993           91      0.86
years of schooling                                    8.04     8.15         0.11      0.39
change in years of schooling
                                                     0.01      0.01         0.00      0.11
(average from t-5 to t)
investment rate                                      0.25      0.23        -0.02      0.00
manufacturing employment share                      28.03     26.49        -1.55      0.00
change in manufacturing employment share
                                                    -0.16     -0.28        -0.12      0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
manufacturing value-added share                     33.56     32.00        -1.56      0.00
change in manufacturing value-added share
                                                     0.09     -0.15        -0.24      0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
polity2                                              6.45      7.37         0.92      0.00
rule of law                                          0.53      0.48        -0.05      0.58
real electricity cost                               0.051     0.060        0.009      0.00
real gas cost                                       0.014     0.018        0.004      0.00
dependency rate (old)                               15.19     15.11        -0.08      0.82
dependency rate (young&old)                         58.72     58.59        -0.13      0.86
openness                                            60.51     57.92        -2.59      0.20
change in openness (average from t-5 to t)           1.52      1.22        -0.30      0.01
terms of trade                                     105.63    105.75         0.12      0.95
undervaluation                                       0.01     -0.01        -0.02      0.25
inflation                                            0.08      0.07        -0.01      0.00
inflation variability                                0.47      0.52         0.05      0.00




                                             25
(C) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $10,000: Consecutive Points
                                             slowdown other years   difference    p value
                                                years
per capita GDP                                    18,569  22,114          3546       0.00
years of schooling                                  9.11     9.83          0.72      0.00
change in years of schooling
                                                    0.01     0.01         0.00       0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
investment rate                                     0.27     0.26         -0.01      0.05
manufacturing employment share                     29.47    27.78         -1.69      0.00
change in manufacturing employment
share                                              -0.19    -0.39         -0.20      0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
manufacturing value-added share                    33.11    30.36         -2.75      0.00
change in manufacturing value-added
share                                              -0.01    -0.18         -0.17      0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
polity2                                             8.89     9.75          0.86      0.00
rule of law                                         0.93     1.15          0.22      0.01
real electricity cost                               0.05     0.06          0.01      0.01
real gas cost                                       0.01     0.02          0.00      0.00
dependency rate (old)                              18.16    19.77          1.61      0.00
dependency rate (young&old)                        53.34    51.93         -1.41      0.00
openness                                           59.36    62.63          3.27      0.18
change in openness (average from t-5 to t)          1.70     1.64         -0.06      0.67
terms of trade                                    107.30   103.75         -3.55      0.15
undervaluation                                     -0.07    -0.14         -0.07      0.00
inflation                                           0.06     0.05         -0.02      0.00
inflation variability                               0.42     0.44          0.02      0.33




                                             26
(D) Countries Whose Per Capita GDP is above $10,000: Chow Test Points
                                                     slowdown other years            difference      p value
                                                        years
per capita GDP                                            18,719  21,526                    2808          0.00
years of schooling                                          9.17     9.69                    0.51         0.00
change in years of schooling
                                                             0.01            0.01            0.00         0.58
(average from t-5 to t)
investment rate                                              0.26            0.26            0.00         0.56
manufacturing employment share                              29.39           28.01           -1.38         0.00
change in manufacturing employment
share                                                       -0.22           -0.39           -0.17         0.00
(average from t-5 to t)
manufacturing value-added share                             32.89           30.76           -2.13         0.00
change in manufacturing value-added
share                                                       -0.08           -0.20           -0.12         0.02
(average from t-5 to t)
polity2                                                      8.80           9.64             0.84         0.00
rule of law                                                  0.93           1.13             0.21         0.02
real electricity cost                                        0.05           0.06             0.01         0.00
real gas cost                                                0.01           0.02             0.00         0.00
dependency rate (old)                                       18.21          19.42             1.20         0.00
dependency rate (young&old)                                 53.54          52.14            -1.40         0.01
openness                                                    59.24          61.48             2.25         0.39
change in openness (average from t-5 to t)                   1.60           1.50            -0.10         0.43
terms of trade                                             106.24         105.22            -1.02         0.72
undervaluation                                              -0.07          -0.13            -0.06         0.00
inflation                                                    0.07           0.05            -0.02         0.00
inflation variability                                        0.43           0.44             0.01         0.49
Note: Slump years refer to those years when a TFP slump began (T). We also include one year preceding (T-1)
and one year following (T+1) the beginning year as slump years. We drop all data pertaining to years, T+2, T+3,
T+4 and T+5 of the growth slump to contrast more clearly slump years with other years. Real electricity cost
and real gas cost are converted to real by deflating nominal values in the current UK pounds, reported by
international energy price comparison statistics, by the UK CPI. We removed outliers found in openness (greater
than 200%), inflation (greater than 50%) and the inflation variability (greater than 2). The last column reports
the p-value for the null hypothesis of no difference for each variable between slowdown years and other years.
The sample includes only those countries whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil-
exporting countries are not included.




                                                      27
Table 4. Determinants of TFP Slumps for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $4,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)
VARIABLES                                        (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)        (15)
                                               1.847     -4.336     -5.830    -15.715*    -5.466     4.969      12.806     -1.219    1.228     -1.317    -4.085    -3.837    -1.264    -1.065     15.058
per capita GDP
                                               [4.406]   [3.983]   [4.170]    [9.241]    [10.451]    [4.279]    [21.944]   [4.225]   [4.687]   [3.902]   [3.983]   [4.357]   [3.901]   [3.930]    [17.693]
                                               0.004     0.330      0.405*    1.055**     0.561      -0.147     -0.256     0.173     0.043     0.172     0.315     0.333     0.169     0.162       -0.563
per capita GDP square
                                               [0.234]   [0.211]   [0.220]    [0.483]    [0.547]     [0.225]    [1.166]    [0.225]   [0.250]   [0.207]   [0.211]   [0.234]   [0.207]   [0.208]    [0.908]
                                               -1.040                                                                                                                                            -11.659***
years of schooling
                                               [0.665]                                                                                                                                            [3.869]
                                                         -11.745
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                         [8.055]
                                                                   4.840***                                                                                                                      14.000***
investment rate
                                                                   [1.616]                                                                                                                        [4.614]
                                                                               0.074                                                                                                               0.036
manufacturing employment share
                                                                              [0.050]                                                                                                             [0.098]
change in manufacturing employment share                                                 1.124***                                                                                                0.906***
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                         [0.245]                                                                                                  [0.341]
                                                                                                    -0.082***                                                                                    -0.212***
polity2
                                                                                                     [0.023]                                                                                      [0.079]
                                                                                                                 1.091
rule of law
                                                                                                                [1.269]
                                                                                                                           0.034                                                                  -0.204*
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                           [0.042]                                                                [0.120]
                                                                                                                                     0.018                                                         0.046
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                                     [0.013]                                                      [0.058]
                                                                                                                                               0.001                                              0.033*
openness
                                                                                                                                               [0.005]                                            [0.018]
                                                                                                                                                         0.036                                     0.042
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                         [0.038]                                  [0.111]
                                                                                                                                                                   0.891*                          -1.108
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                   [0.472]                        [1.291]
                                                                                                                                                                             -1.068                -1.287
Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                             [1.122]              [3.327]

                                                                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                                 0.152     0.846
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                                [0.247]   [0.562]
Observations                           1,555    1,484     1,555     723      573      1,535     284      1,394    1,394     1,555    1,484    1,394     1,555    1,555      567
Pseudo R-squared                       0.170    0.164     0.175    0.165     0.175    0.176    0.258     0.166    0.167     0.169    0.163    0.168     0.169    0.169     0.270
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We define slowdowns by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at
least 1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slumps. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5
percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                       29
Table 5. Determinants of TFP Slumps for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $10,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)
VARIABLES                                         (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)        (15)
                                                -1.644      -18.559    -24.430    -25.050     -9.628     -2.652    110.550*** -23.635     -26.760    -18.976    -22.967    -26.252    -27.563    -19.437     -20.742
per capita GDP
                                               [17.061]    [16.566]    [16.472]   [22.243]   [23.505]   [17.118]    [38.501]   [17.219]   [17.315]   [16.593]   [16.488]   [17.311]   [17.367]   [16.303]    [27.417]
                                                0.314        1.157     1.461*      1.438      0.752      0.330     -5.225***    1.418     1.576*      1.179      1.376     1.549*     1.615*      1.201       1.145
per capita GDP square
                                                [0.864]     [0.841]    [0.838]    [1.126]    [1.187]    [0.870]     [1.886]    [0.876]    [0.883]    [0.842]    [0.838]    [0.878]    [0.884]    [0.829]     [1.384]
                                               -4.947***                                                                                                                                                    -13.578***
years of schooling
                                                [1.662]                                                                                                                                                      [3.960]
                                                           -47.016**
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                           [18.271]
                                                                       4.748*                                                                                                                               13.576**
investment rate
                                                                       [2.754]                                                                                                                               [5.425]
                                                                                  0.199**                                                                                                                     0.182
manufacturing employment share
                                                                                  [0.091]                                                                                                                    [0.117]
change in manufacturing employment share                                                     1.261***
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                             [0.360]
                                                                                                        -0.224**                                                                                              -0.332
polity2
                                                                                                        [0.102]                                                                                              [0.209]
                                                                                                                     1.910
rule of law
                                                                                                                    [1.917]
                                                                                                                               -0.047
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                               [0.064]
                                                                                                                                          -0.003                                                              -0.018
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                                          [0.025]                                                            [0.054]
                                                                                                                                                     -0.002                                                   0.027
openness
                                                                                                                                                     [0.010]                                                 [0.025]
                                                                                                                                                                 0.014                                        -0.014
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                                [0.080]                                      [0.148]
                                                                                                                                                                            0.003                             -0.566
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.900]                           [1.577]
                                                                                                                                                                                      -4.522                  -0.383
inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                      [3.023]                [4.616]

                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                 -0.006    0.571
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                                 [0.430]   [0.717]
Observations                            824      811       824      474      393       819      165       790       790      824      811       790      824      824       468
Pseudo R-squared                       0.296    0.296     0.289    0.249    0.211     0.294     0.259     0.291    0.290    0.285     0.288    0.290    0.288     0.285    0.327
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We define slumps by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least
1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slumps. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $10,000. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5
percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                        31
Table 6. The Impact of Openness on TFP Slumps when Openness is not High
                                           (1) Probit, (2 Probit, Per (3) Probit,   (4) Probit,    (5) Logit,    (6) Logit,    (7) Logit,     (8) Logit,
                                           Per Capita Capita GDP Per Capita         Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
                                           GDP above       above      GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above
VARIABLES                                    $4,000       $4,000)      $10,000        $10,000       $4,000         $4,000      $10,000        $10,000
                                               2.223      10.324       -11.731        -20.044        -1.601        27.252       -32.963        -20.813
per capita GDP
                                             [3.596]      [7.105]       [9.174]      [14.536]       [4.760]      [22.372]      [21.567]       [30.420]
                                              -0.123       -0.548        0.562          0.972         0.201        -1.147        1.900*         1.151
per capita GDP square
                                             [0.194]      [0.366]       [0.467]       [0.713]       [0.251]       [1.141]       [1.110]        [1.546]
                                                            0.213                      -1.400                     -8.265*                   -12.842***
years of schooling
                                                          [0.533]                     [0.959]                     [4.409]                      [4.277]
                                                            3.234                       1.935                   16.362***                       9.105
investment rate
                                                          [2.199]                     [3.237]                     [5.950]                      [6.302]
                                                            0.011                    -0.076**                      -0.044                       0.189
manufacturing employment share
                                                          [0.026]                     [0.036]                     [0.139]                      [0.133]
change in manufacturing employment share                  0.384**                     0.780**                    1.162***
(from t-5 to t)                                           [0.191]                     [0.347]                     [0.443]
                                                           -0.017                     -0.261*                      -0.096                      -0.288
polity2
                                                          [0.033]                     [0.154]                     [0.092]                     [0.185]
                                                           -0.003                       0.032                    -0.305**
dependency rate (old)
                                                          [0.021]                     [0.031]                     [0.131]
                                                            0.008                      -0.027                    0.264***                      -0.009
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                          [0.021]                     [0.028]                     [0.102]                     [0.065]
                                            -0.009**       -0.003      -0.010*         -0.003       -0.013         -0.046       -0.039          0.019
openness
                                             [0.004]      [0.007]       [0.006]       [0.007]      [0.012]        [0.049]      [0.025]        [0.038]
                                                           -0.094                      -0.141                       0.113                       0.015
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                          [0.078]                     [0.124]                     [0.279]                     [0.182]
                                                           -0.235                      -0.897                      -1.126                      -0.898
undervaluation
                                                          [0.477]                     [0.637]                     [1.574]                     [1.672]
                                                            0.606                       1.716                      -4.031                       1.138
inflation
                                                          [1.440]                     [2.015]                     [3.622]                     [4.660]
inflation variability                                       0.369                      0.553*                       0.812                       0.494

                                                                         32
                                                                         [0.239]                       [0.286]                        [0.646]                         [0.742]
Observations                                               1,228           459           620              321           1,227           389             641             389
Pseudo R-squared                                           0.145         0.0990         0.184           0.194           0.199          0.218          0.291            0.295
Note: We report probit (column 1-4) regression with year fixed effects and logit (columns 5-7) regression results with year and country fixed effects included. We removed
observations if openness is above 80. This reduces the number of observations for openness from 1,604 to 1,263 (about 80%). The dependent variable is a dummy variable
that takes the value of 1 for the three years centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We define slowdowns by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating
episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP
slumps. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1
percent level.




                                                                                          33
Table 7. The Impact of Inflation and Inflation Variability on TFP Slumps when Inflation Variability is not High
                                           (1) Probit,   (2) Probit,   (3) Probit,   (4) Probit,    (5) Logit,    (6) Logit,    (7) Logit,    (8) Logit,
                                           Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
                                           GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above     GDP above
VARIABLES                                    $4,000         $4,000      $10,000       $10,000        $4,000        $4,000        $10,000       $10,000
                                               5.332      12.552*         -7.841         2.921        -3.575       44.383       -33.206*        -20.742
per capita GDP
                                             [3.915]       [6.846]      [10.692]      [21.132]       [5.939]      [28.789]      [19.125]       [27.417]
                                              -0.291       -0.633*         0.366        -0.163         0.290        -2.071        1.846*         1.145
per capita GDP square
                                             [0.210]       [0.355]       [0.543]       [1.050]       [0.314]       [1.464]       [0.976]        [1.384]
                                                            -0.485                      -0.030                   -14.075**                   -13.578***
years of schooling
                                                           [0.511]                     [0.786]                     [5.637]                      [3.960]
                                                            3.102*                       1.830                     11.721*                    13.576**
investment rate
                                                           [1.600]                     [2.211]                     [6.575]                      [5.425]
                                                            -0.013                      -0.019                       0.032                       0.182
manufacturing employment share
                                                           [0.025]                     [0.036]                     [0.151]                      [0.117]
change in manufacturing employment share                  0.792***                    1.086***                    1.885***
(from t-5 to t)                                            [0.233]                     [0.287]                     [0.574]
                                                           -0.062*                      -0.118                    -0.306**                      -0.332
polity2
                                                           [0.038]                     [0.072]                     [0.120]                     [0.209]
                                                            -0.017                       0.005                   -0.852***
dependency rate (old)
                                                           [0.023]                     [0.032]                     [0.222]
                                                            -0.010                      -0.022                     0.150*                       -0.018
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                           [0.017]                     [0.027]                     [0.084]                     [0.054]
                                                             0.000                       0.002                       0.005                       0.027
openness
                                                           [0.004]                     [0.005]                     [0.029]                     [0.025]
                                                             0.003                      -0.114                       0.092                      -0.014
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                           [0.056]                     [0.083]                     [0.188]                     [0.148]
                                                             0.179                      -0.444                      -2.301                      -0.566
undervaluation
                                                           [0.460]                     [0.866]                     [2.230]                     [1.577]
                                                             0.810                     5.099*                       -4.012                      -0.383
inflation
                                                           [1.930]                     [3.079]                     [6.542]                     [4.616]
inflation variability                       1.444**       2.254***     1.661***       3.037***      1.838**       6.881***       1.699           0.571

                                                                          34
                                                          [0.583]      [0.745]        [0.569]         [0.902]         [0.898]         [1.896]        [1.168]         [0.717]
Observations                                                936           441           550             323             915             351            579             468
Pseudo R-squared                                           0.146        0.193          0.184           0.225           0.225           0.375          0.329           0.327
Note: We report probit (column 1-4) regression with year fixed effects and logit (columns 5-7) regression results with year and country fixed effects included. We removed
observations if inflation variability is above .5. This reduces the number of observations for inflation variability from 1,923 to 1,118 (about 60%). The dependent variable is
a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We define slumps by considering successive 5 year periods and
isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as
TFP slumps. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the
1 percent level.




                                                                                          35
Table 8. The Impact of Global Factors on TFP Slumps (Logit, Consecutive Points)
                                                       countries with per capita gdp above $4000                            countries with per capita gdp above $10000
VARIABLES                                    (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)           (10)
                                            2.641      14.090         10.955          14.981        12.857      -23.738**    18.241         25.553          17.964        26.655
per capita GDP
                                           [3.441]     [16.609]       [17.233]       [16.601]       [17.088]    [11.690]     [32.523]       [34.940]       [32.428]       [34.523]
                                            -0.121      -0.469         -0.300         -0.510         -0.394     1.195**       -0.665         -0.991         -0.647         -1.040
per capita GDP square
                                           [0.182]     [0.843]        [0.877]         [0.842]       [0.869]      [0.593]     [1.599]        [1.719]         [1.594]       [1.698]
                                                      -12.439***    -12.163***      -12.187***     -12.162***               -17.849***    -17.895***      -17.385***     -17.676***
years of schooling
                                                       [3.540]        [3.528]         [3.539]       [3.528]                  [4.451]        [4.482]         [4.423]       [4.459]
                                                      16.921***      14.984***      16.759***      15.108***                17.606***      13.109**       16.041***      12.286**
investment rate
                                                       [4.377]        [4.454]         [4.366]       [4.443]                  [6.108]        [6.280]         [6.036]       [6.136]
                                                        -0.065         -0.050         -0.072         -0.056                  -0.283**      -0.273**        -0.351**       -0.342**
manufacturing employment share
                                                       [0.083]        [0.083]         [0.083]       [0.084]                  [0.139]        [0.139]         [0.142]       [0.144]
change in manufacturing employment share              1.033***       1.095***        1.061***      1.122***                 1.553***       1.945***        1.782***      2.202***
(from t-5 to t)
                                                       [0.323]        [0.328]         [0.324]       [0.331]                  [0.502]        [0.541]         [0.521]       [0.566]
                                                      -0.226***      -0.212***       -0.222***      -0.210**                 -1.522**      -1.797***       -1.644**      -1.937***
polity2
                                                       [0.080]        [0.082]         [0.080]       [0.082]                  [0.643]        [0.677]         [0.650]       [0.687]
                                                        -0.187         -0.172         -0.176         -0.168                   -0.107         -0.113         -0.047         -0.066
dependency rate (old)
                                                       [0.117]        [0.115]         [0.117]       [0.115]                  [0.128]        [0.128]         [0.129]       [0.130]
                                                        0.028          0.025           0.029         0.028                    0.016          0.014          -0.001         0.001
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                       [0.056]        [0.057]         [0.056]       [0.057]                  [0.083]        [0.085]         [0.083]       [0.085]
                                                      0.043***        0.040**        0.043***       0.040**                  0.058**        0.047*         0.060**        0.048*
openness
                                                       [0.016]        [0.017]         [0.016]       [0.016]                  [0.025]        [0.026]         [0.025]       [0.026]
                                                        -0.018         0.018          -0.020         0.022                    -0.157         -0.095         -0.187         -0.108
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                       [0.094]        [0.097]         [0.093]       [0.097]                  [0.156]        [0.162]         [0.153]       [0.160]
                                                        0.253          -0.026          0.087         -0.146                   1.405          1.045           0.606         0.325
undervaluation
                                                       [1.119]        [1.131]         [1.134]       [1.145]                  [1.625]        [1.681]         [1.675]       [1.730]
                                                        -2.040         -2.735         -1.539         -2.050                   -0.719         -2.355          1.272         -0.277
inflation
                                                       [2.881]        [2.992]         [2.900]       [2.996]                  [4.924]        [4.900]         [4.901]       [4.874]
                                                        0.667          0.651           0.684         0.691                    0.582          0.717           0.507         0.717
inflation variability
                                                       [0.560]        [0.557]         [0.558]       [0.555]                  [0.772]        [0.777]         [0.771]       [0.778]
oil price growth rate                      0.696***     0.443          -0.201          0.396         -0.158     1.008***      0.459          -0.443          0.163         -0.681

                                                                                    36
                                                [0.213]      [0.467]      [0.528]       [0.464]      [0.517]      [0.287]     [0.574]       [0.667]      [0.574]      [0.667]
                                                             0.061         0.103                                               0.098        0.160
LIBOR
                                                             [0.078]      [0.081]                                             [0.101]       [0.106]
                                                                         5.303***                    4.922**                               7.203***                  7.056***
world trade growth rate
                                                                          [2.040]                    [2.003]                                [2.665]                   [2.666]
                                                                                        0.641         0.707                                              1.739**     1.898***
TED spread
                                                                                        [0.525]      [0.530]                                             [0.693]      [0.704]
Observations                                     1,555        554           554            554         554         824          379          379          379           379
Pseudo R-squared                                0.0119       0.232         0.245        0.233         0.245       0.0216       0.239        0.261         0.255        0.276
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP slump begins. We define slumps by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least
1.0 per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slumps. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000 (columns 1-5) and only those with per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $10,000 (columns 6-10). Real oil
price is crude oil price per barrel in 2014 dollars, collected from Statistical Review of World Energy 2015. Real world trade is world trade in merchandise in current US
dollars, collected from WTO and then deflated by the US CPI. The data for LIBOR and TED spread start from 1986. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant
at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                      37
Appendix
        In this appendix we first detail the definitions and sources of our data in Appendix
Table A. In Appendix Table B, we then present probit regression results analogous to Tables
4, 5, and 8 in the text. Finally Appendix C report logit regression results where the dependent
variable is now TFP growth accelerations and TFP growth recoveries. For accelerations
(Tables C1-C2), we find that such episodes are significantly less likely in countries with
exceptionally high investment rates (again consistent with the existence of an intensive-
versus-extensive-growth tradeoff). Accelerations are more likely in countries with high old-
age dependency ratios, for reasons that are not obvious. There is some evidence that
accelerations are more likely when economies are more open or growing more open.
        Since TFP slumps and accelerations appear to respond to a number of country
characteristics in similar ways, it is not surprising that the determinants of TFP growth
recoveries (Tables C3-C4) again look broadly similar. We again see a positive coefficient on
investment, opposite-signed coefficients on the two dependency rates, and a positive
coefficient on the change in openness.




                                              38
Appendix Table A. Definitions and Data Sources

Variables                   Description and construction                        Data Source

                            PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Chain Series),        Penn World Tables 8.1
Per Capita GDP
                            at 2005 constant prices                             (cgdpo/pop)

                                                                                Penn World Tables 8.1
Total Factor Productivity   TFP at constant national prices (2005=1)
                                                                                (rtfpna)

Years of Schooling          Average Years of Schooling Attained                 Barro and Lee(2014)

                            Government Consumption Share of PPP
                                                                                Penn World Tables 8.1
Investment Share            Converted GDP Per Capita at 2005 constant
                                                                                (csh_i)
                            prices

                            People who work for a public or private
Employment in industry      employer and receive remuneration in wages,         World Development
(% of total employment)     salary, commission, tips, piece rates, or pay in    Indicators, World Bank
                            kind.

                            Value of the gross output of producers less the
Industry, Value added (%    value of intermediate goods and services            World Development
of GDP)                     consumed in production, before accounting for       Indicators, World Bank
                            consumption of fixed capital in production

                            Polity score captures the regime authority
                            spectrum on a scale ranging from -10
Polity Index                                                                    Center for Systemic Peace
                            (hereditary monarchy) to 10 (consolidated
                            democracy).

                                                                                World Bank’s Worldwide
Rule of Law                 Rule of Law: Estimate(WGI)
                                                                                Governance Indicators

                            Industrial Electricity Prices including all taxes   International energy price
                            first converted to pounds using annual average      comparison statistics,
Real Electricity Cost
                            exchange rates and then converted to real by        Department of Energy &
                            deflating by the UK CPI                             Climate Change, the U.K.

                            Industrial Gas Prices including all taxes first     International energy price
                            converted to pounds using annual average            comparison statistics,
Real Gas Cost
                            exchange and then converted to real by deflating    Department of Energy &
                            by the UK CPI                                       Climate Change, the U.K.

                            Crude oil prices per barrel in 2014 dollars         Statistical Review of
Real oil price                                                                  World Energy 2015,
                                                                                British Petroleum

                            Percentage ratio of younger dependents              World Development
Dependency Ratio, Young     (younger than 15) to the working-age                Indicators 2014
                            population (15-64 years old)

                            Percentage ratio of older dependents (older than    World Development
Dependency Ratio, Old
                            64) to the working-age population                   Indicators 2014

                            The total trade (exports and imports) as a          Penn World Tables 7.1
Trade Openness
                            percentage of GDP                                   (openk)

Terms of Trade              Net barter terms of trade index calculated as the   World Development
                            percentage ratio of the export unit value index

                                                    39
                   to the import unit value index, measured relative   Indicators 2014
                   to the base year 2000

                   World Merchandise Exports in currency US            World Trade Organization
Real World Trade
                   dollars deflated by the US CPI.

                   3- month London Interbank Offered Rate, based       FRED Economic Data
LIBOR
                   on US dollar, year average

TED spread         TED spread, year average                            FRED Economic Data


US CPI             US Consumer Price Index, year average               FRED Economic Data


UK CPI             UK Consumer Price Index, year average               FRED Economic Data




                                          40
Appendix Table B1. Determinants of TFP Slumps for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $4,000 (Probit, Consecutive Points)


VARIABLES                                        (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)       (15)
                                                4.787     2.994      2.435    4.523      6.853      5.475*     12.522***   4.215     4.998     3.370     2.608     4.469     3.381     3.487      7.444
per capita GDP
                                               [3.033]    [3.150]   [3.219]   [4.619]   [4.626]     [3.127]     [4.343]    [3.149]   [3.550]   [3.133]   [3.182]   [3.270]   [3.160]   [3.129]   [6.192]
                                                -0.256    -0.169    -0.141    -0.247     -0.360     -0.290*    -0.650***   -0.232    -0.271    -0.186    -0.147    -0.245    -0.187    -0.192     -0.396
per capita GDP square
                                               [0.163]    [0.170]   [0.173]   [0.245]   [0.243]     [0.168]     [0.229]    [0.170]   [0.189]   [0.169]   [0.171]   [0.177]   [0.171]   [0.169]   [0.322]
                                               -0.448**                                                                                                                                           -0.428
years of schooling
                                               [0.211]                                                                                                                                           [0.496]
                                                          0.193
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                          [5.203]
                                                                    1.760**                                                                                                                       2.494*
investment rate
                                                                    [0.833]                                                                                                                      [1.405]
manufacturing employment share                                                0.007                                                                                                               0.008
                                                                              [0.016]                                                                                                            [0.022]
change in manufacturing employment share                                                0.483***                                                                                                 0.442***
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                        [0.167]                                                                                                  [0.171]
                                                                                                   -0.036***                                                                                      -0.029
polity2
                                                                                                    [0.010]                                                                                      [0.030]
                                                                                                                 0.018
rule of law
                                                                                                                [0.175]
                                                                                                                           0.001                                                                  -0.000
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                           [0.012]                                                               [0.020]
                                                                                                                                     0.004                                                        -0.013
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                                     [0.005]                                                     [0.016]
                                                                                                                                               0.001                                              -0.002
openness
                                                                                                                                               [0.002]                                           [0.003]
                                                                                                                                                         0.041                                    0.049
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                         [0.027]                                 [0.046]
                                                                                                                                                                   -0.054                         -0.534
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                   [0.203]                       [0.437]


                                                                                                      41
                                                                                                                                                      0.033               1.192
inflation
                                                                                                                                                      [0.573]             [1.400]
                                                                                                                                                                0.095     0.188
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                                [0.161]   [0.216]
Observations                           1,591    1,520    1,604     840       670     1,585     387      1,443    1,443    1,604     1,533    1,443    1,604     1,604      664
Pseudo R-squared                       0.128    0.112    0.128    0.0750   0.0843    0.132    0.0852    0.111    0.111    0.123     0.114    0.111    0.122     0.122     0.116
Note: We report probit regression results with year fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years centered on
the year when a TFP slowdown begins. We define slowdowns by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0
per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slowdowns. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil countries are not included. Numbers in parentheses are robust standard errors. *Statistically significant at the
10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                      42
Appendix Table B2. Determinants of TFP Slumps for Countries whose Per Capita GDP is above $10,000 (Probit, Consecutive Points)
VARIABLES                                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)       (15)
                                           -5.251    -8.442     -8.867    -14.277    -9.424     -3.193    -7.372     -8.393    -9.239     -8.166    -9.545    -8.659    -7.318    -8.243    -9.400
per capita GDP
                                           [8.738]   [8.709]    [9.123]   [11.238]   [10.915]   [9.321]   [12.243]   [9.325]   [10.390]   [8.831]   [9.018]   [9.108]   [8.840]   [8.801]   [14.980]
                                           0.246      0.396     0.420      0.697      0.456     0.142      0.351     0.399      0.440     0.385     0.455     0.403     0.345     0.389      0.429
per capita GDP square
                                           [0.442]   [0.441]    [0.462]   [0.571]    [0.551]    [0.470]   [0.610]    [0.471]   [0.526]    [0.448]   [0.457]   [0.460]   [0.447]   [0.446]   [0.745]
                                           -0.806*                                                                                                                                          -0.325
years of schooling
                                           [0.453]                                                                                                                                          [0.712]
change in years of schooling                         -12.784
(from t-5 to t)
                                                     [10.539]
                                                                1.077                                                                                                                        2.114
investment rate
                                                                [1.415]                                                                                                                     [2.243]
                                                                           0.010                                                                                                            -0.014
manufacturing employment share
                                                                          [0.021]                                                                                                           [0.029]
change in manufacturing employment share                                             0.545**                                                                                                0.677**
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                     [0.245]                                                                                                [0.282]
                                                                                                -0.077*                                                                                     -0.116
polity2
                                                                                                [0.041]                                                                                     [0.083]
                                                                                                          -0.065
rule of law
                                                                                                          [0.296]
                                                                                                                     -0.007                                                                  0.025
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                     [0.015]                                                                [0.030]
                                                                                                                               -0.001                                                       -0.032
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                               [0.010]                                                      [0.021]
                                                                                                                                          -0.001                                            -0.004
openness
                                                                                                                                          [0.003]                                           [0.005]
                                                                                                                                                    0.020                                    0.041
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                    [0.040]                                 [0.080]
                                                                                                                                                              -0.295                        -1.155*
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                              [0.318]                       [0.640]
                                                                                                                                                                        0.728                3.042
inflation
                                                                                                                                                                        [1.377]             [1.894]

                                                                                                  43
                                                                                                                                                                0.134    0.288
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                               [0.202]   [0.250]
Observations                           799       786      799      529       463      794      236       769      769      799       786      769      799       799      458
Pseudo R-squared                       0.175    0.170    0.170     0.119    0.121    0.179    0.0903    0.169    0.169    0.169     0.168    0.170    0.169     0.169    0.160
Note: We report probit regression results with year fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years centered on
the year when a TFP slowdown begins. We define slowdowns by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0
per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slowdowns. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil countries are not included. Numbers in parentheses are robust standard errors. *Statistically significant at the
10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                      44
Appendix Table B3. The Impact of Global Factors on TFP Slumps (Probit, Consecutive Points)
                                                      countries with per capita gdp above $4000                        countries with per capita gdp above $10000
VARIABLES                                    (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)           (8)             (9)          (10)
                                            4.236       6.610          5.969          6.468        5.914    -10.791*    -19.519        -20.870         -21.247      -21.871
per capita GDP
                                           [2.834]     [6.154]         [6.189]        [6.188]     [6.216]   [5.744]     [13.687]       [13.703]       [14.025]      [13.971]
                                            -0.231      -0.355         -0.320         -0.349      -0.318     0.522*      0.953          1.026           1.035        1.073
per capita GDP Square
                                           [0.153]     [0.321]         [0.323]        [0.323]     [0.324]   [0.293]      [0.682]       [0.682]         [0.699]      [0.696]
                                                        -0.303         -0.367         -0.280      -0.367                 -0.400         -0.630         -0.214        -0.504
years of schooling
                                                       [0.466]         [0.469]        [0.457]     [0.460]                [0.736]       [0.736]         [0.711]      [0.715]
                                                        2.281*         1.973          2.227*       1.998                 1.638          1.272           1.328        1.094
investment rate
                                                       [1.358]         [1.393]        [1.349]     [1.372]                [2.126]       [2.218]         [2.131]      [2.194]
                                                        0.000          0.003          -0.001       0.003                 -0.019         -0.018         -0.023        -0.022
manufacturing employment share
                                                       [0.020]         [0.020]        [0.021]     [0.021]                [0.027]       [0.027]         [0.028]      [0.028]
change in manufacturing employment share               0.426**        0.437**        0.426**      0.437**               0.655**       0.710***        0.673***      0.724***
(from t-5 to t)
                                                       [0.173]         [0.176]        [0.173]     [0.176]                [0.257]       [0.271]         [0.259]      [0.273]
                                                        -0.039         -0.034         -0.039      -0.033                 -0.095         -0.096         -0.100        -0.100
polity2
                                                       [0.031]         [0.030]        [0.030]     [0.030]                [0.087]       [0.088]         [0.088]      [0.090]
                                                        0.005          0.003          0.006        0.003                 0.025          0.021           0.030        0.024
dependency rate (old)
                                                       [0.021]         [0.020]        [0.021]     [0.020]                [0.028]       [0.027]         [0.028]      [0.027]
                                                        -0.017         -0.017         -0.018      -0.017                 -0.034         -0.033         -0.040*      -0.037*
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                       [0.015]         [0.015]        [0.015]     [0.015]                [0.022]       [0.022]         [0.022]      [0.022]
                                                        -0.001         -0.001         -0.000      -0.001                 -0.002         -0.002         -0.001        -0.002
openness
                                                       [0.003]         [0.003]        [0.003]     [0.003]                [0.004]       [0.004]         [0.004]      [0.004]
                                                        0.034          0.047          0.033        0.047                 0.018          0.044           0.009        0.038
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                       [0.044]         [0.043]        [0.043]     [0.043]                [0.072]       [0.072]         [0.070]      [0.070]
                                                        -0.373         -0.386         -0.393      -0.397                 -0.420         -0.376         -0.544        -0.467
undervaluation
                                                       [0.405]         [0.414]        [0.403]     [0.413]                [0.534]       [0.570]         [0.545]      [0.576]
                                                        0.250          0.044          0.296        0.124                 1.393          0.791           1.369        0.863
inflation
                                                       [1.272]         [1.280]        [1.302]     [1.301]                [1.918]       [1.898]         [1.932]      [1.897]
                                                        0.170          0.167          0.170        0.170                 0.377*         0.419*          0.352        0.401*
inflation variability
                                                       [0.214]         [0.217]        [0.214]     [0.218]                [0.225]       [0.241]         [0.229]      [0.243]
oil price growth rate                      0.475***     0.401*         0.095          0.408*       0.115    0.663***     0.469*         0.038          0.473*        0.064

                                                                                   45
                                                    [0.131]      [0.214]       [0.234]      [0.208]       [0.220]       [0.179]      [0.265]      [0.293]       [0.254]       [0.268]
                                                                  0.012        0.024                                                  0.010        0.024
LIBOR
                                                                 [0.038]       [0.040]                                               [0.049]      [0.053]
                                                                              2.688***                   2.583***                                3.488***                    3.346***
world trade growth rate
                                                                               [0.967]                    [0.894]                                 [1.223]                     [1.117]
                                                                                             0.169        0.174                                                  0.384         0.363
TED spread
                                                                                            [0.255]       [0.257]                                               [0.317]       [0.322]
Observations                                         1,604         649          649            649         649           847           460          460           460           460
Pseudo R-squared                                    0.0117       0.0768        0.0865       0.0776        0.0867        0.0350       0.0896        0.105        0.0939         0.108
Note: We report probit regression results with year fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years centered on
the year when a TFP slowdown begins. We define slowdowns by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP was at least 1.0
per cent lower on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP slowdowns. The sample includes only those countries
whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000 (columns 1-5) and only those with per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $10,000 (columns 6-10). Real oil
price is crude oil price per barrel in 2014 dollars, collected from Statistical Review of World Energy 2015. Real world trade is world trade in merchandise in current US
dollars, collected from WTO and then deflated by the US CPI. The data for LIBOR and TED spread start from 1986. Oil countries are not included. Numbers in parentheses
are robust standard errors. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                          46
Appendix Table C1. Determinants of TFP Accelerations for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $4,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)

VARIABLES                                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)      (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)       (13)        (14)
                                                8.265     8.872*     19.007***     9.404      9.336     111.689* 18.192*** 22.550***     9.276*      8.639     14.623**    9.221*     18.056** 620.071***
per capita GDP
                                               [5.993]    [5.336]     [5.666]     [18.546]   [5.789]    [58.204]    [6.204]   [6.574]    [5.290]    [5.343]     [5.954]    [5.324]     [8.514]    [198.215]
                                               -0.677**   -0.713**   -1.241***    -1.400     -0.728**   -7.387**   -1.263*** -1.491***   -0.733**   -0.701**   -1.039***   -0.728**   -1.250*** -35.609***
per capita GDP square
                                               [0.323]    [0.288]     [0.304]     [0.990]    [0.310]     [3.292]    [0.339]   [0.360]    [0.285]    [0.288]     [0.324]    [0.287]     [0.462]    [11.092]
                                                0.317                                                                                                                                               5.790
years of schooling
                                               [0.908]                                                                                                                                            [20.245]
                                                           -0.217
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                          [10.177]
                                                                     -11.689***                                                                                                                  -115.462***
investment rate
                                                                      [1.990]                                                                                                                     [38.036]
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.024*
manufacturing employment share
                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.572]
change in manufacturing employment share                                          -0.275                                                                                                          5.647**
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                  [0.332]                                                                                                          [2.463]
                                                                                              -0.003                                                                                                0.038
polity2
                                                                                             [0.026]                                                                                               [0.513]
                                                                                                         2.087
rule of law
                                                                                                         [2.398]
                                                                                                                   0.193***                                                                       3.078**
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                    [0.065]                                                                        [1.364]
                                                                                                                              0.058***                                                             -0.328
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                              [0.020]                                                              [0.277]
                                                                                                                                          0.002                                                   0.234**
openness
                                                                                                                                         [0.006]                                                   [0.111]
                                                                                                                                                     0.027                                          0.103
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                    [0.045]                                        [0.502]
                                                                                                                                                                -0.368                            15.962**
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                [0.548]                            [7.086]
inflation                                                                                                                                                                   0.066                  12.879



                                                                                                        47
                                                                                                                                                   [1.179]             [15.485]
                                                                                                                                                              1.216     8.791*
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                             [1.124]    [5.169]
Observations                           1,704     1,633     1,704     605       1,683        245   1,534     1,534     1,704     1,633     1,534     1,704     1,025      336
Pseudo R-squared                       0.283     0.274     0.311     0.541     0.279    0.695     0.292     0.292     0.283     0.274     0.285     0.283     0.344     0.817
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP acceleration begins. We define accelerations by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP
was at least 1.0 per cent higher on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP accelerations. The sample includes only
those countries whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                       48
Appendix Table C2. Determinants of TFP Accelerations for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $10,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)

VARIABLES                                        (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)
                                               18.284      40.485     28.485      171.455*** 194.181***       5.781    421.732     45.471*    50.971*    33.386     31.554     36.420     20.174     34.117
per capita GDP
                                               [25.597]   [25.793]    [25.363]     [43.739]   [65.699]    [26.017]     [337.135]   [26.691]   [26.591]   [26.402]   [24.881]   [27.818]   [25.917]   [32.044]
                                               -1.397     -2.478*      -1.898     -9.826*** -11.236***        -0.673   -26.701     -2.813**   -3.078**   -2.126     -2.031     -2.359     -1.456     -2.260
per capita GDP square
                                               [1.321]    [1.338]     [1.310]      [2.296]    [3.483]     [1.350]      [20.437]    [1.391]    [1.385]    [1.367]    [1.291]    [1.438]    [1.340]    [1.680]
                                               5.354**
years of schooling
                                               [2.534]
                                                          59.685**
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                          [24.578]
                                                                     -21.753***
investment rate
                                                                      [4.037]
                                                                                   -0.243*
manufacturing employment share
                                                                                   [0.141]
change in manufacturing employment share                                                      -1.176*
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                              [0.600]
                                                                                                          1.472***
polity2
                                                                                                          [0.493]
                                                                                                                        20.981
rule of law
                                                                                                                       [15.019]
                                                                                                                                    0.137
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                                   [0.091]
                                                                                                                                               0.037
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                                              [0.037]
                                                                                                                                                         -0.000
openness
                                                                                                                                                         [0.018]
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.018
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                                    [0.108]
                                                                                                                                                                               -1.353
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                               [1.145]
inflation                                                                                                                                                                                 -6.437



                                                                                                         49
                                                                                                                                                               [4.063]
                                                                                                                                                                         1.355
inflation variability
                                                                                                                                                                         [1.550]
Observations                            889       876       889       487       375         884      90       852       852       889       876       852       889       622
Pseudo R-squared                       0.343     0.344     0.393     0.543     0.614        0.357   0.814    0.342     0.339     0.335     0.334     0.340     0.340     0.381
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP acceleration begins. We define accelerations by considering successive 5 year periods and isolating episodes where the growth rate of TFP
was at least 1.0 per cent higher on average in the second period than the first. We use the entire string of consecutive years as TFP accelerations. The sample includes only
those countries whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $10,000. Oil countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                                                       50
Appendix Table C3. Determinants of TFP Recoveries for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $4,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)

VARIABLES                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)        (13)
                                               26.085*** 18.265*** 29.118***        10.401     22.543*** 27.352*** 33.009*** 18.166*** 17.593*** 21.130*** 17.925*** 26.923*** 482.712***
per capita GDP
                                                [6.793]     [5.910]     [6.353]     [18.310]    [6.611]     [6.688]     [7.059]     [5.858]     [5.899]     [6.151]     [5.878]     [9.808]   [141.828]
                                               -1.653***   -1.232***   -1.788***    -1.441     -1.449***   -1.758***   -2.045***   -1.229***   -1.194***   -1.380***   -1.209***   -1.774*** -28.015***
per capita GDP square
                                                [0.370]     [0.322]     [0.344]     [0.978]     [0.358]     [0.368]     [0.387]     [0.319]     [0.321]     [0.337]     [0.320]     [0.538]    [7.940]
                                               -2.569***                                                                                                                                       11.807
years of schooling
                                                [0.995]                                                                                                                                        [19.658]
                                                            6.448
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                           [10.657]
                                                                       -12.555***                                                                                                             -95.262***
investment rate
                                                                        [2.165]                                                                                                                [28.150]
                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.880*
manufacturing employment share
                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.453]
change in manufacturing employment share                                            -0.157                                                                                                     4.391**
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                    [0.341]                                                                                                    [1.743]
                                                                                                -0.044                                                                                          0.310
polity2
                                                                                                [0.028]                                                                                        [0.371]
                                                                                                           0.263***                                                                            2.980**
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                            [0.069]                                                                            [1.160]
                                                                                                                       0.078***                                                                 -0.155
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                        [0.021]                                                                [0.251]
                                                                                                                                    0.008                                                      0.171**
openness
                                                                                                                                    [0.007]                                                    [0.085]
                                                                                                                                                0.033                                           0.315
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                [0.048]                                        [0.406]
                                                                                                                                                            -0.350
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                            [0.593]
                                                                                                                                                                        0.623                  26.393*
inflation
                                                                                                                                                                        [1.318]                [14.723]
inflation variability                                                                                                                                                               1.273      7.222*



                                                                                                    51
                                                                                                                                                             [1.196]   [4.278]
Observations                            1,649      1,581     1,649       578       1,628     1,486      1,486      1,649     1,581      1,486      1,649      975        340
Pseudo R-squared                        0.306      0.289     0.332      0.526      0.298     0.297      0.296      0.302     0.289      0.284      0.301     0.358      0.793
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP recovery begins. We define a recovery if an accelerations followed a slowdown based on the 5 year – 1 per cent threshold citeron. We use
the entire string of consecutive years as TFP accelerations. The sample includes only those countries whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $4,000. Oil countries
are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                                                      52
Appendix Table C4. Determinants of TFP Recoveries for Countries with Per Capita GDP above $10,000 (Logit, Consecutive Points)

VARIABLES                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)        (13)
                                               67.093**    93.546*** 79.282*** 200.196***      47.416*    713.114     71.182*** 81.232*** 75.192*** 74.541***         65.494**    72.246**    62.671*
per capita GDP
                                               [27.708]    [28.580]     [28.342]    [64.993]   [27.790]   [621.966]   [27.493]    [27.564]    [28.778]    [26.750]    [28.271]    [28.427]    [32.642]
                                               -3.943***   -5.263***   -4.577*** -11.484***    -2.865**   -40.302     -4.142***   -4.636***   -4.337***   -4.303***   -3.850***   -4.186***   -3.736**
per capita GDP square
                                                [1.440]     [1.493]     [1.479]     [3.436]    [1.450]    [33.851]     [1.436]     [1.436]     [1.499]     [1.397]     [1.466]     [1.482]    [1.716]
                                                2.984
years of schooling
                                                [2.620]
                                                           82.324***
change in years of schooling (from t-5 to t)
                                                           [26.389]
                                                                       -23.952***
investment rate
                                                                        [4.323]
change in manufacturing employment share                                            -1.259**
(from t-5 to t)
                                                                                    [0.597]
                                                                                               1.722***
polity2
                                                                                               [0.641]
                                                                                                           5.163
rule of law
                                                                                                           [5.830]
                                                                                                                       0.161*
dependency rate (old)
                                                                                                                       [0.092]
                                                                                                                                   0.072*
dependency rate (young&old)
                                                                                                                                   [0.039]
                                                                                                                                               0.002
openness
                                                                                                                                               [0.019]
                                                                                                                                                           0.054
change in openness (from t-5 to t)
                                                                                                                                                           [0.107]
                                                                                                                                                                       -0.928
undervaluation
                                                                                                                                                                       [1.146]
                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.658
inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                   [4.121]
inflation variability                                                                                                                                                                          1.580



                                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                                                                 [1.563]
Observations                               859         846        859        370        854         85         822        822        859        846         822        859        597
Pseudo R-squared                          0.345       0.357      0.408      0.587      0.363       0.804      0.336      0.337      0.343       0.339      0.332      0.343      0.365
Note: We report logit regression results with year and country fixed effects included. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the three years
centered on the year when a TFP recovery begins. We define a recovery if an accelerations followed a slowdown based on the 5 year – 1 per cent threshold citeron. We use
the entire string of consecutive years as TFP accelerations. The sample includes only those countries whose per capita GDP is above U.S. 2005 constant $10,000. Oil
countries are not included. *Statistically significant at the 10 percent level. **Statistically significant at the 5 percent level. ***Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                           54
