                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DYNAMIC FACTOR MODELS OF
                  CONSUMPTION, HOURS, AND INCOME




                        Joseph G. Altonji

                        Ana Paula Martins

                          Aloysius Siow




                      Working Paper No. 2155




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            February 1987




An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the meetings of the
Econometric Society in New York, December 28th, 1985. We wish to
thank Jonathan Friedman and Thomas Melito for excellent research
assistance in the initial stages of the study. We also thank John
Ham, Joe Hotz, John Kennan, participants in seminars at McMaster
University, Princeton University, University of Toronto, University
of Virginia, and participants at the conference of intertemporal
choice organized by the Econometric Society and NORC for helpful
comments. Altonji and Siow gratefully acknowledge research support
from the National Science Foundation. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2155
                                         February 1987


     Dynamic Factor Models of Consumption, Hours and Income


                              ABSTRACT



      This paper addresses two questions. First, what are the key
 factors that affect a consumers lifetime budget constraint and
how do they evolve over the lifecycle? Second, how do consumers
respond to changes in these factors? We examine the permanent
income hypothesis and the Keynesian consumption model using a
dynamic factor model of consumption, hours, wag unemployment,
and income. We show that a quarterly dynamic factor r!odel with
restrictions on the lag structure may be used with annual panel
data to account for the fact that in many micro panel data sets
the variables relevant to a study are measured at different time
intervals and/or are aggregates for the calendar year. By using
several income indicators we are able to extend the panel data
studies of Hall and Mishkin and Bernanke to allow for measurement
error. We are also able to study the response of inc3me and
consumption to some of the factors which determine them. In
addition, we study a dynamic factor representation of a joint
lifecycle model of consumption and labor supply. We provide
estimates of the effect of wages, unemployment, and other income
determinants on the marginal utility of income as well as
estimates of the substitution effects of wage change on labor
supply and consumption.



    Joseph G. Altonji                    Ana Paula Martins
    Department of Economics              Department of Economics
    Northwestern University              Columbia University
    Evanston, IL 60201                   New York, NY 10027



                        Aloysius Siow
                        Department of Economics
                        Columbia University
                        New York, NY 10027
                                 INTRODUCTION

     This paper addresses two longstanding questions in the economics of

intertemporal choice.     First, what are the key factors that affect a

consumer's lifetime budget constraint and how do they evolve over the

lifecycle? Second, how do consumers respond to changes in these factors?

     These questions are closely related.       First, the lifecycle model of

consumer behavior treats work hours, which are a key determinant of income, as

an endogenous variable.     Consequently, as Ghez and Becker (1975) have

emphasized, the model of consumer behavior is part of the income model.

Second, even if one views the determinants of income as exogenous to the

consumer, as in most empirical research using Friedman's (1957) permanent

income model, the response of consumption to a change in the factors which

drive income should depend upon consumer beliefs about the size and

persistence of the changes.'    The application of the rational expectations

hypothesis to consumer behavior allows the econometrician to quantify consumer

expectations after specifying an income model.     The estimation of a dynamic

model of income and its economic factors permits one to study the responses of

consumers to expected and unexpected changes in these factors.

     Despite these connections, substantial research on lifecycle models of

consumption, income and labor supply has been conducted without explicitly

modelling the behavior of wages, prices, and income.2 However some questions

cannot be answered without modelling the factors that determine the budget

constraint facing the individual.    If we want to estimate the response of

consumption and labor supply to changes in the marginal utility of income

induced by a typical wage, price or unemployment shock within the lifecycle

context, we need to model these processes. Little empirical research on these

consumption and labor supply responses has been conducted.
                                     —2—

     A few studies of the rational expectations—permanent income model have

estimated a joint model of consumption and income. In a path—breaking paper,

Sargent (1978) use aggregate time series data to estimate a rational

expectations permanent income model.    The innovative panel data studies of

Hall and Mishkin (1982) and Bernanke (1984) also estimated income and

consumption jointly.    In order to identify the response of consumption to

permanent and transitory income changes, they had to impose tight restrictions

on the form of the income process.     In particular, they had to assume that

income is measured without error. The assumption of no measurement error is

strong, as Hall and Mishkin recognized, since many of the variables in panel

data are widely believed to contain substantial measurement error.3

Unfortunately, inferences about consumer responses to income innovations are

likely to be sensitive to misspecification of the income process.

     In this paper, we examine the permanent income hypothesis using a richer

model of the income process. Many micro data sets contain some measures of

income determinants, such as wage rates, hours worked, and hours of

unemployment.   These determinants provide leverage in estimating models of

consumption and income while allowing for measurement error in income.4

Furthermore, use of indicators of the determinants of income makes it possible

to identify some of the economic factors that drive income.5 Our analysis of

the income process builds upon earlier work and is of independent interest.6

     In addition, we estimate a lifecycle model of consumption and labor

supply.   We focus on estimating the effects of wages, unemployment, and other

income determinants on the marginal utility of income. We also provide new

estimates of the intertemporal substitution effects of wage changes on labor

supply.
                                        —3—

        Our econometric models are vector moving average representations of the

consumption, hours, wages, unemployment, and income processes.                The

theoretical models place restrictions on the autocovariances and cross

covariances of these variables. We estimate a model's parameters by fitting

the theoretical covariances of the model to sample covariances that are

estimated from data using minimum distance estimators (Chamberlain (1984),

Hansen (1982)). The data are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).

        In conducting the empirical analysis, we pay special attention to four

econometric issues concerning model specification. First, we experiment with

different assumptions about measurement error. Second, we also provide tests

of a number of the restrictions embodied in our models.

        Third, we attempt to account for the fact that in many micro panel data

sets, including the PSID, the variables relevant to a study are measured at

differenttime intervals and/or are aggregates for the calendar year. For
example, in the PSID, individuals are interviewed at yearly intervals; The
consumption measure and the hourly wage measure refer to the time of the
survey    (typically in March)   while family income and hours unemployed refer to
the   calendar year which precedes the survey date. This non—syncronization and

time aggregation of the relevant variables is an important problem for

estimating and testing the permanent income and lifecycle models. We show how

quarterly dynamic factor models can be restricted with polynomial distributed

lag structures to cope with this problem.

        A fourth set of issues arises because the conventional CM—square tests

largely reject the hypothesis that the data are covariance stationary. That

is, the tests reject the hypothesis that the covariances are the same for each

year.      This finding is typical of previous studies of income (see, for

example, Hause (1980), Kearl (1985), Abowd and Card (1986)).          The finding
                                      —4—

poses a potential problem because the structural models may be unidentified if

the non—stationarity cannot be easily parameterized. For our sample, when we

allowed for simple parameterizations of non—stationarity of the data or when

we used dummy variables for specific moments to control for the strongest

departure from stationarity, we obtained estimates of the structural

parameters which do not differ much from those where we made no allowance for

non—stationarity. We also provide evidence that the rejection of stationarity

may be due partly to imprecision in our estimate of the fourth moment matrix

of the data, which is used for both inference and efficient estimation.

     Our main substantive findings are the following.

     1.   Changes in consumption, hours, income, wages, and unemployment are

not normally distributed.      Inference based on the assumption of normality,

which is imposed in a number of previous studies, is likely to overstate the

precision of the estimates. Even with our sample size, 1051 individuals, it

is difficult to obtain precise estimates of structural dynamic factor models

using the PSID data.

     2.   In general, the zero restrictions implied by the permanent income

model on the covariance structure of the data are   not   rejected. There is some

evidence, although quantitatively small, that lagged unemployment and income

factors affect the change in consumption when we estimate the model without

transforming the data.     After transforming the data into logs, there is no

evidence that lagged factors affect the change in consumption7. We interpret

this lack of robustness and the quantitative magnitudes involved as supportive

of the permanent income hypothesis.

     3. There is substantial measurement error in measured income in all our

models (45% —   75%   of the variance of the change in measured income).     The

lower estimates are based on models that account for non—syncronization in the

data. We are less successful in obtaining precise estimates of measurement
                                   —5—

error in measured wages and work hours. A number of our point estimates are

negative. We find only weak evidence against the hypothesis that measurement

error is white noise.

     4.    After accounting for measurement error in measured income,

innovations in the wage, unemployment and work hours explain surprisingly

little of the remaining variance in the change in family income. This lack of

explanatory power is consistent with results which we obtain using regression

techniques to describe the data.        However the result still suggests

misspecification of the income model. When we account for non—syncronization

In the data, the explanatory power of the economic variables determining

income improves.

     5.   We could not get a precise estimate of the discount factor used by

consumers to discount their projected income flows. Estimates range from —.04

to 1.6. The more reasonable point estimates are obtained after accounting for

non—sycronization in the data. The imprecision may be attributed to the lack

of precision in our estimates of the consumption response to unemployment and

work hours innovations, and in our estimates of the response of income to

lagged innovations in wages and income, and possible misspecification of the

income process. We obtained estimates of the marginal propensity to consume

food out of permanent income in the range of .036 to .067. We had similar

difficulties getting a precise estimate of the discount factor with the Hall

and Mishkin model.

     6. The Keynesian model was consistently rejected by the data.

     7.    We show that it is feasible to estimate quarterly models of

intertemporal choice with non—syncronized annual panel data by restricting the

quarterly lag structures to polynomial functions.
                                          —6—


        8.     We find that the zero restrictions implied by the lifecycle model are

not rejected. However, we obtain a small and imprecise negative estimate of

the intertemporal labor supply elasticity.            We also obtain a small and

imprecise negative estimate of the cross substitution elasticity.               This

suggests that consumption and leisure are complements.           However, the null

hypothesis of intra period separability of consumption and leisure cannot be

rejected.

        9. We provide an estimate of the total variance of the innovation in the

marginal utility of income.           Wage and unemployment innovations together

explain over 40% of the total variance. Wage innovations are responsible for

most of this variance.

        The paper proceeds as follows.       Section 1 provides an overview of the

dynamic factor models studied in the paper.               Section 2 discusses our

specification of the permanent income model and the Keynesian model. Section

3 presents a methodology for taking account of time aggregation and

nonsynchronization in estimating such models. Section 4 discusses estimation

methods and the data. In Section 5 we discuss the estimates of the covariance

stationary model, the properties of the income process, and estimates of the

permanent income and the Keynesian consumption models.            Sections 6 and 7

present a dynamic factor specification of the lifecycle modl and a set of

results. We provide a research agenda in Section 8.



    1   • DYN&MIC FACTOR MODELS OF CONSUMPTION, INCOME ANT) HOURS: AN OVERVIEW

        This   paper estimates various dynamic factor models of consumption, income

and hours. We use the real wage and unemployment as additional indicators of

factors which drive these variables.8 Throughout the paper, L is the first

difference operator, C is consumption at t, Y is real family income at t, W

is the real wage at t, Z is annual hours of unemployment at t for the head of
                                       —7

household, and N is the head's annual work hours at t.                For notational

convenience, subscripts for individuals are left implicit. For X=C,W,Y,Z, and

N, X* is the measure of X at t.        We estimate models using first differences

of the levels of the variables and models using first differences of the logs

of the variables (we note one exception to this when the case arises). In

analyzing the RE—lifecycle model, we replace '        with   labor earnings of the

head of household ''t• For convenience, when it does not cause confusion, we

refer to the first difference of the variable as the variable itself.

     We analyse consumption, hours and income using various dynamic factor

models that are nested in the following general model:




A General Dyna.ic Factor   Model of   Consuaption, Inco.e and Hours

                      General Consumption Model (C*t):

(1.la)   LC*, WoLW + 8cw1'wt—1 + cw2'wt—2 + 8czO'zt + cz1"zt—1
          + 8cz2Uzt_2 + cnO'nt + 8cn1'nt—1 + 8cn2'nt—2 + cyO'yt

          + Cy1uyt.1 + CY2uY_2 + 8ccOUct cc1"ct—1 + 8cc2Uct_2


                              General Income Model

         Income Equation (Ey*t):

(1.lb) Y* wOt1wt        + 8iu.i + 8yw2"wt2 + 8yz0uzt            + iut_i
          + B2u_2 + 8yflOUflt + )?fllUfltl + 8Yfl2ufl_2 + yyoUyt

          +           + yy2'yt—2 + l1Eyt

         Annual Work Hours Equation (1N*t):

(1.lc)   tN*t = 8nwO"wt + 8nwlUwt_1 + 8nw2twt_2

          + nzO'zt + nz1zt—1 + nz2"zt—2 + 8nnOtmnt + Bnnlhmnt_1

          + 8nn2Unt....2 + 8nyOtyt + 8nylhlyt_1 ÷ 8ny2'yt2 + nt

         Wage Equation (W*t):
                                              —8—

(1.ld) W* =            out + 8ww1h1wt1 + ww2t1wt_2 + LC
           Unemployment Equation (Z*t):

(1.le) iZ* =                    +            + zz2t1zt_2



     The factors              '-'             and u are assumed to have the following

properties:

Var (ui) =    1        i=c,y,w,z,n         (Normalization of the variances to 1)

Coy (ujt,ujt_k) = 0,          i=c,y,w,z,n; k * 0 (No serial correlation)

Coy (uitujt..k) =      0,     i * j; for all k (factors have 0 cross covariances)

     The measurement error (ME) components have the properties

Var it = aj2           i=y,w,n
Coy (cit,e itk = o            i=y,w,n   ; k * 0 (No serial correlation in ME)

Coy (t,Cjt) =      0        i * i. (ME are unrelated)

Coy (€it,ujt_k) = 0         for all i,j,k. (ME are unrelated to true variables)

     The          are the response coefficients or "factor ibading" relating the

variable i to factor j lagged k periods. For example,                is the response of

income to the wage factor                    We restrict the analysis to second order

vector moving average (MA) models because autocovariances and cross
covariances among the variables are very small after two lags. We work with a

dynamic factor framework rather than a VAR regression model for

                        and         in part because it is very difficult to accomodate

measurement error in the latter framework.

     Equations (1.ld) and (1.le) specify that wages W* and unemployment

      are autonomous processes that are driven only by their own factors. The

zero correlation between wages and unemployment implied by this assumption is

tested below. We use the same equations for wages and unemployment in all of

our empirical models.
                                           —9--


       Equation (1.la) specifies that consumption C' depends on the current

and lagged wage, unemployment, hours of work, and income factors.            We also

include current and lagged values of an independent consumption factor Uct

that captures consumption shocks unrelated to the rest of the model and also

measurement error in consumption. Equations (1.lb) and (1.lc)) specify that

income              and hours N*t depend on the current and lagged wage,
unemployment, hours, and income factors.              Different economic models of

consumption, income and hours imply different restrictions on the factor

loadings in the consumption, income and hours equations.

       The general model also allows for serially uncorrelated measurement

errors                  and    in the measures Y*, W* and        of the variables

      and          In specific cases, we also experiment with models in which

C      C     and        are first order moving average measurement errors.
    yt, wt         nt
       The above model cannot be estimated with our data. Instead we consider

smaller models whose restrictions are implied by various economic models of

consumption and hours.           For each economic model, we first test the zero

restrictions implied by the theory against a model which imposes only

covariance stationarity on the data.           Then we estimate the economic model,

test the overidentifying restrictions against larger factor models and also

models which only impose covariance stationarity, and evaluate the parameter

estimates.         Without futher ado we turn to the permanent income and the

Keynesian models.



        2. THE RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS-PERMANENT INCOME AND KEYNESIAN MODELS




       The   starting point for the rational expectations permanent income (RE—Fl)
model is the consumption change equation:
                                       — 10     —




(2.1)      ic        —
                         c_1   =     (1 — p)   _0p1 (E — Et_i) '+i
            C consumption at time t

           p     constant discount factor =    (1 + interest rateY1

            Et    expectation operator conditional on information available at t

                  income of individual at t

                   permanent income conditional on information at t

        Equation (2.1) states that the change in consumption of an individual is

directly proportional to the change in permanent income. This equation can be

derived rigorously from utility maximization (Hall (1978), Hall and Mishkin

(1982)) only under very strong assumptions about the utility function, the

behavior of unobserved preference shifters over time, and uncertainty about

wages, nonlabor income, and interest rates. We prefer to interpret equation

(2.1) as an approximation or as a basic assumption about behavior (as in

Sargent (1978) and Flavin (1981)). Equation (2.1) is invalid if substitution

effects of wage changes and interest rate movements are important for

consumption.

     For empirical work, equation (2.1) must be modified in two ways. The

first modification is needed because the principal consumption measure in our

data set is family expenditure on food. The marginal propensity to consume

food out of permanent income is not unity.           The second modification is to

allow for preference related transitory consumption changes and measurement

error in the consumption data, which we assume to follow a moving average

process.       (In this paper, measurement error in consumption is not identified

separately from transitory consumption.) We also assume that the measurement

error in consumption is uncorrelated with the other variables used in our

study.     With these two modifications, measured consumption is related to

permanent income by:
                                      — 11 —



(2.2)      C* = c*(1P)yPt + Uct + Aut_i
               marginal propensity for food consumption

            u E transitory consumption and measurement error.

Substitution of equation (2.1) into (2.2) yields:

(2.3) C* =        1 ) rpi
                       —          (Et —   Et..i)Yt+i   ÷ Uct ÷ (A—l)ut_i —   Aut_2
        Equation (2.3) cannot be estimated directly because the revision in

expected wealth is unobserved.       Therefore the RE—PI model can be estimated

only by adding a model for income.

        Within both the RE—PI model and the Keynesian model, labor supply and

family income are determined independently of consumption. Consequently, to

analyze these models, we restrict the hours equation of the general income

model in (1.lc) as follows



           Exogenous Work Hours Equatioq (N*t):

(1.lc') N*t =     8nnOhmnt
                             +        + 8nn2%t2 + 8nzO1zt + 8nz1Izt_1

            + nz21zt_2 + nt


We will refer to the income model consisting of equation (1.lc') for hours and

equations (1.lb, 1.ld, 1.le) for income, wages and unemployment as the "income

model with exogenous hours".      The only difference between the above income

model and the general income model is that the current and lagged values of

the wage factor         and the income factor uyt are not included in the hours

equation (1.lc'). These zero restrictions will be tested.

        Given the above income model, the RE—PI consumption model implies two

sets of restrictions on the general consumption equation (1.la).             First, it

implies that the change in consumption only depends on the contemporaneous

factors affecting income:        u, Unt and               This implies the following

consumption equation
                                                — 12 —



              RE—PI Consumption Equation (C*t):

(2.4) C* =            wO
                               +
                                   czO'zt   +   cnO'nt   +          + cco''ct   +
                                                                                    cc1'ct—1
                           + 8cc2Uct_2


The second set of restrictions involve the factor loadings 8cwO' czO' 8cnO'

and 8cyO• Equation (2.3), which defines the optimal consumption response, and

equation (1.b) for the income process imply that cwO' czO' cnO' and 8cyO

must satisfy



(2.5)         8cjO = a (8yj0   + P8yjl +    i2)          jw,Z,n,y



         marginal propensity to consume, a, and the discount rate,
        The                                                                             p, are

determined by the four equations in (2.5) and are overidentified.

        An advantage of using dynamic factor models of income with multiple

indicators is that various factors are allowed to have different effects on

income, and consequently should have different effects on consumption.                     For

exaniple, if the estimates of the equations of the income process indicates

that unemployment has only a temporary effect on income, then the RE—PI model

implies that unemployment has only a small effect on consumption. Since the

parameters a and p are overidentified, one may test whether the response of

consumption to particular factors affecting income is consistent with the

pernianent income model.           It is also clear that one can only hope to get valid

estimates a and P if the income model is correctly specified. Here again, the

use of multiple indicators is an advantage because some of the factors

determining income are now identified with observable quantities (e.g. the

wage factor), and we can use apriori information to judge how reasonable the

estimated income model is.
                                                 — 13 —



    An   alternative to              the RE—PI model is               the Keynesian model of
consumption. We can use the same income process as specified In (1.lb). The

consumption change equation must be respecified as:



(2.6) c*                     + transitory       consumption



The dynamic factor specification for the Keynesian consumption function is



(2.4') C*t =                        +                 +             +             +
                       8ywo"wt          yw1wt1            82Uwt_2       yzO"zt        yz1Uzt.i
             '               +              +               +               +
                 8yz2'zt—2       8ynOtmnt       yn1Unt.1        8yn2Unt_2       8yyOuyt
          +
                 81u_1       +                   +
                                                     8ccOUct cc1Uct_1 + 8cc2uct_2


where Uct and its lags reflect both variation in consumption preferences and

measurement error in consumption.                    The Keynesian model also implies strong

restrictions on the covariances between cousumption and the other variables in

the model.        While the Keynesian model and the RE—Fl model are not nested

models, they are both nested in the model consisting of the general

consumption model (1.la) and the income model with exogenous hours (1.lb,

1.lc', 1.ld, 1.le).

    We estimate the general consumption equation, the RE—PI equation, and the

Keynesian equation using the first differences of the levels (actual values)

of the variables.       To facilitate comparison to our analysis of the lifecycle

consumption and labor supply model below,                        we also estimate the general

consumption equation and the Keynesian equation using the changes in the logs

of the variables. Unfortunately, the RE—Fl restrictions on the response of

consumption to the innovations in the log linear income process are extremely

complicated and involve family wealth. Consequently, it does not appear to be

feasible to estimate the RE—Fl model with a loglinear income process.
                                      — 14   —




              3.   TIME AGGREGATION AND NONSYNCERONOUS MEASUREMENTS:
                         THE QUARTERLY DYMANIC FACTOR MODEL




     In   many micro panel data sets, the variables relevant to a study may be

measured at different time intervals. For example, in the PSID, individuals

are interviewed at yearly intervals. The consumption measure and the hourly

wage measure refer to the time of the survey (typically in March or April)

while family income and hours unemployed refer to the calendar year which

precedes the survey date. This poses a problem because the inconsistency of

the timing may weaken the relationship between the change in family income and

the change in the wage.       Futherinore, the differences in the timing of the

consumption, wage, income, and unemployment variables may affect the estimates

of the relative response of consumption to the various factors which drive

income, particularly since consumption should not respond to lagged income

innovations if the RE—PI is correct. Since the consumption change is measured

a few months after the income change measure, part of u may be past
information. Consequently, estimates of the response of consumption to the

income factor u,, may be understated. (Many tests of the RE—PI model hinge on

the issue of timing of information about income. See the surveys by Hayashi

(1985a) and King(1985)).     In addition, the use of annual values rather then

the unavailable quarterly values may cause problems.

     Hall and Mishkin (1982) recognized the problem of nonsynchronization in

their data and they made adjustments within the annual framework of their

model to deal with the problem.        However their approach is difficult to

generalize to other models. First, the adjustments that should be made to a

particular annual model may not be obvious.         Second, modifications of an

annual model may imply unreasonable restrictions on the underlying quarterly

model.9
                                               — 15 —



        We   treat the problems of nonsynchronous timing and time aggregation by

specifying quarterly dynamic factor series models for the determinants of

consumption and income, and aggregating where this is appropriate. Given the

inherent data limitations, we impose Alinon (1962) polynomial distributed lag

structures on the coefficients of the quarterly dynamic factor models.

        Our model is as follows. Let



(3.1) W1 —           w_1              8wj''wt.ij
         zt.i —      zt.i_l    :j=0   zzjUzt.i_j
             t.i —    t.i—1

                               o
                                j=O    nzj'1zt.i—j + nnjUnt.i_j

         Yt.i        Yt.ii =           jwtij + yzfzt.i—j + 8ynfnt.i—j + bju.j_j)
         C• — .5.—1                       +             + cnO'nt.i. + 8cyO"yt.i



where

                      Wage rate in the i'th quarter of year t

                      Hours of unemployment in thei'th quarter of year t

                      Work Hours in the i'th quarter of year t

                       Income in the i'th quarter of year t

                      Food consumption in the i'th quarter of year t.



        In the model above, the data are generated at a quarterly rate (1 runs

from 1 to 4). For example, the difference of Z in the i'th quarter of year t
from Z in the i—l'st quarter of year t is a seventh order moving average

process (a two year process).                 At the risk of some confusion, the time

subscript t.i—j refers to the observation j quarters prior to the i'th quarter

of year t. Thus, t—1.i and t.i—4 both refer to the i'th quarter of year t—1.
                                                     — 16 —



        The RE—PI model, using (2.3) and                 (3.1),   implies



(3.2)      8ckO ''jO)qi8ykj ; k=w,z,n,y
                      quarterly discount factor.
           Pq


        Note that our specification of the quarterly RE—PI consumption equation

and the associated income model is analogous to our annual specification. If

quarterly data are available to the econometrician, then the model in (3.1)

can be estimated directly.                  However the data are only available at annual

intervals, and        Z*,     N*t and



      are annual averages:

(3.3)      W*     —                     —            +
                                                         wt
           Z *t       Z*           /
                  —             Lj=lZt_l.j       —
                                                     Z_21
           N*t — N*t_i          i(Nt_ij — Nt_2.i) + nt
                  —
                      Yti       I.i(—i.i         —
                                                     t—2.i        +
                                                                      yt
                                                     +
           c*t —      c*t_i     ct.i —      ct_i.!       8ccouct ÷ ccf'ct—i + cc2"ct—2


      For the PSID data, W* is the reported wage rate at the time of the

survey (typically March or April), which we approximate as the first quarter

wage. Z* is the reported total hours of unemployment in the calendar year

preceding the survey date.                  N*t is total work hours on the main job in the

calendar year preceding the survey. Y* is reported total annual income in

the   calendar year preceding the survey date. C* is the annual rate of food
consumption reported in the week of the survey,                            which we interpret as the

rate of consumption for the first quarter.
                                              — 17 —



        Given the available data (i.e. data as defined in (3.3)), we cannot hope

to recover all the parameters of the model in (3.1).                Our strategy is to

restrict the lag structures in (3.1) to polynomial functions. In particular

we impose:



(3.4)                     +           +
           8ijk =   a0j       a111k       a2jjk2


            ij=ww,zz,nz,nn,yw,yz,yy; k=O,1 ,2,3,4,5,6,7



        We have reduced the number of free parameters, 8, in each of the

quarterly moving averages to 3 parameters.                 If we have three years of

consecutive data as defined in (3.3), then the model of (3.1) as restricted by

(3.2) and (3.4) can be estimated.              The differences in timing and aggregation

of the different variables help identify the quarterly lag structure from

annual observations. The model implieé that several of covariances at 3 year

lags will be nonzero, and so we add the relevant moments to the set of sample

moments used in estimation.



                          4. MT& AND ECONOMETRIC METHODOLOGY

        The structural parameters of the models are estimated by fitting the

theoretical auto—covariances and cross—covariances implied by the models to

the corresponding sample moments of the variables.                   Chamberlain (1984)

contains a comprehensive discussion of these estimators.'°

        The estimation procedure minimizes a quadratic form

                     (S—E(fl ))'S2(S—(JI))

where S is the vector of distinct sample covariance elements, (1I) is the
vector of predicted covariance elements, considered as a function of the
                                      — 18 —



vector   of parameters II (e.g. ijk'g and a1's in (1.2)).    2 is the identity

matrix in the case of unweighted least squares estimates, and a consistent

estimate of the inverse of the fourth moment matrix of the underlying data in

the case of optimal minimum distance estimates (OMD).    In practice, we follow

a number of previous studies and use the inverse of the empirical fourth

moment matrix of the underlying data, V, when computing OMD estimates.     The

unweighted least squares case amounts to running a nonlinear regression of the

individual sample covariances in S against the elements of E(It). The optimal

minimum distance estimator (OMD) is analogous to fitting thIs relationship by

generalized least squares.

    We use the OMD estimator rather than maximum likelihood under the

assumption of normality, which was used by Hall and Mishkin and Bernanke. We

do so because our preliminary data analysis, for both levels and logs,

indicated that the data are non—normal.        Specifically, we calculated the

Kolmogorov—Smfrnov test stalistic for the null hypothesis of normality for

each variable in each year (   e.g.   ic1979). The null hypothesis was rejected

in every case at a marginal significance level less than .01. We also found

that the empirical fourth moment of a given variable, Xt, varies from 1.5 to

10 times larger than 3*(var(xt))2 even though these quantitites should be

approximately equal if x Is normally distributed.

    Unfortunately, there are also drawbacks to the OMD estimator.           In

particular, we will present evidence that, for our problem, the sample

estimate V of the fourth moment matrix is imprecise. Furthermore, sampling

error in the fourth moments is likely to be correlated with sampling error in

the second moments.    If this is true, it may be preferable to use a simpler

weighting scheme to estimate the models than the full GLS transformation used

in the OMD case.      For this reason, we also estimate our models with the
                                         — 19 —



diagonal elements of 2 set to the inverse of the average of the diagonal
elements of V corresponding to a given type of covariance (e.g., the variance

of the Income change, the covariance of the wage change with the consumption

change, etc.).11 In this case all off diagonal elements of 2 are set to 0.

This amounts to fitting the model by a form of weighted least squares, which

hereafter we will refer to as WLS.            The average of the estimated fourth

moments for the various years corresponding to each of the moments in equation

(2.9) is used as the weight for the particular moments.

     Chamberlain shows how tests of parameter restrictions can be conducted

when the OMD estimator is used.          Let E(S) = EOI), where the vector It has

dimension K. Suppose restrictions on (1I) imply E(S) = G(L) where the vector

9. has dimension L < K. Then If the restrictions hold, d1 — d2      >    X2(KL),
where

         d2     m(S — E(11))'A(S —   Z(JI))

         d1
                m(S —   G(t))'A(S — G(L))
         m    is the number of observations,



where A is set to V. Newey (1985) provides a goodness of fit test which is

valid when WLS rather than OMD is used.

    The least restricted model that can be estimated is the non—stationary

model in which each moment in S is given its own parameter. In this case ZOT)

and S have the same dimension.          All covariance stationary models which we

experimented with are overwhelmingly rejected against this model.

    As a second bench mark, and to provide a convenient data summary, we also

use the covariance stationary model
                                       — 20 —




Covariance Stationary Model

(4.1)    Coy (I*t,tM*t+j)                I,M = C,Y,W,Z,N;   j=—2,—1,0,1,2.
                              0IMj



     We use the covariance stationary model as a second bench mark against

which to judge the fit of the structural models, for two related reasons.

First, tests based upon the test statistic above using the empirical fourth

moment matrix to form the x2         statistic   indicate that the data are non—

stationary in the covariances. Therefore our various economic models will be

rejected just due to the fact that they are stationary models. Second, there

are indications that the fourth moment matrix may be too imprecisely estimated

to permit reliable tests of the restricted models against the nonstationary

model using the test procedure discussed above.        We conducted the following

experiment to get a sense of whether the imprecision in our estimate of the

fourth moments may have an effect on tests of stationarity.

     For the data in the levels, we randomly divided our sample of 1051

individuals into two subsamples, A and B.         Consequently, the sample moments

for the two subsamples have the same distribution. For the two subsamples, we

calculated two separate fourth moment matrices,        VA and VB,   for use as an

estimate of the variance of the second moments for the subsample.            We used

them to test the hypothesis that the expectations of the second moments of

our subsamples are equal, without imposing stationarity across years.            The

test statistic indicated rejection of this hypothesis, which is true by

construction, at the .003 level. In contrast, when we used the fourth moment

matrix from the full sample to form the V matrix for both subsamples, the

hypothesis that the subsamples have the same second moments easily passes.
                                   — 21 —



Furthermore, when we used the common V matrix estimated from the full sample
to compute OMD estimates of separate stationary models from the moments in the

two subsamples, the       statistic with 314 degrees of freedom to test

stationarity is 440.3. When we use VA and VB, the corresponding       statistic

is 570.9.   We conclude that the estimates of the fourth moments may have a

substantial effect on the test statistic for stationarity.      The results for

the data in logs were similar although the discrepancies were less dramatic.

Of course, these findings do not provide a clear indication of whether the

problems which arise when the same sample of 526 observations is used to

compute both the second moments and V carry over to a sample of 1051. But in

view of these results, it seems sensible to also judge the performance of our

structural models against the covariance stationary model.

     Our use of stationary structural models in the face of evidence of

nonstationarity raises the possibility of inconsistency in the estimates of

the parameters of income and consumption equations.          We checked this in

several ways. First, we estimated models in which the variance of u, Uyt

unt, u, and Uwt were permitted to depend on a common year specific scalar.

This typically resulted in a significant improvement in the fit of the models

(although the modified models were also overwhelmingly rejected against the

unrestricted nonstationary model). However, the response coefficients of the

income equations and the consumption equation did not change very much. We

experimented with other ways of introducing nonstationarity into the dynamic

factor models, with little change in the estimates of the income and

consumption equations despite improvements in the fit of the model.

     Second, we introduced dummy variables for the moments for which there was

a significant departure (at the .05 level) from stationarity.          This is

analogous to excluding these moments from the analysis. We identified these
                                     — 22   —




moments   using a step—wise regression procedure to estimate the stationary

model.     The procedure resulted in the introduction of dummy variables for

about 6 percent of the moments.        The fit of the dynamic factor models

generally improved to the point where they cannot be rejected against the

unrestricted nonstationary model.     More importantly, the parameters of the

consumption and income equation are basically similar to those which we report

below.    Our findings are consistent with those of Kearl (1985) and Hause

(1980), who found that relaxing stationarity improved the fit of their models

of labor earnings but had little effect on key parameters.

      Consequently, we have evidence that our inferences about the form of the

income process and the consumption equation are valid despite the fact that

the   stationary dynamic factor models are rejected against the nonstationary
model.
    Our reported standard errors of the parameter estimates are based on a
modification of the formula provided in Chamberlain (1984). Chamberlain's
formula   is valid under the assumption that the discrepancy between the fitted

covariances and the sample covariances arise only from sampling error in the

covariances.    Since the x2 goodness of fit tests discussed below indicate

model misspecification, it seemed appropriate to scale the standard errors up

by a factor equal to the square root of the mean square error of the estimated

residuals of the models.     The formula in Chamberlain assumes that the mean

square error of the estimated residuals for the OMD estimator is one.       It

leads to standard error estimates for the model parameters which typically are

about one third smaller than the ones we report.    To make our standard error

estimates comparable to those of other studies (e.g., Ahowd and Card (1985,

1986), one may divide them by the square root of the mean square error

reported in the Tables.    We are, of course, on shaky ground in performing
                                        — 23 —



statistical   inference in the presence of model misspecification. This is one

reason to prefer the conservative standard errors which we report.



Data

       For most of the analysis the data are from the 1976—1981 Panel Study of

Income Dynamics individuals tape (See Survey Research Center (1982)).
Consequently, in first   differences,   data are available for five years. For a

given year, the sample contains male heads of household who were between the

ages 18—60 inclusive, who had not retired, and who were employed, temporarily

laid off or unemployed at the time of the survey.           We have limited the

analysis to these years because the wage measure is unavailable for salaried

workers prior to 1976. In the balanced sample, an individual is included only

if he has complete observations on all the variables for all the years. The

sample contains 1051 individuals. Because the wage measure is collected only

if the individual is employed or on temporary layoff at the time of survey,

the balanced sample is likely to consist of individuals with more stable

employment histories than the sample at large. We experiment with unbalanced

samples for 1976—1981 and for 1969—1981 as well.

       A few of the variables require discussion. C* is the sum of the family's

food expenditures at home and outside of the home, deflated by the food

component of the consumer price index. This is the consumption measure used

in Hall and Mishkin (1982), Altonji (1986), Altonji and Siow (1988), and other

recent studies of lifecycle models based on the PSID.       There appears to be

considerable measurement error in the variable. We account for it with the

error component

       The variable W* is the change in the straight time wage at the time of

the survey. Given our assumptions about measurement error, it is important to
                                    — 24 —



note that for both hourly workers and salary workers this wage variable is

based upon survey questions which are independent of those used to construct

iY*, family income. For salaried workers measurement error in iW*t may be

correlated with the true change in work hours, since the variable is usually

imputed from information on salary per week, per month, or per year using a

standard number of work hours (such as 40 hours per week). We ignore this

potential problem.

     As noted earlier, the consumption measure and the hourly wage measure

refer to the time of the survey (typically in March) while family income and

hours of unemployment, Z*, refer to the calendar year which precedes the

survey date.

     For computational convenience, we followed Hall and Mishkin (1982) and

Hayashi (1985b) and removed the effects of economy wide disturbances and a

variety of demographic characteristics from the variables used in the analysis

of the dynamic factor models.    We do so by first regressing the change in

consumption, the change in income, and the income determinants against a set

of year dummies, age, age2, age3, education, the change in a dummy variable

for marital status, current and lagged values of dummy variables for 8 Census

regions, residence in an SMSA, and residence in a city with more than 500,000

people, as well as variables for the level and squared value of the change of

family size, the change in the number of children in the family unit, and the

change in the number of children under age 6.       The residuals from these

regressions form the basis for the analysis below. Given the large samples

which were used to form the residuals, the fact that the estimation was

performed in two stages is of little consequence.
                                     — 25 —



     When analyzing the models using changes in the levels (as opposed to the

changes in logs) of consumption and income, we followed Bernanke (1984) in

attempting a correction for the fact that the variances of the changes in the

level of income and consumption are strongly related to the level of income.

We split our sample into 13 income classes based upon the 6 year average of

annual income for each family.       We then divided the change in the income

levels, the change in the consumption level, and the change in the wage level

by the mean of the averages for the families in a given class. Essentially,

this imposes the assumption that the variances of all of the factors except

those of unemployment and work hours are proportional to the square of the

mean income level in the income class.      Note that the effect of changes in

work hours or unemployment on the change in the family income level should

depend on the wage. To allow for this, we did not deflate the hours change or

the unemployment variable by the mean income level, under the assumption that

the mean wage level of individuals in the income class is proportional to the

mean family income level.

     Finally, we have eliminated some outliers from the analysis.12



             5. RESULTS FOR THE PERMANENT INCOME AND KEYNESIAN MODELS

     In   Section 5.1 we begin with the estimates of the stat onary model (4.1)

in levels and logs and tests of the 0 restrictions on the stationary model

that are implied by the income model and by the RE—PT consumption equation.

In Section 5.2 we report estimates of the income equations of the dynamic

factor model, the PIN and Keynesian consumption equations. In Section 5.3 we

discuss a number of extentions, including the use of weighted least squares,

experiments with alternative assumptions about measurement error,           and

estimates obtained when we extended the sample to years prior to 1976 and to
                                      — 26 —



individuals   who are missing data for some years. In Section 5.4, we present

estimates of the quarterly dynamic factor models. Estimates of the Hall and

Mishkjn Model are in Section 5.5.



5.1 Estimates and Tests of the Stationary Model and the Unrestricted Dynamic

Factor Models

        This section presents OMD estimates of the stationary model (4.1) in

levels and logs and tests of the 0 restrictions on the stationary model which

are implied by the income model and by the RE—PI consumption equation. Table

Ia presents the OMD estimates of the stationary model (4.1) when the data are

in levels.      It consists of the covariances among the variables

         iZ* and N*t at 0, 1, and 2 lags. The model contains parameters for

65 distinct covariances which we estimate from 250 second moments. The signs

of the contemporaneous covariances seem reasonable.         One distinguishing

feature is that the covariances at the second lags are small for almost all of

the variables.       Out of 25 such covariances, only Cov(Y*t, Y*t2) is

statistically significant. Furthermore, the estimates of the covariances are

somewhat imprecise despite the fact that data on 1,051 individuals and between

3 and 5 sample moments are used to estimate thetni3          Furthermore, the

covariances of hours, wage, and unemployment with income are   small   at second

order lags. The small values for these covariances and the imprecision in the

estimates of the moments causes problems for estimation of the restricted

models. Identification in these models utilizes the covariances at the second

lags.

        Table 2a presents x2 statistics, degrees of freedom, and p—values

(marginal    significance   levels) of a series of restrictions on the sample

moments.     The row labels indicate the restrictions imposed under the null
                                       — 27 —



hypothesis     of the test.        The column labels indicate the restrictions

maintained under the alternative hypothesis.              The first column tests the

stationary models against the unrestricted nonstationary model (which fits the

sample moments perfectly). The x2 statistic for the stationary model with no

further restrictions is 307.7 with 185 degrees of freedom, which is large

enough to reject stationarity with a p—value of less than .0001               We also

tested separately for stationarity of the autocovariances of each of the five

variables.     For levels, we reject stationarity for work hours, wages and

unemployment. For logs, we reject stationarity for all variables except for

work hours. As we noted earlier, stationarity of the data is also strongly

rejected for all models estimated using OMD in this paper (except in two cases

discussed in Section 5.5).     For reasons discussed in Section 4, we use the

stationary model as a yardstick to assess the restricted models.

        Because the income model with exogenous hours excludes the wage factor

from the hours and unemployment equations, it implies the following zero

restrictions on the stationary model.



0 Restrictions on Coy. Stationary Model Implied by Income Equations 1.c', 1.d,

i.e

(5.1)      Coy (W*t,Z*t+j) =   0       j=   —2,—i,0,1,2
(5.2)      Coy (iW*t,N*t+j) = 0        j —2,—1,0,1,2



We report tests of these restrictions in the second row of the table. The p—

value is .029 when the data are in levels.                Inspection of the individual

sample moments indicates that none of the covariances among the wage and

unemployment are significant, but the hours change has a significant negative

covariance with the wage change and a positive covariance with the lagged wage
                                      — 28 —



change.     Note that the lifecycle model of consumption and labor supply implies

that wages and hours should vary together.

        In addition, since the RE—PI model implies that past information does not

cause a change in permanent income, it implies the following restrictions on

the stationary model.



Zero Restrictions on Coy. Stationary Model Implied by RE—PI Consumption

Equation

(5.3)       Coy (C*t,I*t_j) — 0       I = Y,W,Z,N; j—1,2



The third row of the table tests these restrictions. They pass easily when

stationarity is maintained.

        The fourth row tests the zero restrictions on the income process and the

o restrictions implied by RE—PI for consumption. We obtained a p—value of

.038 for these restrictions when testing them against the unrestricted

stationarity model. This rejection at conventional significance levels is due

to the restrictions on the income process.

    Finally, the table reports a test against the unrestricted stationary

model (4.1) of the factor model consisting of the unrestricted consumption

equation (1.la) and the income model with exogenous hours.       The p—value to

reject is .057, and so there is only weak evidence against the factor

structure once stationarity is maintained.        The p—value for this dynamic

factor model is .334 when tested against the stationary model including 0

restrictions on the income process.

    In summary, we find overwhelming evidence against stationarity, weaker

evidence against the assumption that unemployment and hours do not vary with

the wage change, little evidence against the RE—PI -zero restrictions on the
                                    — 29 —



relationship   between consumption and lagged income determinants, and little

evidence against the dynamic factor representation of the data.

     Table lb reports estimates of the unrestricted stationary model when the

data are in logs. Note that for this specification LZ*t is the log of (2,000

+ Hours   of unemployment) and is not in first differences. (Using first

differences did not change the results in the cases we checked.) For the log

results the standard errors are usually smaller relative to the parameter

estimates than for the level results. Once again, most of the covariances at

the second lag are small relative to the covariances between the same

variables at lags 0 and 1. (Only 3 out of 25 are significant at the 5% level.)

     Table 2b reports a series of         tests of the restrictions on the

stationary model against various alternatives.   Column 1 of the Table shows

that stationarity is overwhelmingly rejected. However, once stationarity is

imposed, the restriction that wages do not vary with hours or unemployment

passes at the .127 level. The 0 restrictions implied by the RE—Fl model also

pass easily.     The p—value for the dynamic factor model consisting of the

income model with exogenous hours and the unrestricted consumption equation is

.097 in a test against the unrestricted stationary model. The p—value is .199

against the stationary model including 0 restrictions on the relationship

between wages and hours.

     In summary, once stationarity is imposed, the log results provide weak

evidence against the income specification, but little evidence against the RE—

Fl 0 restrictions or against the dynamic factor representation of the data.



5.2 Estimates of the Dynamic Factor Models with Exogenous Income

     We now discuss estimates of the dynamic factor models with exogenous

income and hours, and various consumption equations.       We begin with the
                                      — 30 —



equations of the income model (1.lb, l.lc', 1.ld, 1.le). We then turn to the
consumption equations.       In estimating these models we have excluded the

covariances between hours and wages and between unemployment and wages from

the sample, because the income model implies these are 0.

        In Table 3 we present estimates of the equations of the income model with

exogenous hours which are obtained when they are estimated jointly with the

unrestricted consumption equation (1.2). The estimates of the family income,

wage,     hours,   and unemployment equations     reported in the table are
representative of the results which we obtained for the income equations when

the restrictions associated with RE—PI or the Keynesian model were imposed,

although the precision of the coefficients on the income factor
                                                                          Uyt_1
and Uyt_2 is higher in the latter cases.         The long run effect of a one

standard deviation innovation in one of the factors may be estimated by

summing the factor loadings on that factor.

        The results for both logs and levels indicate that most of the response

of income to a wage innovation occurs in the initial period, and that most of

the effect is permanent. Because the data in levels have been deflated by the

mean income values in each of 13 income classes (see section 4), the estimates

for logs are somewhat easier to interpret. The log results indicate that a

one standard deviation increase in the wage factor, which is equal to .20

           leads to a permanent increase in family income of about 2%.      This

seems small given that a one standard deviation shock to the wage raises the

wage level by about 7 % in the long run, and the evidence presented earlier

indicates that the relationship between wages and work hours is weak.

Inconsistency in the timing of wages and income is a possible explanation for

the small response of family income to wages. We investigate this possibility

below.     It is also worth mentioning that the standard error on the wage
                                    — 31   —



measurement error variance      is large relative to the total variance in the

wage change, and that the point estimate is actually negative (although not

significant).

     The estimate of —.0169 for 8yzO in the log equation is the short run

effect on the income change of a one standard deviation increase in the

unemployment factor ut.      This factor drives the log of (2000 + hours of

unemployment) and the change in the log of annual hours. The effect on annual

work hours is —.037, while the effect on the unemployment variable is .0296.

These results suggest that unemployment leads to a more than proportional

reduction in work hours in the short run, perhaps through shorter work days,

and to a less than proportional reduction in family income.       The long run

effect of unemployment on family income is near 0 for the log model.     It is

about half of the short run effect when levels are used.

     The short run effect of the work hours factor         on the log of family

income is only about 1/4 of its effect on work hours. The log model implies

that more than 3/4 of the effect on income is permanent, while the level

results imply that slightly more than half of the positive short run effect is

permanent.      We obtain a small positive estimate of the variance of the

measurement error component in hours,          when logs are used, and a small

negative estimate when levels are used. These estimates come as a surprise,

because Duncan and Hill (1984), Altonji (1986) and Altonji and Paxson (1986)

report strong evidence of substantial measurement error in the change in the

log of annual hours. Below we obtain larger measurement error estimates when

we use WLS and when we account for nori—syncronization in the data.

     The income factor       has a strong effect on income.      In all of the

models that we estimated, it was the most important factor in the income model

(after measurement error).      The estimates of the log model imply that
                                   — 32 —



measurement error is responsible for 70.8 ¼ of the variance of          Of the

remaining 29.2%, 82.9% Is due to       8.6% is due to      5.0% Is due to ut,

and 3.4% is due to       The model in levels implies that measurement error is

responsible for 73.3% of the variance of income and        is responsible for

94.5% of the rest of the variance. In the various models that we estimated,

the contribution of the variances of wage, hours of work and unemployment

Innovations to the variance of the first difference of log income after

correcting for measurement error was always less than 30%.           It seems

implausible to us that variations in bonuses or overtime premia and in

nonlabor income and spouse's earnings are large enough to explain the

importance of

     In Table 4 we provide some evidence that these results reflect basic

characteristics of the data rather than gross model misspecification or

problems with the estimation procedures. In column 1 we present a regression

of Y*, against Y*t_i and Y*t...2. The data are in logs. The       is .115. In

column 2 we add current and lagged wage, hours and unemployment changes. The

R2 rises by .067 to .182. In column (3) we add the current value and two lags

of zNS*t, which is the change in the log of 1370 plus annual work hours of the

spouse to the equation. We also add ZS and its lags, where ZS* is the log

of 1370 plus wife's hours of unemployment.     The value 1370 is the mean of

wife's work hours for wives who work positive hours. (We transformed the work

hours and unemployment variables to reduce the influence of large percentage

changes in hours worked by women working few hours on the log variables and to

handle the fact that our sample includes unmarried men and men whose wives do

not work in some years).   These variables lead to an R2 of .297.     We view

these results as consistent with substantial measurement error in family

income. They also suggest a relatively small role for variation in husband's
                                     — 33 —



work hours, unemployment, and wages in the variance of measured income. The
results in Altonji and Siow (1986) for a similar sample of men suggest that

adding the change in work hours lost due to illness and interactions between

wage changes and quits, layoffs, and promotions would result in only a small

improvement in explanatory power.     In light of the substantial explanatory

power of wife's work hours and unemployment, it may be useful in future work

to expand the dyanamic factor model to include these variables.



The Consumption Equations: Results for Levels

     Table 5 reports a series of consumption equations. The       statistic and

the degrees of freedom reported at the bottom of each equation are for a test

of the consumption equation and the associated equations for the income

determinants against a stationary model (Model B in Table 2a).

     Column 1 of Table 5 reports the estimates of the unrestricted consumption

equation (1.la). cwO' the response of the consumptiân to           is estimated

at 12.9 with a t—value of 1.6. The coefficients on         is positive, and the

coefficient on       is negative, but neither is statistically significant. The

variable Uyt has a strong positive effect on consumption          is 61.3). An

interesting finding is that the coefficients of lagged unemployment and lagged

income both have fairly large coefficients with t     values   of 2.07 and 1.75

respectively.     This is evidence against the implication of the RE—Fl model

that lagged income and unemployment factors should not affect current

consumption.     It comes as a surprise in view of our finding in the previous

section that the 0 covariance restriction between consumption and lagged

income determinants are satisfied.

     In column 2 we report the consumption function when the consumption

coefficients on the lagged income determinants are set to 0.      Interestingly,
                                    — 34 —



the p—value to reject the model against the stationary model (model B) is more

than .10. However, when we maintain the factor model for income and only test

the consumption restrictions against the unrestricted consumption function in

column 1, they are rejected at the .025 level. The coefficients on all of the

income components have the right sign, but only the wage and income factors

are statistically significant. The coefficient cwO is 14.5, which is 2/5 the
size of 8cyO    From the perspective of the RE—Fl model, this estimate of

seems a bit large given that the estimates of the income model estimated

jointly with column (2) imply that the long run effect on income of a one

standard deviation shock to        is only 1/4 as large as a one standard
deviation shock to

     Column 3 in Table 5 presents estimates of the five variable restricted

RE—PI model.   The restrictions, when tested against the stationarity model,

are not rejected at the .10. However, they are rejected at the 5% level when

tested against the model with the unrestricted consumption equation in model

1.   The estimate of    a, the marginal propensity to consume food out of

permanent income, is .0672 with a standard error of .0215. Unfortunately, the

estimate for the discount factor, p, is —.044 with a standard error of .398.

Given the large standard error, a reasonable discount factor cannot be

rejected.   With other specifications of the model in levels (allowing for

different variables and measurement errors), we still could not pin down the

estimate of the discount factor. Often we obtained discount factors slightly

larger than 1 with large standard errors.    Part of the problem is that only

the wage and income innovations are significant in determining consumption.

The other problem is that the lags of the innovations of wages and income on

the income process are not determined precisely.
                                      — 35 —



        Column 4, Table 5 contains an estimate of the Keynesian model.       The

marginal propensity to consume out of current income, a, was estimated at

.0291 with a standard error of .010. The estimates of the equations of the

income model (not shown) and the coefficients on Uct Uct_1 and uct_2 are

similar to those for the RE—PI models.         However the Keynesian model, when

tested against the stationarity model, is rejected with a p—value of .01. It

is rejected at the .005 level when tested against the factor model with the

unrestricted consumption equation. All variants of the Keynesian model with

which we experimented performed worse than the equivalent RE—Fl model.

        Columns 5, 6, and 7 report estimates of some dynamic factor models that

exclude hours of work from both the income process and consumption function.

Although the hours decision within the RE—Fl framework is viewed as exogenous,

it is interesting to explore the possibility that the endogeneity of hours is

adversely affecting the analysis. In column 5 we impose the restriction that

lag innovations of        Uyt and u1 do not affect LC*. A comparison of the

estimates of           and cyO with the coefficients of the income model
corresponding to column 5 indicates that the estimate of 8cwO' the effect of

wage innovations on consumption, is still too large relative to the estimate

of cyO' the effect of ut on consumption, when viewed within the RE—PI

model. The effect of          on consumption is not significantly different from

0. The model is not rejected against the four variable statlonarity model at

the .10 significance level.

        In column 7 we estimate the restricted RE—PI model. The     restrictions
pass. The estimate of the discount factor p is 1.66 with a standard error of

.598.     The Keynesian model in column (7) is rejected against the stationary

model at the .05 level.
                                    — 36 —



Dynamic Factor Models with Exogenous Income using Logs.

      Column 8 of Table 5 presents the unrestricted log linear consumption

equation. In contrast to the results for levels, none of the coefficients on

lagged income determinants are significantly different from 0.

      Since the relationship between the consumption change and innovations in

the determinants of the log of income is very complicated, we could only

impose the zero restrictions implied by the RE—PI model on the loglinear
model.    Column 9 of Table 5 reports results for the loglinear consumption

equation with coefficients on lagged income determinants set to 0.         The

qualitative results largely follow those found in the levels.             This

consumption equation and the associated income equations easily passes tests

against the stationarity model and against the model with the unrestricted

consumption equation. Unemployment and hours of work innovations have small,

statistically insignificant, effects on consumption. Wages again have a more

persistent effect on income than unemployment. However, when compared to the

parameters of the income equation, 8cwO seems large relative to 8cyO'

Inconsistency of timing of the variables or a substitution effect of the wage

on consumption are among possible explanations for this.

     Column 10 in Table 5 presents estimates for the five variables loglinear

model with the Keynesian consumption function.       The Keynesian model is

overwhelmingly rejected, although the estimates of the income process and the

other processes do not differ much from those of the P1 models. However, it

should be mentioned that the estimates do not satisfy the standard convergence

criterion. 14

     The results for this section may be summarized as follows. First, many

of the coefficients of the consumption and income model are imprecisely

estimated, leading to imprecise estimates of the discount factor.     Second,
                                              — 37 —



when the data are in levels, we find evidence that consumption is affected by

lagged determinants of income. We do not find evidence of this when the data

are in logs.         Third, the response of consumption to           seems large and the

response to u seems small relative to the long run effects of these

variables on consumption. Fourth, the Keynesian model is rejected.

         As for the family income process, the estimates are disappointing in

terms of the fraction of the variance explained by the wage, unemployment and

hours factors relative to the variance explained by the income factor

The regression analysis in Table 4 suggests that this finding reflects basic

characteristics of our data. Inconsistency in the timing and time aggregation

of some of the variables may also play a role. We turn to this issue below.

A second explanation is that our assumptions about the properties of the

measurement errors are invalid, leading to a misspecified income equation.



5.3 Extensions

Alternative Assumptions about Measurement Error

     We experimented with two alternative specifications of measurement

error.       First, we also estimated most of our models assuming that the

measurement error was zero for all equations except consumption.                  In all

cases,      these     restricted models were handily rejected against their

counterparts with measurement error. For example, the                 statistics, with 3

degrees of freedom, for the models with no measurement error that corresponded

to col. 2, 3, and 9 of Table 5 were 17.9, 12.2 and 13 respectively. Second,

we also allowed for first order moving average measurement errors (i.e. cj =

it   +              for   i =   y,n,w).   We cannot reject the null hypothesis that   is

zero for all cases at the 5% significance level.'5                   Finally, we briefly

experimented with cross—correlated measurement errors.                  However we were

unsuccessful in our attempts to estimate these models.
                                    — 38 —



Weighted Least Squares
       We report a set of weighted least squares (WLS) estimates of the

stationary models, the RE—PI and Keynesian models, in the Appendix (Table Ala,

Mb, A2, A3).       The reported standard errors for the levels results are

calculated as if WLS is efficient. (We experienced computational problems in

correcting the standard errors when the data are in levels. We will provide

them in a later draft. We also will also report goodness of fit statistics

for the factor models at that time.)

       Based on Newey's goodness of fit       test,   stationarity   is   still

overwhelmingly rejected.   The parameter estimates for all models, especially

for data in the levels, are larger in absolute values than those obtained with

OMD. We are somewhat puzzled by this phenomena. The standard errors of the

estimates are also larger as expected because WLS is inefficient relative to

OMD.    The deterioration in precision of the level estimates is particularly
                                         -
troubling.

       The   WLS estimates of the factor models in Table A2 and A3 are

qualitatively similar to those obtained by OMD. Measurement error explains a

larger portion of the variance of the change in measured work hours.      It is

still insignificant or has the wrong sign for measured wages. The estimates

of P are still very imprecise. The main difference between Tables A2 and A3

and the OMD Tables 3 and 5 is that the absolute values of the factor loadings

are typically larger when WLS is used.



Unbalanced Data

       In trying to get more precision for our estimation procedures, we

estimated the model on two larger samples.        Both larger samples were
unbalanced (i.e. each sample covariance was not necessarily calculated with
                                   — 39 —



the same number of observations). In one sample, using the same years 1976—
1981, we also include individuals who did not have complete data on all

variables for all the years.     After this addition, between 1699 to 2877

observations are available to calculate each sample covariance.     The point

estimates as well as their standard errors obtained with this larger sample,

using the OMD estimator, are larger than before.'6 We again could not pin

down an estimate of p. The additional data does not improve the precision of

our estimates because the sample covariances for those individuals with

missing data are substantially larger than those of individuals with complete

data. That is, the two sets of individuals faced different income processes.

For example, for data in logs, the sample variances of income, wages and hours

of work are about 3 times larger than for the balanced sample. The variance

of unemployment was 10 times larger. This is not surprising given that the

wage measure is a available in a given year only for persons who are employed

or on temporary layoff at the time of the survey. As a result, the balanced

sample is weighted toward individuals with relatively stable employment. We

experimented with estimating the income process for each group of individuals

separately while constraining the estimates of c and p to be the same for the

two groups. The results are inconclusive.

     In the second sample, we also included data from before 1976 back to

1968. We extended the sample temporally in an attempt to improve precision.

This led to an increase in the number of second moments used in estimation

from 212 to 583. We used the WLS estimator with this sample because it

became computationally intractable to invert the full empirical fourth moment

matrix.   The estimates of the covariances of the stationary model were

substantially larger than those obtained for the balanced sample.         The

parameters of the factor models also increased in absolute value, although
                                      — 40 —



the relative values are basically similar to those reported.'8 The variances

of the innovations again appear to be higher for those individuals who are

missing data for some years, as one would expect. Our estimates of       and P

were not very precise, as an increase in the mean square error of the

stationary model and the various factor models approximately offset the

increase in the sample size.



5.4: Time Aggregation and Nonsynchronous Measurements: Estimates of the

Quarterly Dynamic   Factor   Models

     Table 6 presents estimates of the quarterly dynamic factor model. (See

equation (3.4)). Columns Ia and lb report estimates and standard errors when

the data are In levels and annual hours are excluded from the analysis. In

this model the response of consumption to the current wage, income, and

unemployment innovations are unrestricted, while the model in column 2a and 2b

parameterizes these responses in terms of the marginal propensity to consume

out of wealth and the quarterly discount factor Pq       In column 3a and b we

report estimates and standard errors of the quarterly dynamic factor model

when the data are in logs.        We ignore the problem that the log of annual

income is not equal to the sum of the logs of quarterly income.

     The parameters of the income, wage and unemployment equations (the aki)

are the parameters of the polynomial distributed lag specifications in

equation (3.4).     In Figure 1 we plot the time pattern of the response of

income Y* (as opposed to iY*t), the wage W*, and unemployment Z* to a one

standard deviation innovations in u,           and     when the levels of the

variables are used.    The effect after 7 periods is the long run response of

Y*, etc, to the various shocks. The plots are based on the estimates of the

akl in column 1.    In Figure 2 we report the corresponding Information for the

log model using the estimates in column 3.
                                   — 41   —




    We   focus our discussion on the results for the log models. Y*, initially

increases by .028 in response to a wage innovation of .058.    It rises above

this level in the next period, declines almost to 0, before rising again. The

long run response is .028, so most of the wage effect is permanent, while the

long run effect of a wage innovation on the wage level is about .038.    Since

the mean of labor earnings is equal to about two thirds of the mean of family

income, the size of the response of income to the wage factor is basically

sensible.    These results are a substantial improvement over the results

obtained using the annual model. However, the shape of the response is not

entirely plausible and may be an artifact of the quadratic polynomial imposed

on the moving average coefficients used in estimation. The pattern and size

of the response of income to unemployment seems sensible.

     Wages and unemployment explain 22.8% and 7.5% of the true variance in the

quarterly change in income, while the income factor explains 69.6 %.     Wages

and unemployment explain 15.3% and 1.8% of the variance of change in the

annual average of income, while the income factor explains 83.2%.          The

importance of measurement error in the annual average falls to 46.7%.     When

the data are in levels rather than logs, the wage, unemployment, and income

factors explain 10.6%, 3.7%, and 86.7% of the true variance in the change in

the annual average of family income. Measurement error accounts for 49.5% of

the variance.    The increase in the explanatory power of the wage in the

quarterly models relative to the annual models suggests that treatment of

timing is useful.

     In column 2a, the estimate of the quarterly discount factor Pq is .974.

This implies an annual discount factor of about .9.    This point estimate is

favorable to the RE—PI model but is subject to a large standard error.
                                   — 42 —



      We   now turn to the consumption coeficients based on the loglinear

specification in column 3a.     The cwO is .0118 and cyO is .0114, which

implies that the consumption response to a one standard deviation wage

innovation and a one standard deviation income innovation are approximately

equal.     The response of consumption to the wage innovation seems large

relative to the response to the income innovation. The long run response of

income to the wage innovation (.028) is only 4/7th's as large as the response

of income to the income innovation (.048).      On the other hand, the small

response of consumption to unemployment is consistent with the fact that the

income parameters imply the long run response of income to a one standard

deviation innovation in unemployment is only .001.

      Table 7 presents a set of estimates of the quarterly models with annual

hours included.    Col. 1 presents the levels results for the model with a

consumption equation in which the responses to the current wage, income,

hours, and unemployment innovations are unrestricted. Col. 2 presents the RE—

PT model. Col. 3 presents the unrestricted log results. The time patterns of

responses of various variables to one standard deviation innovations in the

various factors implied by the estimates in Col. 1 and Col. 3 are presented in

Figures 3 and 4 respectively.

      The results in Figures 3 and 4 are qualitatively similar to that in

Figures 1 and 2.    Concentrating on the log results (Figure 4), in the long

run, hours rise by about 1% in response to a one standard deviation innovation

in the hours factor.    The long run impact on income is slightly more than

1%.   The income response seems a little large although basically sensible.

The long run response of hours to unemployment innovations is basically zero,

consistent with that of income. Measurement error explains about 25% of the

variance in the change in measured hours of work.      Measurement error now
                                    — 43 —



explains   53% of the variance of the change in measured income. Wages, hours

of work, unemployment and income innovations explain 12%, 5%, 4%, and 79% of

the variance of the change in true family income respectively.         It is

surprising that adding hours of work reduces the variance explained by wages

and unemployment relative to that explained by the income factor. When the

data are in levels, wages, hours of work, unemployment and income innovations

explain 6%, 3%, 2% and 89% of the variance of the change in true income.

Measurement error accounts for 21% of the variance of the change in measured

income. Again, adding hours of work seems to add to the explanatory power of

the income factor.

     Turning to the RE—PI model in Col. 2, Pq is estimated as 1.03 with a

standard error of .077.    The estimate of   is .03 with a standard error of

.01. So the restricted estimates are basically consistent with that obtained

in the model which excludes hours of work.

     In summary, accounting for non—syncronization in the data reduces the

explanatory power of measurement error in measured income.   The explanatory

power of the income factor is also reduced in favor of the wage factor in

explaining the variance of the change in true income. Measurement error now

explains a substantial portion of the variance in the change in work hours,

consistent with the evidence in the literature. Finally, the point estimates

of the discount rate are more reasonable.



5.5: The Hall and Mishkin Model

    Given our difficulties in getting a precise estimate of p and also for

purposes of comparison, we present estimates of the Hall and Mishkin model

using the optimal minimum distance estimator.   As argued earlier, we do not

use maximimum likelihood because the data are not normally distributed. We
                                   — 44 —



estimate the model with two sets of data. The first data set are simply the
consumption and income moments from our balanced sample. The second data set

consists of the consumption and income moments for individuals that have

complete consumption and income data. An individual with incomplete wage data

will not be in the first data set but will be in the second. The larger data

set has over twice the number of observations, 2324.    Since we correct for

heteroscedasticity and we also use different measurement units than Hall and

Mishkin use, our estimated variances are not quantitatively comparable to

thei rs.

      Col. 1 of Table 8 reproduces the Hall and Mishkin results from their

Table 1 (notation in Table 8 is theirs).    Their estimated , together with

their estimates of the moving average parameters of transitory income imply an

infinite horizon discount factor p of .77. Col. 2 presents our OMD estimates

of their model using the first data set. The p—value for rejecting the model

against the non—stationary alternative is .013. This p—value is much larger

than that obtained by any of our models.    It says that the consumption and

income moments alone may be close to stationarity. The p—value for the model

against the stationary model is .01.    The t—statistics associated with the

point estimates are much smaller than that in col. 1. The point estimate of p

seems reasonable.   Col. 3 presents the results using the second and larger

data set.   The p—values against the non—stationary model and the stationary

model are .08 and .10 respectively. Again the t—statistics are smaller than

those in Col.1. However the point estimate for p this time is .17. Given the

large standard error, a reasonable p cannot be rejected. The differences in

point estimates across Col. 1, 2 and 3 do suggest that imprecision in the

estimation of p also plagues the Hall and Mishkin model.    We note that the

qualitative features of our estimates do not differ much from theirs,

especially in view of our more conservative standard errors.   Unfortunately
                                   — 45 —



the point estimates of p are quite sensitive to small differences in the point

estimates of the income process.        Given our standard errors, these small

differences are to be expected when we switch samples. The relatively smaller

standard errors that they obtained are due to their assumption of normality

and their subsequent choice of the maximum likelihood estimator.



           6. A DYNAMIC FACTOR MODEL OF CONSuMPTION AND lABOR SUPPLY

     The "permanent income" specification of the lifecycle hypothesis embodied

in equation (2.1) has been used in many studies and is very convenient for

empirical work. But it imposes many restrictions upon behavior that are not

essential to the basic idea of the lifecycle model of consumer behavior and

limit the empirical questions which it may be used to ask.          First, the

relationship between consumption and lifetime resources does not reduce to the

simple permanent income formulation except in a very special case, even if

preferences are additively separable in consumption and leisure within and

across time periods.    Second, there is no natural way to integrate labor

supply into the RE—PI analysis.        Third, if preferences are not additively

separable within the period, then both anticipated and unanticipated changes

in the wage rate will have pure substitution effects on consumption

expenditures.    It would be desirable to separate out the intertemporal

substitution and within period substitution effects of the wage rate on

consumption and labor supply from the "income effect" of this variable.

     The lifecycle model of consumption and labor supply may explain some of

our earlier empirical results.    The weak evidence, for data in the levels,

against the exogeneity of wages and hours can be reconciled with endogenous

labor supply. The relatively large response of consumption to the wage factor

may be explained by substitution of consumption and leisure in a lifecycle

model (e.g. Ghez and Becker (1975)).
                                             — 46   —




The RE—lifecycle Model

        We use a standard lifecycle model of consumer behavior under uncertainty

that    incorporate intertemporal separability of preferences (See footnote 1 for
references)19. Using loglinear approximations to the marginal of utility of
income constant (A—constant) demand equations for hours and consumption and

the intertemporal optimality condition for expected utility maximization, one

obtains the following model for the first difference equations for hours and

consumption.



(6.1) mAt lnAt_i —            in   r_i,i +


(6.2)           =   constant + B(W) ÷ (B +B)1Pt —            (B   + Bnc)rt_i,i ÷

                     (B + B)rI +      nzOIzt + nz1h1zt1 + 8nz2tlzt_2

               ÷ 8nnOUnt + nn1'-'nt1 + nn2'nt2 + nt



(6.3) C*        =   constant+ BcnWt + (Bc +    Bcn)LiPt —   (B   ÷ Bcn)rt_i,i +

                     (B   + Bcn)lt + ccO'-'ct + cc1"ct—1 +
                                                           cc2'-'ct—2




At       marginal    utility of income at date t.
rt       : nominal interest rate at date t.

         innovation in the log of the marginal utility of income.

Nt*       log of measured labor supply at date t.

          log of measured consumption at date t.

         log   of the Real Wage at date t.
Pt     : log of the price level at date t.
         serially    uncorrelated measurement error.
                                     — 47   —




     Equation (6.2) is a labor supply equation in first differences that is
conditional on the innovation in the marginal utility of income, t Equation

(6.3) is a consumption equation in first differences also conditional on

With intertemporal separability of preferences, Nt and Ct depend upon
current assets and the distribution of future wage and prices only through

changes in lnA1• Equation (6.1) shows the evolution of the marginal utility

of income, A.1.     Under rational expectations, n       is   uncorrelated with

information known to the consumer in t—1. The variables        and ut are taste

shifters. Measurement error in consumption is also incorporated in u. In

estimation, we assume that Unt and Uct are uncorrelated. This implies a zero

correlation between the changes in labor supply and consumption preferences

that are not captured by the demographics variables we control for.         The

variable      is the factor driving unemployment.    It may reflect changes in

labor supply preferences and/or constraints on hours of work.2°

     The parameter B is the intertemporal labor supply elasticity.          The

parameters B +      and B + Ben are the intertemporal substitution effects of

changes in the nominal interest rate on labor supply and consumption

(respectively).   Strict concavity of preferences and the assumption that

consumption and leisure are normal goods imply B +        > 0 and BC +     < 0

(See Heckman (1974).). Symmetry of the A constant cross—substitution effects

implies that the elasticity       is approximately eqnal to B(NtW/C). Under

the assumption of intraperiod separability, Ben = Bnc = 0.

     The "income" effects on consumption and labor supply of shocks to budget

parameters such as the wage rate and shocks to preferences arise through the

effects of these shocks on At..   The expected value of the marginal utility of

income, At, is implicitly defined by the parameters of the utility function,

current and the individual's wealth level and expectations about the
                                     — 48 —



distribution    of current and future values of wages, interest rates, prices,

and the preference shifters.      Since an analytical solution for    does not

exist in the case of uncertainty and time varying preferences, there is little

hope of obtaining an analytical solution for the relationship between the

innovation                and innovations in the exogenous factors entering the

lifetime budget constraint. As a basis for empirical work, we simply specify

   as an unrestricted linear function of unanticipated changes in exogenous

(with respect to preferences) factors affecting income (such as wage rates)

and unanticipated changes in preferences.

        Given the "exogenous" equations (1.ld,     1.le), that is wages and
unemployment, let n depend upon the innovations in these variables plus the

error component u which captures the effects of factors whic" have been

omitted from the model:



(6.5) n = flwouwt + 8Ou1 + 8nyO"yt +


where        is the wage innovation and     is the unemployment innovation, and

Uyt is the innovation in components of earnings not directly related to

changes in the wage rate or work hours, and          is a residual factor with

variance cr2. In anticipation of the empirical specifications used below, in

(6.5) we impose the assumptions that Uct and       do not affect     This will
be true only if consumers have perfect foresight about consumption and labor

supply preferences (We have not been successful in attempts to estimate models

which relax this assumption.).     The exclusion of lagged values U.,t, uzt and

u from (6.5) is implied by the assumption of RE, which implies that         is

uncorrelated with information known in
                                                      — 49 —



        Substitute   (6.5) for n., and (1.ld) for                                      in the first differenced

consumption and labor supply equations (6.2) and (6.3).                                         After surpressing

constant terms this leads to



(6.6)         B(out + 81u1                            +
                                                          ww2Uwt_2)
                      +
                          c      +
                                       Bcn)(wuwt          +
                                                                                 +nyouyt)
                      + (Bc+Bcn)(uit —
                                                      r_i,i       +              + 8ccO'ct ÷ 8cc1ct1 + 8cc2'ct—2


(6.7) Nt* =                      + 8wwlUwt_1 +            ww2'wt2            )


                      +   n    + Bnc)($nwoU.t +                   nzouzt          +
                                                                                      nyo'yt
                      +
                          (B+ B)(ut — rt_1,1                       +
                                                                          APt)    +
                                                                                      8nzO'zt   +
                                                                                                    nz1'zt1
                      +
                          nz2Uzt_2 + nnOumnt + nn1'nt—1 + 8nn2tnt_2 +                                  nt
We estimate versions of (6.6) and (6.7) along with the wage and unemployment

equations (1.ld and 1.le). Unfortunately, the parameters nwO' 8TizO' and

nyO' a2, B and the parameter l3 are not identified unless one imposes the
                                       =
symmetry restriction                       BC(Nt W)/Ct. We provide one set of estimates
with this restriction imposed and Nt WIC = 4.                                         We also estimate the model

with intraperiod nonseparability between food consumption and labor supply

imposed (Bcn = Bnc =       0.)
        Finally, one may make use of the fact that a measure of the change in

labor earnings              is available that is measured independently of                                    and

Wt by combining (6.7) and (1.ld) to form the equation



               = (1 +                                                 +
(6.8)                     B)(8oUt + ewwluwt_1                             8ww2twt_2      )


                      + (B         +
                                       Bnc)(8nwOUwt
                                                           +
                                                                  Ou2t            ÷
                                                                                      8nyo'yt
                      +                                rt_i,i +                   +             + nz1Uzt_1
                          (Ba-i-   B)(u,1t
                                                              +
                      +
                          nz2uzt_2             +
                                                                3nn1Unt_1 + nn2hmnt_2
                      +
                          Bu               +
                                               iui 8nn0unt
                                                              +           +
                                       — 50   —




It   worth mentioning at this point that in our empirical work to date we have

found that the restrictions in (6.8) are not satisfied by the data.

Consequently, we report estimates of labor earnings without restricting

using a specification which is analogous to equation (1.lb) for family

income. The equation is



                  =
(6.9)
                      yw0Uwt ÷ 8ywlUwt_1 + 82u_2 + yz0Uzt + 8yzlUzt_1
            + yz2"zt—2 + 8ynoUnt + yn1Unt_1 ÷ 8yn2'nt—2 + yyOUyt + yylUyt_1

            + yy2'yt2 yt

        The effects of the interest rate and the price change will be removed

using year dummies, with cross sectional variation in the after tax interest

rate ignored.

        From estimating the system consisting of (6.6, 6.7, 1.ld, i.le, and 6.8

or 6.9), we can get estimates of B, B,            and       We also focus attention

on the responses of           and     to the shocks 1wt'   u,   and Uyt which arise

from the effects that these variables have on '             the innovation in the

marginal utility of income22.         We expect that permanent shocks to these

variables have larger affects on         than transitory ones, just as persistent

shocks to income induce larger changes in permanent income (y) than do

transitory shocks.



           6.   RESULTS FOR THE LIFECYCLE CONSUMPTION—LABOR SUPPLY MODEL

        Column 1 in Table 9   presents estimates of the   dynamic factor model that
only    imposes the 0 restrictions implied by (6.6, 6.7 and 6.8) on the general

model (1.1).          The p—value to reject the model against the covariance

stationary alternative is .05. The covariance stationary model is analogous
                                     — 51 —



to   (4.1), but is estimated using        in place of Y*t. Measurement error

explains about 3/4 of the variance of            The estimates of measurement

error in wages and hours of work are imprecise. Variation in wage, hours of

work, and unemployment innovations explain about 2/3 of the variation of yfl*

after correcting for measurement error and about 1/6th of the total variance

in 1yfl*      The shortfall seems large even though labor earnings may contain

bonuses, overtime wages or wages on second jobs, and these are not be captured

by our wage and hours variables. The regressions for labor earnings in Table

4 indicate that the marginal contribution to R2 of current and lagged wages,

hours and unemployment is .237.      The variable C* responds only to current

innovations in the wage and earnings which suggests that Bcn=Bnc=O•

Unemployment is more transitory than wages in affecting the earnings
process. An interesting finding is that innovations due to the income factor

affect hours of work.

      In Column 2 we report estimates of a restricted labor supply model. Bcn

8nc' and y are restricted to be zero. Measurement error in nonlabor income

is absorbed in u. We do not impose restrictions on the earnings process to

guard against misspecification of the earnings equation (in view of the

results in Column 1 and the results for family income in Section 4)-        The

strategy here is to use the unrestricted earnings process as an additional

indicator to aid identification of the factor loadings in the other

equations.     The estimate of the intertemporal labor supply elasticity Bn is

—.117 with a standard error of .131. From equations (6.7) and (l.ld), we see

that E can be identified from Cov(Nt,iWt_2)/Cov(Wt,Wt_2). From the point
estimates in Table ib, one can see that the sign of the estimate of          is

partially due to the insignificant and small negative estimate of Cov(Nt,

Wt_2).       The negative estimate has the wrong sign but is not significantly
                                     — 52 —



different   from 0 or from the small positive values found in most previous

micro data studies.     The estimate of B is —.295 with a standard error of

.119. The negative estimate is predicted by the theory. The estimate of

the effect of wage innovations on the marginal utility of wealth which should

be negative, is —.0841 with a standard error of .0279. The estimate of

which is the effect of unemployment innovations on the marginal utility of

wealth and should be positive, is .00300 with a standard error of .0168.

Given the finding that unemployment innovations have smaller and more

transitory effects on earnings than wage innovations ,        the relative and

absolute magnitudes of        and      are sensible.   The variance of Uflt is

imprecisely estimated at .00893.     Wage and unemployment innovations explain

44Z of the variance of the innovations in the marginal utility of income. We

note that point estimates of the variances of all the measurement errors are

positive. The p—value to reject the model is .02.

     In Col. 3, we report estimates of the restricted labor supply model with

Ben =              is still restricted to be zero and the earnings process is

again unrestricted.      We can get an estimate of           from Cov(Ct,MJ

2)1Cov(Wt,Wt_2).      Since the estimate of Cov(C,Wt..2) is so imprecise as

shown in Table Ib, the estimate of       should be treated with caution. The

estimate of      is —.019, with a large standard error of .042, suggests that

consumption and leisure are weak complements. This small negative coefficient

argues against explaining the excess response of consumption to the wage

innovation in our permanent income estimates by appealing to the lifecycle

model.   The point estimate for B remains negative, again with a large

standard error. The point estimate for        is now .0055 which is 1/3 smaller

than the previous estimate.    Wage and unemployment innovations now explain

about 48% of the variance of the innovations in the marginal utility of
                                    — 53 —



income.   Estimates of the other parameters and the associated standard errors

are about the same as before.    Finally, we cannot relect the hypothesis that

Bnc = 0 (the      statistic for col. 2 against col. 3 is .4 with 1 degree of

freedom).23



                            8.   CONCLUDING REMARKS

     Since we have summarized our main empirical findings in the introduction

and Sections 5 and 7. we close the paper with a research agenda. First, since

more precision in our estimates would be helpful, we are 4n the midst of

analyzing an expanded balanced sample for the years 1976—1983.

     Second, we are estimating a version of the lifecycle model based on a

dynamic quarterly model.

     Third, within the context of the permanent income model we are taking a

number of approaches to investigate the possibility that the income factor ut

in our model is contaminated by misspecification. At several points in the

paper we have noted that the response of consumption to the income factor u

sern1s small relative to the response of consumption to the wage. This is true

in the quarterly dynamic factor models as well as the models which ignore

problems of timing and nonsyncronization. The income factor is distinguished

from income measurement error only by the fact that it is not restricted to be

a white noise process and that it is correlated with consumption. All factors

that affect income, other than wages, unemployment and work hours, are

summarized by uyt.    It is unlikely that the consumption response to these

factors is appropriately modelled as if consumption was responding to a single

factor that followed the u process.      Indeed, a motivation for our paper is

the view that it is important to use more than one indicator of the factors

which drive family income if one is to sort out the true income process from
                                      — 54 —



measurement error.     One approach which we have already explored is to attempt

to estimate the marginal propensity to consume and the discount rate from the

wage, unemployment, and hours factors only       Tinfortunately, the results are

very imprecise. A second approach we hope to explore is to add wife's work

hours to the model as an additional indicator, although some researchers who

are can to accept husband's unemployment and even hours of work as exogenous

with respect to consumption may balk at using wife's hours. What is really

needed is a data set which contains reliable information on additional factors

which affect income.     More accurate and complete information on consumption

expenditures would also be very helpful.
                                   — 55



                                  Footnotes

     1. Many recent papers use the terms permanent income model and "life
cycle model" interchangeably. In this paper we restrict "permanent income
model" to refer to models in which labor income is exogenous and current
wealth plus the expected discounted value of current and future income is a
sufficient statistic for the effect of lifetime resources on consumption.

     2. The pure intertemporal substitution responses to wages, prices, and
interest rates (with the marginal of utility of income held constant) can and
have been estimated without a model of wage, price and interest rate behavior.
(See for example, Heckman and MaCurdy (1980), MaCurdy (1981), Hansen and
Singleton (1983) and Browning et al (1985), and Altonji (1986)). Furthermore,
following Hall (1978), many studies have tested versions of the permanent
income and lifecycle models by examining whether past information about wages,
interest rates and other budget constraint determinants is related to changes
in consumption. These stu.4ies, surveyed in Hayashi (1985a). do not require a
detailed model of the income process either. See King (1985), Deaton (1985),
Mayer (1972), and Hayashi (1985a) for discussions and references to the
permanent income hypothesis. See Altonji (1986), Blundell (1986), Browning et
al (1984), Ghez and Becker (1975), Heckman (1974), Heckman and MaCurdy (1980),
King (1985), Killingsworth (1983), MaCurdy (1981,1983), Mankiw etal. (1985),
for detailed discussions and references to the literature on lifecycle models.

     3. Duncan and Hill (1984) have provided some direct evidence on the
importance of measurement error by comparing the responses of employees of a
single large firm with the records of the employer.           They find that
measurement error accounts for 16.8 percent of the variance in the earnings
level. Under reasonable assumptions, these would translate into a much larger
percentage of the variance in the first difference of earnings. Measurement
error in nonlabor income is likely to be an even more serious problem. Mellow
and Sider( 1984) use matched employer/employee responses to show the existence
of considerable measurement error in the survey data. Altonji (1986) provides
evidence of substantial measurement error in the first difference of the log
of earnings divided by hours and in hours of work. For the same data, Altonji
and Siow (1986) found that the lifecycle model may be wrongly rejected if
measurement error in the income variable is ignored, and found that         the
ordinary least squares estimate of the regression coefficient relating      the
change in consumption to the change in income is only one third of          the
estimate obtained using an instrumental variables estimator to account      for
measurement error. In his survey, Hayashi (1985q) concludes that measurement
error is a major issue in micro panel studies of consumption and liquidity
constraints.

     4. Attention to reporting error problems in work on the consumption
function is not new. For example, the interesting study by Bhalla(1979) makes
use of an Indian panel data containing independent measures of consumption,
savings, and income to study consumption behavior. However, Bhalla's analysis
is not conducted in a rational expectations framework and di fers in many ways
from the work presented here.

     5. Holbrook and Stafford (1971) analyzed the link between the level of
consumption and various components of family income using one year of
consumption data and 3 years of income data for a cross section of families.
                                         — 56



They assume that the components of income each consist a fixed trend and a
transitory element. The transitory elements may be correlated across income
components and may be autocorrelater! for up to one period. Although Holbrook
and Stafford do not work within a rational expectations framework, their
analysis shows that consumption is less responsive to the elements of family
income which are most transitory, and is an important precursor to the Hall
Mishkin study and the present project. An early study by Mincer (1960) uses
wage changes as an indicator of permanent income changes and hours changes as
an indicator of transitory income changes.

    6. See Lillard and Weiss (1979), Hause (1980), Kearl (1985), MaCurdy
(1982 a and b), Abowd and Card (1985 and 1986) and Chowdhury and Nickell
(1985).

     7. Hall and Mishin (1982) found that the change in consumption responds
to the lagged change in income using the PSID, and this result is frequently
cited as evidence against a simple rational expectations permanent income
model.   The bulk of the evidence from time series data is consistent with
their results    (See Deaton (1985)). However, our finding that this evidence
for the PSID is not robust is consistent with the results of our earlier paper
(Altonji and Siow (1986)). In that paper we obtain different evidence on the
effect of the lagged change in the log of income on the change in the log of
consumption with different samples, although the empirical magnitude of the
effect was small in all cases.     Zeldes (1985) findings on the relationship
between change in the log of consumption and the lagged value of the log of
income are also sensitive to the details of the specification and sample.

     8. We also experimented with hours of illness, but it did not contribute
much to explaining the variables of interest.

     9. While it may not be what they had in mind, the permanent income
quarterly model specified below aggregates up to the restrictions Hall and
Mishkin impose on the covariance annual data (see their page 472). Moreover,
it is consistent with their structural intepretation of their parameters.

     —
   '—i.       =
                  .1             —
                                     (1i) —i.i     —       —
                                                                 1t—2.i
                                                                           —
                                                                               82t—3.i
C• Ct_i
     —            a       + (1   —         Pq4 —       —
                                                               )q8
                                                                     —
                                                                         8q'2t.i)
Y*t — Y*t_1   i=1t—1.i —
    —
              ct.1    —
                                 + 8cc0uct + 8ccluct_1 + 8CC2uCt_2
    The variables    and    are quarterly innovations OF the random walk
component and the moving average component of the income process
respectively. Y i and C. ( i=1,2,3,4) are income and consumption in the
i'th quarter of year t,              is the quarterly discount factor.
                          andPq
     10. Abowd and Card (1985, Appendix A) provide a clear exposition of the
issues which are relevant to the present paper.

     11. For eximple, consider the variance of the wage change in each of our
5 sample years. For each year the fourth moments of the wage change form the
basis of our estimates of the variance of the wage variance.    These fourth
                                              — 57



moments are the elements of the diagonal of V corresponding to the estimated
variances of the wage in each of the 5 years. We set the 5 elements of the
diagonal of 2 corresponding to the 5 wage variances equal to the inverse of
the average of the 5 fourth moments of the wage change.

     12. Briefly, if the wage, hours, family income, earnings, showed an
increase of 500% or a decline of 80% from the previous year, the observation
was eliminated.     Observations were also eliminated if the change in
consumption showed an increase of 400% or a decrease of 75% from the previous
year. Finally, we elminated observations with an annual hours change of more
than 3,000 hours, a level of hours above 5,000, or wage measures below $.50
per hour in 1972 dollars.

     13. 3, 4 and 5 sample moments for the covariances involving second,
first, and 0 lags, respectively.

     14. We had difficulty getting the algorithm used to compute the optimal
minimum distance estimator to converge even with various starting values.

     15. The best case for serially correlated measurement error was obtained
for the log onsumption model in Table 5, col. 9 and the associated income
model. The X statistic with 3 degrees of freedom to test the hypothesis that
the moving average parameters       t and      are 0 is 6.4.   The estimated
consumption and income equations are:

     = .0217u     + .00121u       + .00895u   + .0350u
          (.OO825 (00474t           (0065751t    .olos

            + .254u     —.148u —i + •0180u —2
              (.OO66) (.OO7)             (.O180,5

     = .O248uT     °°191t—l °°°692'wt—2 + .O425u                         —.0121u —l
          (.00875 (.004653    (.00475)     (.013451                       (•007ng

            + .0008u —2 —.0170u + .0192u —1 + .00233u t—2 + .0401u
              (.OO885    (.OO49 (.0O63         (.0O6O2      (.0288

            + .0353u         + .0345u         +      —    (.162    —   1)c    + .162c —2
                       t—l              t—2
              (.0398            (.O358                   (.0714)                  (.071
     16. OMD estimates of some contemporaneous covariances are presented to be
compared with those in Table la and lb.
                      Levels                      Logs
                   Estimate   SE            Estimate    SE
Coy (EC ,C )       492000.   31100.         .123       .00333
Coy (iYt,zYt)      11900000. 457000.        .104       .00342
Coy (Nt,Nt)        220000.   7690.          .0669      .00293
Coy (Zt,Zt)        66200.    4340.          .00772     .000471
Coy (Wt,W)         .510      .0405          .0371      .00189
Coy (C,iW )        25.0      13.8           .00399     .00105
Coy ('SC ,'Y)      205000.   46600.         .00654     .00163
Coy (AC,iN )           2460.       4470.                 .0000564 .00126
Coy (EC                —2790.      2690.                 —.000160 .000364
Coy                    260.        46.5                   .00776         .00104
                                               — 58 —



      Corresponding to the log model reported in Col. 9 of Table 5, the
estimate of the consumption and income equations are:

      = .0254u     — .00625u      +    .00162u      +   .0266u
           (.0049 (00463t (00454t (.0065
             + .310u —.154u —1 — •0059u —2
               (.005) (.006)              (.0074
      = .O489u                        —.00725u t—2 +         .0402u      +.00509u t—l
         (.0049 (.00586)               (.00665r57             (.0551')        (.0057)
             + .OO876u t—2 —.0421u         +   .0144u           +    •OO8llUzt_2 + .155u
               (.00689         (.00550         (.00662              (.00608)           (.0499
             + .O482u t—l — .0306u t—2 +
               (.0598           (.0163
                                                 yt — Cyt_l
 2
      = .0342
       (.00479)

     17. We restricted our investigation to models with exogenous work hours.
Certain sample moments are missing because the relevant questions were not
asked in those survey years. C1973, W68, W are missing. The wage variable
is unavailable for salary workers prior to 1976.

      18. WLS estimates of some contemporaneous covariances are presented to be
compared with those in Table la and lb. The reported standard error are
calculated as if the diagonal weighting matrix is the optimal weighting
mat rix.
                          Levels                                      Logs
                       Estimate   SE                         Estimate         SE
Coy (C,iC)             624000.   29100.                      .114            .00221
Coy                    13600000. 448000.                     .113            .00240
Coy (INt,Nt)           240000.        5530.                  .0788           .00227
Coy                    67000.         2810.                  .00808          .000330
Coy (W,iWt)             .713          .0586                  .0361           .00146
Coy (Ct,W)             29.0           18.4                   .00358          .000998
Coy (Ct,IY)            250000.        57000.                 .00869          .00136
Coy (Ct,N)             9193.          4422.                  .00167          .00117
Coy (Ct,iZt)           —4842.         3010.                  —.000563 .000387
Coy                    368.           71.2                   .00735          .000961

      Corresponding to the log model reported in Col. 9 of Table 5, the
estimates of the consumption and income equations are:

txC* = .0215u     — .00983u       +    .O0216u      +   .0475u
           (.0071Y (00432t             (004671t         (.0088T5
             + .299u    —.146u    —1
                                        — .OO824u
                                                        —2
               (.006) (.009S)             (005805t
                                                    — 59      —




             = .O448u     +.00975u           ••••OO73OUwt_2
                                                              +
                                                                  .O45lu    +.000199u t—1
               (.00981 (.00636                 (.00586)           (.0108)     (.00531
                  — .OO211u                        + .O222u         + .0125u t—2 + .lSlu
                            t—2 —.0531u
                      (.00500S'      (.00544        (.00554          (.fl0494      (.020!
                  + .O723u
                    (.02383
                                    — .O386u
                                      (.01083
                                              t—2 +    yt — ytl
     2   =    .0380
             (.00157)

          19. We have not explored models which relax intertemporal separability,
 and our interpretation of the evidence is of course conditional on this
 assumption.  See Hotz et al (1985), Eichenbaum et al (1984), and Blundell
 (1986) for some initial steps in this direction.

      20. As Ham (1986) and others have discussed, the presence of hours
 constraints may bias the estimates of the labor supply parameters,
 particularly if u is correlated with the other factors in the model.
 Problems may also atse if, as in the Lucas and Rapping model of unemployment,
 hours of unemployment are intrinsically related to labor supply decisions and
 vazy with the wage rate. We are ignoring these considerations. Note that we
 cannot   reject  the hypothesis that covariances between the wage and
 unemployment are 0.   The papers by Ashenfelter (1980) Browning et al (1985))
 suggest that the form of the consumption, hours, and marginal utility of
 income equations are             affected   by constraints on labor supply.

     21. As Chamberlain (1984) pointed out and Hayashi (1985b) observed in a
similar context, the rational expectations hypothesis does not imply that the
forecast error T1 is uncorrelated with past information when the distribution
is taken across households rather than over time for a given household. If
the effect of an aggregrate disturbance on the
                                                marinal          of Income is  utility
systematically related to determinants of Ew        t—i'    t—1'          and
        then these determinants will be correlated with     in a short panel.
A similar problem would arise in Hall and Mishkin's analysis or in the work
with the RE—PI model discussed above. However, we doubt if this is a serious
problem here, since most of the variation in the change in the wage, hours of
unemployment, hours lost due to illness and other key elements of w
                and Q      occurs over time for a given household rather than
cross—sectional, and we follow Hall and Mishkin's lead and remove the main
effects of aggregate shocks through the use of time dummies.
         22. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to attempL to estimate the
contribution of           various factors to the variance in the innovation of                    the
marginal utility          of income.  Using aggregate time series data, Attfield                  and
Browning (1985)           provide estimates of the covariance of innovation of                    the
marginal utility          of income with price changes. They do so by exploiting                  the
symmetry and homogeneity restrictions of a demand system. They do not have to
impose the assumption of rational expectations.

         23. In the Appendix, Table A4 presents a set of WLS                  estimates.    The point
estimates for B, Bn are still negative. Although consistent with earlier
estimates, these resuits are             surprising     because in Table Aib, we see that Coy
(L
     N          )/Cov  (W ,W_2)
                 The WLS results
                                             and     Coy  (iC ,Wt2)/Cov (W ,W2) are
positive.                              are   basically similar to the OMD results.
                                  REFERENCES
Abowd, John M. and David E. Card, "Intertemporal Substitution in the Presence
     of Long Term Contracts," National Bureau of Economic Research working
     paper No. 1831 (February 1986).

_______ and _______, "On the Covariance Structure of Hours and Earnings
     Changes." Unpublished paper, Princeton University, (December 1985).

Almon, Shirley, "The Distributed Lag between Capital Appropriations and
     Expenditures," Econometrica Vol. 30 (1962) : 407—423.

Altonji, Joseph G., "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
     Micro Data", Journal of Political Economy XCIV No. 3 Part 2 (June 1986),
     S176—15.

         and Aloysius Slow, "Testing the Response of Consumption to Income
     Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data", NBER Working Paper No. 2012 (September
     1986, Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics).

         and Paxson, Christina H., "Job Characteristics and Hours of Work",
     NBER Working Paper No. 1895 (April 1986, Forthcoming in Research in Labor
     Economics).

Ashenfelter, Orley., "Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate
     Labor Supply," Econometrica, XLVIII (April 1980), 547—64.

Attfield, C. L. F. and M. J. Browning, "A Differential Demand System, Rational
     Expectations, and the Life Cycle Hypothesis", Econoinetrica, Vol. 53,
     No. 1 (January 1985): 31—48.

Bernanke, Ben, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on Automobiles:
     Evidence from Panel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIX (1984),
     587—14.

Bhalla, Surjit S., "Measurement Errors and the Permanent Income Hypothesis:
     Evidence from Rural India", American Economic Review, LXIX (June 1979),
     195—07.

Blundell, R. "Econometric Approaches to the Specification of Life—Cycle Labour
     Supply and Commodity Demand Behavior", forthcoming in Econometric
     Reviews, Vol. 5(1) (2986).

Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish, "A Profitable Approach to
     Labor Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life—Cycle," Econometrica
     LIII (May 1985), 503—44.

Chamberlain, Gary. "Panel Data." in Z. Griliches and M. Intrilligator Eds.,
     Handbook of Econometrics, (1984).

Chowdhury, Gopa and Stephen Nickell, "Hourly Earnings in the United States:
     Another Look at Unionization, Schooling, Sickness and Unemployment Using
     PSID Data". Journal of Labor Economics Vol 3(1) Part 1 (January 1985):
     38—69.
 Deaton, Ancus, "Life—cycle Models of Consumptoin: Is the Evidence Consistent
      with the Theory", (July 1985).

 Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer, Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge
      University Press, Cambridge (1980).

Duncan, Gregory, and Daniel Hill, "An Investigation of the Extent and
     Consequences of Measurement Error in Labor Economic Survey Data", Survey
     Research Center, The University of Michigan (July 1984).

Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars P. Hansen and Kenneth J. Singleton, "A Time Series
     Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure Choice
     under Uncertainty", unpublished paper (January 1984).

Flavin, Marjorie A., "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income:
     Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?", Canadian Journal of Economics, XVIII
     (February 1985), 117—36.

_________ "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
      Income," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX (1981), 974—09.

Friedman, Milton, "A Theory of the Consumpton Function, Princeton: Princeton
     University Press, (1957).

Ghez, Gilbert and Becker, Gary S. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the
     Life Cycle. NBER Columbia University Press (1975).

Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
     Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI
     (1978), 971—987.

___________ and Frederick S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
      Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,"
      Econometrica, L (March 1982), 261—81.

Ham, John C., "Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Life—Cycle Labor Supply
     Behavior" The Review of Economic Studies (July 1986).

Hansen, Lars P., and Singleton, Kenneth J. "Stochastic Consumption, Risk
     Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Stock Market Returns." Journal of
     Political Economy, 91, No. 2 (March 1983): 249—265.

Hause, John C., "The Fine Structure of Earnings and the On—The—Job Train4 ng
     Hypothesis," Econometrica, 48 No. 4 (May 1980):1013—1029.

Hayashi, Fumio, "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey", NBER
     Working Paper No. 1720 (October 1985a).

                     Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption Durability:
     Analysis Based on Japanese Panel Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics, C
     No. 4 (November 1985b): 1083—1113.
Heckinan, James J. "Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation of
     the Relationship between Income and Consumption over the Life Cycle."
     American Economic Review 64 (March 1974): 188—194.

__________  and Thomas E. MaCurdy, "A Life—Cycle Model of Female Labour
     Supply." Review of Economic Studies 47 (January 1980): 47—74.

Holbrook, Robert, and Stafford, Frank., "The Propensity to Consume Separate
     Types of Income: A Generalized Permanent Income Hypothesis,"
     Econometrica, XXXIX (January 1971), 1—22.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Finn Kydland, and Guilherme Sedlacek, "Intertemporal
     Preferences and Labor Supply," Unpublished paper, Carnegie—Mellon
     University (December 1985).

Kearl, J. R., "The Covariance Structure of Earnings and Income, Compensatory
     Behavior and On—The—Job Investments", NBER Working Paper No. 1747
     (October 1985).

Killingsworth, Mark R, Labor Supply, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
     (1983).

King, Mervyn, "The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent Contributions," in
     K. Arrow and S. Hartiapohja, (editors), Frontiers of Economics, Oxford:
     Basil Blackwell (1985).

Lillard, Lee and Yoram Weiss, "Components of Variation in Panel Earnings Data:
     American Scientists 1960—1970", Econometrica 47 No. 2 (March 1979): 437—
     454.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of
     Labor Supply and Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Uncertainty,"
     International Economic Review, XXIV No. 2 (June 1983), 265—290.

_________ "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of
     Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis." Journal of Econometrics, 18
      (1982a): 83—114.

________   "Modeling the Dynamic Components of Hours of Work Using Multiple
     Time Series Analysis Applied to Panel Data" unpublished paper, Stanford
     University (November 1982).

________ "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle Setting",
     Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX (December 1981), 1059—85.


Mankiw, N. Greg, Julio Rotemberg, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Intertemporal
     Substitution in Macroeconomics," Quarterly Journal of Economics C
     (February 1985), 225—51.

Mayer, Thomas, Permanent Income, Wealth, and Consumption: A Critique of the
     Permanent Income Theory, the Life—Cycle Hypothesis, and Related Theories,
     Los Angeles: University of California Press, (1972)
Mellow, Wesley, and Hal Sider, "Accuracy of Response in Labor Market Surveys:
     Evidence and Implications", Journal of Labor Economics, I No. 4,
     (October 1983), 331—44

Mincer, Jacob, "Consumption and Employment", Review of Economics and
     Statistics, XLII No. 1 (February 1960), 20—26.

Newey, Whitney K., "Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing.",
     Journal of Econometrics Vol 29 (September 1985):229—256

Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity and
     Consumption," Journal of Political Economy LXXXVI (1978), 673—700.

Survey Research Center, A Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Procedures and Tape
     Codes 1981 Interviewing Year, In8titute for Social Research, University
     of Michigan, Ann Arbor Michigan. (1982).

Zeldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
     Investigation," Working Paper No. 24—85, Wharton School, University of
     Pennsylvania (November 1985).
                                                                                     Table Ii
                                                     Optiul Niiui Distance Estilate f CORtiUCCS Data in eie1s)




                                p cr,-             , L ,, ,.
                                                                ' tç
                         ,,                                                                                         (Jvevvp lO3tev            ___________
                                              4
             ACt       ACt—i ACt-,a A;                    -t       t..1                                     2:        Az1                           oç, A'i
ACt         223000.   —98300.     5770.    55000.     -47500.   22200.     1210.       3970.     —1970.     32.7       —1110.    465.      14.3     1.42       —5.15

           (14*00.) (8ii0.)      (8660.) (2140o l87oo.) (29800.) (illo.) Q3190.) (4390.) (io4o.)                      (1050.) (sio.) (5.54) (5.17) (5.86)

                                           22300.                          203.                             —326.                          —13.6

                                          (29303.)                        C 3190.                          (957.)                         (5.93)


1:. 1t—2                                   —064.                           21.                              —5.06                          4.30

                                          (11100.)                        (3530.)                          (1010.)                        (5.90)


                                           5050000. -1630000. -340000. 94300.          —31300.    -1210.    -22000.    12900.     -549.    110.      38.8      —2.57

                                          (l7!o0o. (1s60oo. (117800.) (15300.) (15700.) (iisoo.) (5560.)              (5720.)    (5700.) (25.9) (27.2 (24.8)

A !..1                                                                     -44600.                          7940.                          —10.1

                                                                          (14600.)                         (4180.)                        (26.2)



    t—                                                                     —2330.                           —894.                          —13.5

                                                                          16700.)                          c5200.1                        126.2)

     G
A                                                                          101000.     —41000.    -449.     —5410.     3690.      —433.    —5.20     3.11      —2.01

                                                                          (.6440.)    (3650.)    (2860.)    U300J 1156.)         (653.)   (3.14)    (3.91)   (3.26

A                                                                                                           15*0.                          .333

                                                                                                           (646.'                         (3.10)


A                                                                                                           542.                           -2.01

                                                                                                           (641.\                         13.51)


                                                                                                            5540.       —2610.    —335.    —.0127    —.614     1.57

                                                                                                            L1348.     (616.)    (425.)   (.1.09)   (1.14)    (1.24)


A Z.i                                                                                                                                      .319
                                                                                                                                          t.9133



A 1t—2                                                                                                                                     1.10

                                                                                                                                          (1.13)



    It                                                                                                                                     .201

                                                                                                                                          (.0153)
                                                                                                                                                    —.057      .811

                                                                                                                                                    (.00771) C.00112'i




             ( sto,ncL.! uyv
                                                    pc.r L.v)
                                                                                       Tb1e I
                                                       2ptiiii   Nnii Distance htiate r C3Yarinces Oava in                   Loqsi




              tC
                _______
                         AC       A SL
                                              L                   A   >.
                                                                                     LK      k        A t'J
                                                                                                                      ________
                                                                                                                     z44                             A     :     A
AC.          .0880       —.0195   .00404    .80214    —.000291 -.000017 .0001*1         .000497    —.00163        .0000607 .000137      .000191     .00331      —.000091     .000199
             (.10374) (.00253) .00251) (.00140 (.10149) (.00169) (.000916 (.00107) (.00145) (.000156) .008172) (.000197) (.000840) (.000075) 8Q0945)
L                                           .00119                           .000986                              .0000075                          —.00227
                                           (.01137                          .000982)                            .000147)                          (.000905)

A C,                                        .000842                          .0000354                            —.008216                           .000467
                                           (.00149)                         .00105)                             (.000118                          (.00184)
A !,                                        .0441     -.0132     -.00251     .00616     -.00182   -.000155 —.000265 .000560
                     -                                                                                                                 .0800643 .00424          —.000027 —.000237
                                           (.00228) (.00111)     (.00126)   (.000090)(.080792)    (.000860) (.000136) (.000166) (.000164) (.800043) (.000102)(.000753)

'                                                                           -.00250                              .0800332                           —.00265
                                                                            (.000750)                           (.000159)                         (.000791)

A                                                                           .0000426                             .000104                            .000539
                                                                            .800S50)                            (.000164)                         (.000802)

A                                                                            .0251      —.00962   -
                                                                                                      .000801    —.800759 .00102       .000151     —.000109 —.00090! —.000312
                                                                            1.00201)   (.00101) (.000799) (.000198) (.000214) (.000111) (.000534) (.000591)(.000504)

A   It—I                                                                                                          .000204                          .000293
                                                                                                                 (.000148)                        (.800505)

A   !,...i                                                                                                       —.000096                          -.000025
                                                                                                                (.000122)
                                                                                                                                                  (.000503)

                                                                                                                 .00105      .000417   .000284     .0000434 —.000167        .000067

                                                                                                                (.000160) (.0000t59)(.000100; (.0000946) (.ooo0s!3 (.ooootioo


                                                                                                                                                   .0000398

                                                                                                                                                  (.0000972)


        -                                                                                                                                          —.000097
                                                                                                                                                  (.0000933)

A t                                                                                                                                                .0172       —.0064!     .00113
                                                                                                                                                  (.00142)    (.000sio) (.000652)




    (sttd,j              jVtçi y
                                                                         T1. 2.
                                                   Tests of Zestriettoes an the Co riane.
                                                                                      •   Strscture of
                                                                                               U..loyne.t.
                                                                       a is
                                                  Coessepti.., Mo.rs, Iscans, Wages
                                                                              Iwe1u

                                                     Xdegrel,., of freedo.) [p—value, in bracketal
                                                        IS1UTAI A'rL0 OP ALTUIATIVE 8TPuT3IS II 3T.
                                               Unrestricted               A:Stationarity           B:Stationarity
                                               Nonstationary Model                                  Cov(wages, hours)0
                                                                                                    Cov(wages, une.pl)0


STlICTIGUS D1P05
OU LL flPOT$tS
A: 1. Stationarity                         307.7(185) 1.0001

1:   1. Stattonarity,                      327.7(j95) [.0001             20.0(10) (.0291
     2.   Cow(wages, unespl.)0
     3. Cov(wages, hours)0
C: 1.     Stationarity                     318.7(193) (.0001             11.0(9)     (.2001
     4.   0 Coy between cons. and hg-
          ged inco.e deter.inants
D: 1. Stationarity
     2. Cov(wages, une.pl.).0
                                           •(203)      1.0001            30.0(18)
                                                                                     1.0381         10.0(8) [.2641
     3. Cov(wages, houre)0
     4. Co, between cons. and lag-
        ged intone detereinants
E: 1. Stationarity                         342.3(208) (.0001             34.6(23)    1.0571         14.6(13) [.3341
     5. Factor .odel, unrestricted
        consu.ption equation



                                                                          Tál.Zb
                                                    Test.

                                                                        a
                                                            ( Restrictions on the Covagiesce Strscture of
                                                        _tio., Rosr., Iscoan, Wages
                                                                             is    logs
                                                                                        d O.esploy..nt.

                                                                 of freedo.) 1ps in bracketsl
                                                     X(degree.
                                                            ISiWTAI £SSITI0S 0! ALTRT!VR P0TSIS I ST.
                                                Unrestricted               A:Stationarity          8: Stationarity
                                                Ilonutationary Model                                 Cov(vages, hours)0
                                                                                                     Cov(vages, une.pl)0


STRICTIO UffOU
— LL P0T3IS
A: 1. Stationarity                         340.5(185) .000
8: 1. Stationarity,                                                                   [.1271
                                           355.6(185) .000               15.1(10)
   2. Cov(wages, une.pl.)..0
     3. Cov(wages, hours)0
C: 1. Stationarity                         345.0(193) .000               4.6(9)
                                                                                      1.8041
   4. 0 Coy between cons. and       lag-
      ged intone deter.inanta
D: 1. Stationarity                                     .000              18.9(18) (.3971            3.8(8)   (.8781
     2. Cov(wages, une.pl.   )-0
     3. Cov(wages, hours)0
     4. Coy between cons. and lag-
          ged Intone deter.inants

5: 1. Stationarity                         312.6(208) 1.0001             32.1(23) (.0971            17.0(13) [.1991
   5. Factor eodel, unrestricted
      consu.ption equation
                                              Table 3
                          Equations of the Income Models (OMD Estimates)*
                                 Data in Levels                     Data in Logs
                     Estimate          S.E.        Estimate                 S.E.
  Income (y*t)
                     197.              56.0        .0210                    .00682
                     64.6              39.6        —.000808                 .00392
           8yw2
                     2.81              39.2        —.00108                  .00407
                     164.              112.        .0333                    .00870
                     —85.6            59.5         —.00951
           yn1                                                              .00564
                     8.98             52.6         —.0000868
          8yn2                                                              .00695
                     —205.            53.7         —.0169                   .00495
                     116.             66.2         .0189                    .00627
                     —7.36            82.4         .00236                   .00609
          8yz2
                     1050.            246.         .0766                    .0737

          8yyl
                     272.             311.         .0627                    .103
          8yy2
                     —286.            139.         —.0292                   .0326
 a27                 1820000.         217000.              .0156            .00218


 !!. (W*t)

                    .699              .194         .200            .0550
                    —.397             .195        —.125                    .0541
          8wv2      .00117            .0120               .00357           .00365
                    —.220             .213        —.0189                   .0176


 urs

          nno       330.             187.         .127             .030
                    —194.            191.         —.0575                   .0306
                    —5.25            9.14         —.00272                  .00617
         nz0         66.8            8.88          .0374                   .00604
                    41.9             8.17         .0318                    .00563
                   —8.35             9.76         .00709                   .00405
                   —25400.           99000.               .00173           .00556


Unemploy. (Z*t)


         8zzO      69.9              7.32         .0296                    .00254


                   —36.0            5.59         .00951                    .00163


         8552      1.41             6.29         .00674                    .00247


*Both income equations were estimated jointly with their respective unrestricted
consumption equation.. Goodness of fit statistics are reported with the consumption
equations in Table 5, Columns 1 and    8    respectively.
                                                            TABLE 4

                           Regression Models for the Change in Log Family Iiome (AT:)
                                          (1)                          (2)                         (3)
          Variable           Pa ramete r        Standard   Parameter         Standard   Parameter        Stands rd
                              Estimate           Error      Estimate           Error     Estimate        Error
          Intercept            0.00216          0.003406   0.005889          0.0036768 0.0069037         0.0034123

Fam Inc. zYt1                 —0.344889         0.015193 —0.365845           0.015195 —0.409402          0.015237
                             —0.149442          0.014164 —0.164237           0.014207 —0.180597          0.014217
                t—2


Wage                                                       0.255408          0.021303   0.253772         0.019779
                                                           0.230359          0.023417   0.259038         0.021814
                t—1
                                                            0.130852         0.022149   0.162618         0.020694
                t —2



Hours                                                       0.175907         0.021493   0.188632         0.019968
                t
                                                            0.102820         0.023286   0.134116         0.021688
                t—1
          tN*                                               0.079422         0.017428   0.098556         0.016283
                t—2


Unempi.    Z*                                              —0.210617         0.073056 —0.219238          0.067839
           z*                                               0.243431         0.075413   0.247934         0.070081
            t—1
                                                           —0.015513         0.066992 —0.020714          0.062227
            t —2



Wife's    NS*                                                                           0.315563         0.012844
            t
Hours     NS*                                                                           0.174080         0.013839
                    t—1
          LNS*                                                                          0.079502         0.013325
                    t —2


Wife's     ZS*                                                                          0.029845         0.026945
                t
Unempi.                                                                                 0.011641         0.026542
           ZS*1
           ZSt —2                                                                       0.022398         0.024941


           R2                              .1154                       .1822                       .2970

           MSE                             .0473                       .0418                       .0377
                                                  TABLE 4 (continued)
                          Regressions Models for the Change in Log Earnings (Y)
                                       (1)                            (2)                           (3)
           Variable        Parameter         Standard     Parameter         Standard    Parameter Standard
                            Estimate         Error         Estimate          Error       Estimate   Error
           Intercept       0.012811          0.0032534    0.019658          0.003109    0.019634          0.003111
                P.S
Earnings Yi—i             —0.412299          0.015327 —0.524590             0.015191    0.524500          0.015197
         Yt—2             —0.132896      0.013809 —0.196307                 0.013848 —0.196216            0.013855


Wage       LW*                                            0.361598          0.017960    0.362132          0.017976
                                                          0.394570          0.020287    0.393079          0.020309
                t—1
                                                          0.251440          0.019365    0.250672          0.019390
                t —2


Hours                                                     0.371535          0.018128    0.370928       0.018155
                t
                                                          0.297834          0.020333    0.297084       0.020374
                t—1
                                                          0.154049          0.016169    0.152987       0.016193
                t   —2



Unempi.    Z*                                            —0.516155       0.061596 —0.513953            0.061660
           Z*                                             0.410682       0.063874       0.409595       0.063981
            t—1
           Z*                                             0.133424       0.057101       0.131799       0.057175
            t —2


Wife's     iNS*
                    t
                                                                                       —0.010471       0.011673
Hours      NS*                                                                          0.000374       0.011723
                    t—1
           ANS*                                                                        —0.017061       0.011240
                    t—2


Wife's     ZS*                                                                         —0.021584       0.024489
                t
!Jnempl.   ZS*1                                                                        —0.006724       0.024121
           ZS*                                                                          0.010421       0.022663
                t—2


           R2                     .1506                              .3871                         .3877
           MSE                    .0431                              .0312                         .0312

*Sample Size is 4085. All variables are residuals obtained from regressions of the
original variables against a set of demographic variables and time dummies.
See page 23.
                                                                             Table   5

                                                              QnsuWt ion Equations:
                                                             (H)   estintes: (Stardard Errors)
                                      Ia In Ie.ls                                                      Ia In h
                                                                                                                  10.   11.        12.
Col.          1.             2.       3.     4.     5.       6.         7.                 8.          9.

Wage    factor:
                             14.5                   17.9                                    .018       .0171            .0226
              12.9
              (7.95)         (7.25)                 (8.56)                                  (.00585)   (.00597)         (.00604)
              1.99                                                                          .00122
              (6.97)                                                                        (.00401)
              —8.38                                                                         .00326
82:                                                                                         (.00499)
              (9.84)


Unaiiloynnt factor:               u                                                                                     .00270
              —9.91          —13.0                  —8.60                                   -0.00      .00141
              (11.5)         (10.5)                 (11.3)                                  (.00625) (.00472)           (.00462)
              —27.9                                                                         —.00101
              (13.5)                                                                        (.00650)
              —2.45                                                                         .00477
               (23.2)                                                                       (.00698)

Fkurs       factor:
               4.48
                      u      12.2                                                           .00422     .00653
               (9.71)        (8.89)                                                         (.00616) (.00535)
               —2.95                                                                        —.00547
               (8.81)                                                                       (.00709)
               —20.4                                                                        —.0109
                                                                                            (.0122)
               (16.9)

Incone       Factor:    u.
                        '                                                                   .0288      .0253            .0242
               61.3          35.2                   39.7
 cyO                                                (12.3)                                  (.0237)    (.00655)         (.00666)
               (19.6)        (11.1)
                                                                                            —.00341
               -48.1
               (27.4)                                                                       (.0400)
               6.78                                                                         —.00476
       2:
               (28.4)                                                                       (.0266)
                                                                            Table 5 (continued)

Col.     1.            2.      3.        4.       5.       6.      7.                 8.           9.        10.        11.        12.

Consumption factor:

         393.         396.     396.     391.     400.     400.     397.               .254        .255
8cc0                                                                                                         .252       .259       .256
         (14.7)       (14.3)   (14.2)   (14.4)   (15.3)   (15.2)   (15.4)             (.00621)    (.00582)   (.00606)   (.00575)   (.00628)
Bcci     —221.        —218.    —218.    —215.    —220.    —220.    —217.              —.147       —.148      —.147      —.145      —.144
         (17.4)       (15.6)   (15.6)   (15.6)   (18.0)   (17.9)   (17.8)             (.00776)    (.00717)   (.00757)   (.00737)   (.008 13)
         20.4         25.3     24.6     29.1     17.1     17.7     21.0               .0171       .0177
cc2                                                                                                          .0187      .0169      .0 186
         (22.1)       (21.8)   (21.6)   (22.1)   (23.6)   (23.4)   (23.8)             (.0105)     (.00984)   (.0105)    (.0100)    (.0112)
a:                             .0672   .0291              .0504    .0324                                     .239                  .232
                               (.0215) (.0104)            (.0223) (.0106)                                    (.0609)               (.0656)
p                              —.0437                     1.66
                               (.398)                     (.598)

x2:      11.3         30.9     31.4     42.8     20.0     20.2     27.9               20.6        25.4       64.6       12.4       61.6

DF       13           21       23       24       14       15       16                 13          21         24         14         16

MSE      1.67         1.70     1.69     1.74     1.74     1.73     1.78               1.87        1.83       2.02       1.75       2.12
acol 1 is the unrestricted levels consumption model. It is jointly estimated with the levels income model
in Table 3. Col. 2 has no lagged factors. Col. 3 is the RE—PI model. Col. 4 is the Keynesian model. Col.
5 excludes lagged factors f rom the consumption equation and annual hours from all
                                                                                   equations.  Col. 6 is the
RE—PI model without annual hours.   Col. 7 is the Keynesian model without annual hours.  Col. 8 is the
unrestricted consumption equation in logs which is estimated with the log income model in Table 3. Col. 9
is the log model with lagged factors excluded from the consumption
                                                                    equation.  Col. 10 is the log
model. Col. 11 excludes lagged factors from the consumption equation and annual hours from all Keynesian
                                                                                                 equations.
Col. 12 is the log Keynesian model without annual hours.

bThe x2 statistic and degrees of freedom are for a test of the
                                                                consumption equation and the associated
income model against the covariance stationary model.   The cross covariances between hours and wages and
unemployment and wages are not used in estimation. 2I..moments are used to estimate columns 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9,
and 10. /41 sample moments are used to estimate columns 6, 7, 11, and 12, which exclude annual hours.
                                                                               Tabi.
                                                                   Quart.rly Dynamic factor     duls
                                       Data to is,. is Annual 8urs Excluded                              Data    in top, Annual lours Excluded
                                               OPV Eatt.ata.                                                        0I Estimates
                                                    ih
                                                 Standard
                                                                      .o
                                                                    Parat.r            Standard
                                                                                                         3'
                                                                                                       Psramater          Standard
                                Paramater
                               Estimate           Error             Estimats           Error           Estimate            Error
Consumption Equation'
Paranaters
                                                                                                       .0116              .00292
                                8.71             4.39
                                                 5.92                                                  .000392            .00250
6cz0"zt
                                18.7             5.17                                                  •0U4               .00321

                                403              14.3               402                14.3            .238               .00352

                                —225              17.6              —224               17.3            —.145              .00160
Bcci(Uct_1)
                                9.87             21.7               10.7               21.6            .0136              .0102
cc2ct—2
       0                                                            .0357              .0114
                                                                    .974               .133

tocomaEquation
Paramaters
                                245              48.7               245                48.4            .0279              .00357
u.Jt.j:
                                —190             41.9               —189               41.6            —.0221             .00310

                                25.8             5.91               25.7               3.87            .00313             .000716

                                —145             37.7               —139               36.1            —.00103            .00392
uxci:        aDyx
                                112              34.0               106                32.8            .00457             .00367
             a171
                                —14.7            4.93               —13.9              4.50            —.000510           .000332.
             a271
                                                                    463                469             .0172              .0421
uytj: a0                        479              474
                                                 419                 196               415             .00631             .0387
                                —209
                                18.0              56.8              16.2               56.3            —.00185            .00535
             a217
                                1242071          670642             1267353            614696          .0103              .00464


Wags Equation
Paramaters

uj:                             .188
                                —.112
                                                  .0452
                                                  .0326
                                                               :
                                                                    .187
                                                                    —.111
                                                                                       .0431
                                                                                       .0326
                                                                                                       .0571
                                                                                                       —.0359
                                                                                                                          .0121
                                                                                                                          .00869
             51w
                                .0129             .00396            .0127              .00396          .00417             .00106

                                —.0613            .0765             —.0601             .0758           —.00608            .00636

Uneuploymant Equation
Parat.rs
                                8.96              .865              8.94               .863        j   .00257              .000326
U1t1          Ozz
                                —6.16             .705              —6.16              .705            —.00113             .000247

                                .741              .0992             .739               .0988           .000115             .0000348

                                25.7                                26.9                               47.1


Dagr.ss      of ?r..do.         21                                  22                                 21

                                1.67                                1.66                                1.87

             statistic    for taut of the madel against th. stationary madat
           Th. degrees   of freedom ar. the degrees of freedo. of th, test.
                                                              Table 7

                                               C.iarterly Dynamic Factor ?kdels
                                                      Anrual lixirs Irriuded
                                            tta in Levels
                                                     Estlnt
                                                                                                    tta In thgs
                                             (1,1)
                                                                                                    at Estinates
                            Ia           H,
                                      Stanlard
                                                             10
                                                            Paraiater
                                                                                  lb                                16
                         Paraiater                                              Stantlard    Parieter             Stariard
                         Estiamte      Error                Est1nte              Error       Estlnate             Error
 Ccxsuiçtion Equation
 ParanEters

 cz0("zti
         )               7.65
                         —9.64
                                      3.94
                                      5.76
                                                                                             .00897               .00266

 8(uj)                    2.74
                         13.3
                                     4.87
                                     4.97
                                                                                             .000609
                                                                                             .00366
                                                                                                                  .00240
                                                                                                                  .00282
 8cyij(uyj)                                                                                  .0103                .00303
 8ccO(Uct)               389.         13.7                  388.                13.7         .251                 .00564
 Bcci(Uct_i)             —218.        16.3                  —217.               16.1         —.145                .00720
 3cc2ct—2                11.1         20.6                  12.2               20.6          .0137                .00973
                                                            .0316              .0106
 Pq                                                         1.03                .0771

I.nccme   Equation
Paraters


u.:                     220.         43.0                  220.                42.6          .0216                .00501

      a1                —172.        37.0                  —172.               36.7         —.0179                .00442
                        23.6         5.23                  23.5                5.18          .00251               .000626
u:                      —133.        36.6                     119.             35.9         —.00102               .00356
      a1
t: a
                        99,4         32,6                  89.0                32.4         .00783                .00341
                        —12.9        4.74                  —11.5               4.73         —.000968              .000499
   a0                   85.5         98.7                  90.5                114.         .0147                 .00382

      a1                —104.        109.                  —107.               123.         —.00944           .00303
      a2                15.5         16.5                  15.8                18.5         .00113            .000427
u: a0                   762.         575.                  721.                557.         .0302             .0414
      a1                -'467.       487.                  -433.               474.         —.00732           .0367
                        53.4         64.8                  49.0                63.1         .0000826          .00499
                        486000.      1930000.              623000.             1730000.     .0112             .00213



Wa Equation
Paraiters

u:    af),,M
                        .202         .0472                 .201                .0467        .0649             .0149
                        —.124        .0342                 —.123               .0339        —.0417            .0107
      a2                .0143        .00417                .0141               .00413       .00490            .00129
                        —.0942       .0886                 —.0916              .0868        —.0109            .00914
                                                      Table 7 (continui)
UrEIloynert Equation
Paraieters                /0             Ii')


Uzt:    aa1              7.76
                         —5.32
                                       .802
                                       .652
                                                       7.60
                                                       —5.16
                                                                       .811
                                                                       .664
                                                                               .00252
                                                                               —.00123
                                                                                          .000243
                                                                                          .000161

        z2               .646          .0911           .621            .0927   .000138    .0000214


Ainia]. }urs Equation
Paraters


u: a1                    6.36          15.5            6.83            16.8    .0134      .00382

       aim                10.3         14.7             10.5           15.7    —.00892    .00316
                         1.59          2.06            1.59           2.20     .00108     .000416
                         -8.84         1.14            —8.76           1.16    —.00518    .000757

       a1                6.65          .911            6.61            .932    .00369     .000626
                        —.854          .129            —.850           .132    —.000445   .0000861
                         27800.        26100.          28200.         27800.   .00313     .00387


   x2*                  52.9                           55.0                    60.4
tgrees of               34                             36                      34
                         1.71                          1.70                    1.86


          statistic for test of t ni,de.l against tl stationary de1
       fl degrees of frian are t degrees of freaian of t test.
                                        Table 8
                              The Hall and Mishkin Model

            1. Hall and Mishkin       2. Balanced Sample      3. Larger Sample
            Estimate t—stat          Estimate t—stat          Estimate t—stat
 a          .107      13.4           .0740     2.43           .0498     2.84
 8          .292     3.65

p           •77                      .932      3.47           .169      .28

$           .253     4.4             .306      .72            .407      3.72
            .215     15.4            .143      2.28           .210      5.53

A2          .101     5.9             .0657     .85            .0191     .41

p1          .294     14.             .208      2.37           .211      3.64

p2          .114     6.3             .0238     .33            .0467     1.02
a2          1.49     13.5            1212562. 3.32            2440932. 5.33
            .158     52.7            2990402. 6.28            4974909. 9.06
a2          3.41     26.2            149998.   11.06          248592.   16.0

x23.                                 14.1                     6.32

                                     52.4                     44.3

M.S.E.                               1.59                     1.34

x23    isto test against the covariance stationarity model.
       is to test against the non—stationary model.
                                             Table 9
                                Estimates of the Lifecycle Model

              (1)                          (2)                     (3)
              Estimate   SE                Eeti.ats   SE           Eatiate SE
Consuaption C*
8cvO          .0229      .00582
              .00216     .00611
cw1
cw21          .00538     .00780
dcz0
              —.000787 .00496
              —.00397    .00591
cn0           .0245      .0127
'cy0                                                  .00689       .252      .00829
              .254       .00580            .252
8ccO
              —.146      .00713            —.147      .00765       —.148     .00826
              .0142      .00970            .0142      .00974       .0142     .00979
3cc2

Earnings AT*ta
              .0459      .00627            .0503      .00660       .0495     .00661

8yvl
              .0109      .00617            .0104      .00656       .0112     .00662
              .00310     .00572            .00373     .00608       .00391    .00601
yw2           —.0285     .00654            —.0274     .00659       —.0272    .00661
yz0           .0167      .00581            .0159      .00585       .0158     .00585
yz1                                        .00827                  .00816    .00521
              .00866     .00521                       .00520
3yz2
yno           .0229      .0362             .0486      .00706       .00485    .00697
              —.0137     .00764            —.00416    .00547       —.00410   .00549
yn1           —.0116                       —.00204                 —.00199   .00587
                         .0154                        .00585
8yn2
yyo           .0158      .0172             .137       .00537       .137      .00531
              .0140      .0363             —.0833     .00622       —.0834    .00623
              .0450      .0340             .00479     .00677       .00461    .00677
yy2
a2            .0127      .00194




3ww0          .117       .0137             .107       .0120        .108      .0123
              —.0457     .0120             —.0377     .0106        —.0388    .0108
    evl
wz            .00793     .00518            .00677     .00557       .00640    .00547

              .000879    .00216            .00233     .00172       .00214    .00178

Uneploy

              .0284      .00250            .0282      .00250       .0282     .00250
3zzO
              .00817     .00170            .00809     .00172       .00809    .00172
zz1
              .00507     .00226            .00491     .00231       .00496    .00232

Hours       N*t
              .178       .197              .121       .0169        .121      .0169
              —.127      .209              —.0583     .0169        —.0580    .0170
2nn2          —.00181    .00427            —.00337    .00573       —.00319   .00575
              —.0370     .00558            —.0353     .00585       —.0354    .00574
nz1           .0288      .00533            .0272      .00539       .0272     .00540
              .00394     .00386            .00336     .00386       .00338    .00386
8nz2
6nwO           .00333    .00332
              .00395     .00423
nu1           —.00440    .00429
nw2
              .0386      .0178
8nyO
        2     —.0138     .0619             .00153     .00282       .00157    .00281
    n
                                           —.117      .131         —.110     .125
                                           —.295      .119         —.370     .288
Bnc                                                                —.0195    .0424
                                           —.0841     .0279        —.0713    .0384
87w
&)1z
                                           .00300     .0168        .00187    .0112

                                           .00893     .0151        .00552    .0100
              31.7                         43.6                    43.2
OF            20                           26                      25
MSE           1.81                         1.82                    1.82
d     is the log 61 measured labor earnings. As in the other log models in
the paper.       is the log(2000 + Hours of Unemployment), rather than the
change in the log(2000 + Hours of Unemployment).
                                                                     t.
                               Data in Levels, Annual Hours Excluded




            Response of Wage   to   a one-standard                                        Response of Unemployment to a one—
           deviation innovation in the wage factor                                        standard deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                Unemployment factor
 0.3
                                                                               14
0.25
                                                                               12
 0.2                                                                           10
0.15                                                                            8
 0.1                                                                            6
                                                                                4
0.05
                                                                                2
   0
                                                                                0
       0      1     2     3     4           5       6       7                       0      1       2   3          4   5       6       7
                           Tim.                                                                            Time

                                                                                         Response of Income to a one—standard
           Respons, of Income to a one-standard                                          deviation innovation in Unemployment
             deviation innovation in the Wage                                                          factor
                          factor
                                                                                0
350
300                                                                            -50
250
200                                                                        -100
150
100
 50
       0      I     2    3
                          Time
                               4            5       6   7                  ::                      2   3      4
                                                                                                           Time
                                                                                                                      5   6       7


                                             Response of Income to a one-standard
                                            deviation innovation in the Income factor

                               000
                               800
                               600
                               400
                               200
                                    0
                                        0       ¶       2       3          4         5         6   7
                                                                    Time
                                                                      Rce 2
                                                  Data in Logs. Annuel Hours Included




                Response of Wage to a one—standard                                                Response of Unemployment to a one—
            deviation innovation in the Wage factor                                               standard deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                        Unemployment factor
  0.1


                                                                                  0 001
      01           I           I       I          —



       0           1           2       3       4          5       6       7       -0.OOTO               1        2       3          4   5       6       7
                                           Time                                                                              Time

                Response of Hours to a one—standard                                              Response of Hours to a one—standard
            deviation innovation in the Hours factor                                                        deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                              Unemployment factor

                                                                                  0.005i
                                                                                         o.f
o .oos
      CI           .
       0           1           2       3       4          5       6       7
                                       Time                                                                              Time

                Response of Income to a one—standard                                             Response of Income to a one-standard
                deviation innovation in the Wage factor                                              deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                       Unernploy ment factor
  0
  0                                                                                0.01 T
  0.01                                                                                of
     0                                                                            -0.01
                                                                                  -0.021
                                                                                         •—_.-                        t
 -0.01 0               1           2   3          4       5       6       7                  0      1          2     3          4       5       6       7
                                           Time                                                                          Time


                 Response of Income to a one—standard                                            Response of Income to a one—standard
                deviation innovation in the Hours factor                                           deviation innovation in the Income
                                                                                                                         factor
  0.03
                                                                                       0.1
  0.02
  0.01                                                                             0

        0                  '                                  —                          n-I-       i                    I          I       I       I
            0              1       2       3          4       5       6       7           0         1           2     3         4       5       6       7
                                           Time                                                                              Time
                                                                     cTi-e 3
                                           Date in Levels, Annual Hours fncluded



              Response of Wage to a one-standard                                           Response of Unemployment to a one-
             deviation innovation in the ilage factor                                      standard deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                 Unemployment factor

                                                                                15i
                                                                                1oJ._____-.
      4.


  o                   P       !       I          P       I       P
      0               1       2       3          4       5       6        7          0                2
                                                                                            1                3              4   5       6       7
                                          Time                                                                   Time

              Respons, of Hours to a one—standard
            deviation innovation in the Hours factor                                       Response of Hours to a one—standard
                                                                                                    deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                      Unemployment factor
                                                                                 Sr
-10
-20
-30
  0               1       2           3          4       5       6        7
                                                                               -10
                                                                                 5

                                                                               -150         1         2      3          4       5   6       7
                                          Time                                                                   Time

            Rspons, of Income to a one-standard                                            Response of Income to a one—standard
           deviation innovation in the Wage factor                                                  deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                      Unemploy ment factor

                                                                                     0

                                                                               -loot
  0           1           2       3       4          5           6        7    -200                    2     3          4       5
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                            7
                                      Time                                                                       Time

            Response of Income to a one-standard                                          Response of Income to a one—standard
           deviation innovation in the Hours factor                                      deviation innovation in the Income factor
                                                                              1500




  0           1           2       3         4        5       6        7          0          1         2      3          4       5   6       7
                                  Time                                                                           Time
                                               Date in Logs, Annu8l Hours Excluded




             Response of Wage to a one—standard                                                      Response of Unemployment to a one-
            deviation innovation in the Wage factor                                                  standard deviation innovation in the
                                                                                                           Unemployment factor
 0.09'
 0.08                                                                                 0.003
 0.07'                                                                               0.0025
 0.O6                                                                                 .0.002
 0.05
 0.04                                                                                o 0015
 0.03                                                                                 0.00l
 0.02                                                                                0.0005
 0.01                                                                                     0
    0           t       I   I          •            I           t       —.
                                                                                    -0.0005
        0       1       2   3          4           5        6           7                      0            1           2       3       4    5   6   7
                                Time                                                                                            Time
                                                                                                   R.spons. of c.uu. to a one-standard
          Response of Income to a one-standard                                                              deviation innovation in the
         deviation innovation tn the Wage factor                                                              Unemployment factor



oo
  0.04



0.015
 0.01

ooo
                                                                                     0.002
                                                                                         0
                                                                                    -0.002
                                                                                    -0.004
                                                                                    -0.006
                                                                                    -0.008
                                                                                     -0.01
                                                                                                                                    /
                        I                                                           -0.012
-0.005
         0
                    ,

                    1   2
                            I
                            3      4               5        6       7                         0         1           2       3       4       56   7
                                Time                                                                                        Time


                                                    Response of Income to a one-standard
                                                   deviation innovation in the Income factor

                                   0.1
                                  0.08
                                  0.06
                                  0.04
                                  0.02
                                           0
                                               0        1           2        3   4       5          6           7
                                                                             Time
                                                                     Table Ala
                                                        WIS Estimate of Covariances (Data in
                                                                                             Levels)

          Constiiption                 Faintly InconE                  Work Ibirs
                                                                                                        1kiloynEnt                       Wages
                    &t_1*    A_2*                 t_1* t_2*            &Jt*       t_1* t_2*             Zt*        t_1*       t_2*          W       l   W_1
 zç*      393000.   —164000. —15700.   137000.    —110000.   149000.   6280.       2200.     —96.2      —3050.     —351.
          (32000.) (22300.) (26300.) (54100.) (56800.) (80100.) (4800.)                                                       2000.      19.9       12.2        -4.68
                                                                                   (4780.)   (6701.)    (2370.)    (2410.)    (3410.)    (15.8)    (17.1)       (23.0)
                                       —9760.                          —1640.                           —416.                            —30.9
                                       (51900.)                        (5020.)                          (2270.)                          (20.0)
                                       41000.                          —4940.                           1150.                            20.8
                                       (65200.)                        (4920.)                          (2370.)                          (17.7)
                                       7020000. —2240000. —212000. 135000.        —23900.    13000.    —50400.    9300.       —2280.     2.39.
                                       (369000.) (243000.) (245000.) (20200.) (21200.) (25600.) (10000.)                                           86.2        —13.5
                                                                                                         (9770.)              (10500.    (60.4)    (60.5)      (61.7)
                                                                       —38700.                         10700.                            —38.9
                                                                       (20400.)                        (8290.)                           (62.3)
AY _2*
  t                                                                    —46600.                         19800.                            20.5
                                                                       (24900.)                        (11500.)                          (57.5)
                                                                       137000.    —48300.    —7260.    —23000.    5330.      2080.       —1.63     4.00        —8.15
                                                                       (6570.)    (4920.)    (4260.)   (2350.)    (1520.)    (1690.)     (5.53)    (6.48)      (6.01)
                                                                                                       4940.                            4.21
                                                                                                       (1430.)                          (6.49)
                                                                                                       3260.                            —7.16
                                                                                                       (1540.)                          (6.90)
                                                                                                       25500.     —6210.     —2450.     -4.16     —1.69       6.70
                                                                                                       (2550.)    (1340.)    (1100.)    (3.33)    (3.45)      (3.57)
Lzt_*                                                         .
                                                                                                                                        —.173
                                                                                                                                        (3.85)
      *
  —2
                                                                                                                                        6.65
                                                                                                                                        (6.13)
                                                                                                                                        .431      —.129       —.0303
:u.rteJ staiviard errors.                                                                                                               (.0454)   (.0373)     (.0321)
                                                                    Table Aib
                                                         WLS Estimate of Covariances (Data             in Logs)


          tton                           Fanily Jncsie                   1bt¼ Iburs                       1k1oynit                        Wages
                                                    Yt_1*      AYt_2*                 Nt_i*                           Z_f       2t_2*                              A   1t
                     Ac_j*    S—z        AYt*                                                   t_2*                                                     hit..i             -
 *        .102       —.0426   —.000324   .00321     —.000521   .000569   .00132       .000655   —.00131   —.000245    .000448   .000272   .00300      .000755     —.000701
Cb        (.00384) (.00261) (.00264) (.00152) (.00177) (.00204) (.00108) (.00116) (.00170) (.000236) (.000310) (.000293) (.000951) (.00114) (.00123)

                                         .000899                         —.000327                         —.000085L                       —.00266
                                         (.00158)                        (.00118)                         (.000283)                       (.000987)

                                         -.000471                        —.00140                          .000186                         .00109
                                         (.00168)                        (.00117)                         (.000363)                       (.00118)

                                         .0557      —.0163     —.00344   .00875       —.00150   .000503   —.00101     .00074    .000375   .00537      .00186      —.000573
                                         (.00258) (.00167) (.00143) (.00109) (.000952) (.00110) (.000242) (.000274) (.000329) (.00102)                (.00105) (.000926)

                                                                         —.003)0                          —.000265                        —.000215
                                                                         (.000930)                        (.000210)                       (.000906)

                                                                         —.00169                          .000453                         .000354
                                                                         (.00103)                         (.000256)                       (.000851)

                                                                         .0401        —.0128    —.00183   —.00236     .00232    .000968   .000321     .000353     —.000821
                                                                         (.00265) (.00129) (.00102) (.000392) (.000357) (.000341) (.000662) (.000786) (.000693)

                                                                                                          —.000565                        .000222
                                                                                                          (.000248)                       (.000772)

     *                                                                                                    .0000128                        —.000491
                                                                                                          (.000204)                       (.000710)

                                                                                                          .00299      • 00114   .000740   —.000303    —.000354    —.0000901
                                                                                                          (.000334) (.000206) (.000172) (.000178) (.000181) (.000199)

3 t _1*                                                                                                                                   .000208
                                                                                                                                          (.000163)

                                                                                                                                          .000223
                                                                                                                                          (.000163)

                                                                                                                                          .0281       —.00914     —.00123
                                                                                                                                          (.00211) (.00114) (.000845)

(s'        errors)
                                          Table 2
                           &uatlo of tF Incc*ie MDdels (WIS Estln2tes)*
                                  Data in Levels                          Data in thgs
                     Estinnte                                 Estinte               S.E.
  ITrxE (y*t)
                     445.                  206.               .0310                 .00930
                     141.9                 133.7              .0073)                .00727
           yw1

           yw2       —21.4                 112.               —.00366               .00623
                     657.                  259.               .0531                .0125
                     —49.6                 157.              —.00735               .00814
                     110.                  188.              —.00662               .0103

           yzo       —317.                 67.4               .0219                .00580
                     61.7                  66.7              .0108                 .00707
                     —11.4                 69.8              .00682                .00758

                     2218.                4094.              .119                  .0611
                    —986.                 4362.              .0217
          yy1                                                                      .075

          8yy2
                    122.                  259.               —.02%                 .0210

                    171000.               13400000.          .0178                 .00539
 W (AJ*t)
                    .563                  .228               .183                  .0536
                    —.147                 .184              —.0877                 .0538

                    —.0284                .0551             —.00554               .00607
                    .0473                 .147              —.00649               .0143
 urs ()             146.                  47.7              .132                  .0268
                   —37.8                  35.9              —.0256                .0254
                   —57.7                  24.7              —.00958               .00919
                   —140.                  15.8              —.0534                .00871
                   37.4                   11.0              .0359                 .00680
                   11.7                   11.2              .0181                 .00737
                   43577.                6756.              .00857                .00403

Urt1oy. (*)
                   152.                  8.73               .0532                 .00362
                   -43.0                 8.35               .0171                .00312

         8zz2       19.4                 6.25               .00949                .00327
*Both 1nctz  uatix      re t1nte1 jointly with tFir respective unrestrioted
coinpti.x equations. t' statistics are reported with tFe ccmsunpcicxi equations In Table A3.
#Uncorrected staedard errors.
                                                                                            bleA3
                                                                 Cxtim                 .iLS e1      (srasierd errors#)


                                            lta In 1,veIa                                                          Eta In th
                                   2.       3.       4.          5.        6.          7.               8.         9.          10.*          11.        12.*
      Cal..         1.

      We factor:                                                                                        .0331     .0186                      .0185
                    47.1           41.8                          41.5
                                   (33.6)                        (32.4)                                 (.11)755) (.0090B)                   (.00826)
                    (33.6)
                    23.9                                                                                .i08
                    (34.9)                                                                              (.00678)
                    —5.57                                                                               —.00287
                    (41.9)                                                                              (.0083))

      !.kiloymet factor: Uz                                                                             -0.00762 —.00456                     —.00414
                    —16.5          —18.4                         —19.7
                    (15.9)         (15.1)                        (14.7)                                 (.00659)   (.0055(e)                 (.00508)
                                                                                                        .00663
                    1.77
                    (16.8)                                                                              (.00756)
                    14.3                                                                                .00508
                    (22.6)                                                                              (.00681)

                  factor: u                                                                             .00542     .00878
                    42.1           33.8
                    (39.1)         (34.2)                                                               (.00964) (.0113)
                                                                                                        .00494
                    16.0
                    (34.9)
                                                                                                        (.00982)
                                                                                                        —.00763
                    17.3
                                                                                                        (.0158)
                    (49.1)


      lrscma factor:         u..
                                                                                                                                             .0218
                    23.5           52.2                          63.1                                   .0212      .0196
                                   (59.7)                        (52.2)                                 (.0186)    (.0167)                   (.0142)
                    (85.6)
                                                                                                        —.00911
      8 1:          —30.9
                                                                                                        (.0182)
                    (121.)                                                                              —.00979
      B 2           63.9
                                                                                                        (.0199)
                    (133.)

      Ca,tIon factor:                   u
                                            526.       527.       526.      526.        528.             .279       .279       .278          .279       .277
       B                           526.
              :     515.
                                                                            (86.6)      (81.3)           (.00743) (.00607)     (.0124)       (.00736)   (.0122)
                    (109.)         (89.5)   (89.2)     (85.1)     (86.9)
                                                                                                                               —.154         —.153      —.156
                                                                  —331.     —331.       —327.            —.153    —.153
       Bor1:        —339.          —331.    —331.      —327.
                                                                  (110.)    (110.)      (104.)           (.0101)   (.0111)     (.0166)       (.0101)    (.0162)
                    (136.)         (113.)   (113.)     (109.)
                                                                                                                               —.000448       .00116    .000166
       Bcc2         —33.9          —29.9    —29.9      —29.4      —29.9         29.9        29.4         —.00141   -.00116
              :
                                                                                        (51.3)           (.0120)    (.0129)    (.0094)       (.0117)    (.00895)
                     (58.9)        (54.1)    (53.8)    (53.3)     (52.3)    (52.1)

                                                                            .0696       .0402                                  .269                     .355
       a:                                    .0600     .0437
                                                                                                                               (.0777)                  (.0974)
                                             (.0269)   (.0211)              (.0494)     (.0262)


                                             1.43                           1.74
       p
                                             (1.41)                         (1.63)


       = 1.63                       1.63     1.61      1.60       1.52      1.51        1.49              1.52      1.48        1.51          1.31       1.35



Coi.  1 is the unrestricted levels consumption model. It is jointly estimated with the levels income model
in Table i.i. Cal. 2 has no lagged factors. Col. 3 is the RE—Pt model. Col. 4 is the Keynesian model. Col.
5 excludes lagged factors from the consumption equation and annual hours from all equations. Col. 6 is the
RE—PI model without annual hours. Col. 7 is the Keynesian model without annual hours. Col. 8 is the
unrestricted consumption equation in logs which is estimated with the log income model in Table m2.Col. 9
is the log model with lagged factors excluded from the consumption equation. Col. 10 is the log Keynesian
model. Col. 11 excludes lag.d factors from the consumption equation and annual hours from      equations.                              all
Col. 12 is the log Keynesian model without annual hours.


#   (rrecreI starsiard errors.
* Eetijimtes dlxi rt satisfy starsiard ivergme criterion.
                                                   Table 44
                               Estii.te,   of the Lifecycle Mod.! OiLS)
                 (1)                           (2)
                 Estimate    SE                                            (3)
                                               Estimate sz                 Estimate SE

      8
      Consumption AC*t

                 .0251       .00968
      8aw1       .00573      .00845
      3cw2l      —.00291     .00903
      8czO      —.00508      .00654
      8cnO       .00398      .0263
      8cyO      .00244       .0436
     8ccO       .286         .0118            .267            .0807       .254        .170
     8ccl       —.147        .0162            —.160           .0512
                —.000883 .00991
                                                                          —.169       .116
     ec2                                      —.00121         .0168       —.00138     .0185
     Earnings y*5

     i3         .0553
                .0149
                          .0162               .0607       .0155           .0390       .0135
     8yvI                 .00987              .0180       .0141           .0175       .0139
     8yw2       —.0000738 .00746              .000136     .0128
                —.0424                                                    .000339     .0130
     8yzO                 .00853              —.0425      .0116
                .0197                                                     —.0425      .0122
     8yz1                 .00892              .0195       .00966
                .0191     .00759              .0194
                                                                          .0195       .0101
  6yz2                                                    .0104           .0194       .0109
  8ynO          .0281     .178                .0929       .0192
                .00808    .722
                                                                          .0925       .0201
  8ynl                                        —.0103      .0111           —.0103      .0115
  8yn2          .00189      .0391             .00339
                .161        2.29
                                                          .0125           .00337      .0130
                                              .165        .0176           .167        .0173
               —.0292       2.46             —.0994       .0193
  8yy2         .00431       .0684            .00323
                                                                       —.0983         .019
                                                          .0143           .00314     .0149
               .0142        .458




 8wwO          .147         .0372            .136         .0350
               —.0504       .0281
                                                                       .140          .0360
 8w1                                         —.0438       .0322        —.0466        .0337
 8w2           —.00675      .00706           —.00703      .0103        —.00685       .0104
      2        .00208       .00646           .00370       .00599       .00311        .00635
 Unmaploy AZ*t

 8zzO          .0534        .00308           .0533       .00503        .0533
               .0170                                                                 .00523
 8zz1                       .00230           .0170       .00428        .0170         .00447
 8zz2          .00925       .00234           .00921      .00426        .00921        .00444
 Hour,

 8nnO         .160         .291             .147                       .148
              —.0627       .462
                                                         .0285                      .0299
                                            —.0382       .0266        —. 0383       .0279
8nn2          —.00499      .0120            —.00532      .0108
              —.0539       .00911
                                                                      —.00332       .0113
8nzO                                        —.0527       .0133        —.0532        .0129
8Z1Z1         .0361        .0102            .0361        .00931
              .0179                                                   .0361         .00973
8nz2                       .00759           .0181        .0102        .0181         .0106
8nwO          .00180       .00568
6nwl          .0000862 .00599
8rtw2         —.00611      .00584
B70           .0541        .580

              .00204       .0856            .00610       .00470       .00605        .0047
8n                                          —.0253
B                                                                     —.0255        .208
                                            —.119       .427          —.384         1.37
                                           —.222
                                                                      —.0376        .0738
                                                        .801          —.0909        .223
8nz                                        .0455        .175          .00995        .0304
                                            .322        3.88          .0285         .117
MSE           1.77                         1.60                       1.60

the paper,       is the log(2000 + Hours                                         dela in
                                         of Une.p1oym.t), rather than
change in the log(2000 + Hours of Unemploynt).                                       the
