                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DEMOGRAPHICS AND AGGREGATE HOUSEHOLD SAVING IN JAPAN, CHINA,
                            AND INDIA

                                        Chadwick C. Curtis
                                         Steven Lugauer
                                         Nelson C. Mark

                                       Working Paper 21555
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21555


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2015




This paper has benefited from presentations at Carnegie Mellon / the University of Pittsburgh, the
2015 Chinese Economists Society conference (Ann Arbor), the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the
2014 China’s Economic Growth conference (Omaha), the University of Notre Dame, and the 2015
Virginia Association of Economists meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Chadwick C. Curtis, Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographics and Aggregate Household Saving in Japan, China, and India
Chadwick C. Curtis, Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark
NBER Working Paper No. 21555
September 2015
JEL No. E2,J1

                                              ABSTRACT

We present a model of household life-cycle saving decisions in order to quantify the impact of demographic
changes on aggregate household saving rates in Japan, China, and India. The observed age distributions
help explain the contrasting saving patterns over time across the three countries. In the model simulations,
the growing number of retirees suppresses Japanese saving rates, while decreasing family size increases
saving for both China and India. Projecting forward, the model predicts lower household saving rates
in Japan and China.


Chadwick C. Curtis                                   Nelson C. Mark
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Richmond                               University of Notre Dame
Richmond, VA 23173                                   434 Flanner
ccurtis2@richmond.edu                                Notre Dame, IN 46556
                                                     and NBER
Steven Lugauer                                       nmark@nd.edu
Economics and Econometrics
University of Notre Dame
443 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Steven.Lugauer.1@nd.edu
Introduction
Momentous demographic transitions have been occurring throughout the world since the mid-20th
century. Declining fertility and mortality have combined to profoundly change the population age
distribution in many countries. These demographic shifts have serious long-term macroeconomic impli-
cations. Variations in the age distribution alter the ratio of savers to non-savers and changes the size of
households, both of which a↵ect the aggregate saving rate, capital formation, the viability of pension
schemes, labor supply, and may ultimately a↵ect the long-run economic growth rate.
   This paper studies one aspect of the age distribution’s e↵ect: the impact on the aggregate household
saving rate. We show that a life-cycle model of saving behavior coupled with the observed demographic
changes accounts for a substantial share of the time-variation in aggregate household saving rates from
1955 through recent years in Japan, China, and India. We focus on these countries for two reasons.
First, they are large. China and India together are home to over a third of humanity. By GDP (PPP
basis), Japan, China, and India are 3 of the 4 largest economies in the world. Second, all three countries
have experienced substantial variation in their demographics and household saving rates.
   Each of these countries has embarked on the demographic transition from a relatively young to an
aging population. However, their transitions have occurred at di↵erent times and on di↵erent scales.
Consequently, Japan, China, and India currently have distinctly contrasting demographics. Japan is
the oldest country in the world with an elderly population (over 63) share of 28 percent. Japan’s total
population peaked in 2009 at 127 million and is projected to continue falling for the foreseeable future.
In China, the majority of the population is in its prime working years (ages 20-63), but its population
will also age considerably in the near future. India, on the other hand, is a relatively young country,
with an elderly population share of just 6 percent.
   The household saving rates in these countries also show substantial variation over time. Japanese
households had high saving rates in the 1970s and 1980s. As their population has aged, however,
Japan’s saving rate has fallen. In China, the saving rate was low under the central planning regime.
Since the onset of economic reforms in 1978, Chinese saving has soared to the point where, at nearly 30
percent, the Chinese household saving rate now ranks among the highest in the world. Saving in India
follows a pattern similar to China in that it generally has increased over time, approaching 25 percent
by 2007. The large variation in saving rates and demographic profiles make Japan, China, and India
an attractive set of countries to study the life-cycle hypothesis of household saving.
   Our model is adapted from Curtis et al. (2015) and features Barro and Becker (1989) style preferences
with children in the utility function. The agents live up to 95 years. From birth to age 19, individuals
make no decisions and are part of their parent’s household. Beginning at age 20, individuals form
their own household, work, and make saving and consumption decisions. From age 20 until retirement,
agents support children. Working age parents decide how much to consume and how much to save for
retirement, and they transfer, as a tax, a portion of their wages to current retirees both through a formal
national pension system and as an informal intergenerational transfer. Retirees live o↵ of accumulated
assets, their pension, and family transfers.
   Agents take wages, interest rates, and the demographic structure (including the number of depen-


                                                      1
dent children) as exogenously given. Dependent children’s and parent’s consumption both enter into
parent’s (household) utility. Having household saving and consumption decisions explicitly depend on
the number of children in the household is a natural way to consider the impact of declining family size
on saving rates.
   In addition to family size, the model features three other channels through which demographics a↵ect
saving. First, a large cohort of households in their prime-earning years increases aggregate saving, while
relatively more retirees decreases aggregate saving (all else constant), due to a simple composition e↵ect.
Second, as life spans increase, model agents save more for their longer expected retirement.1 Third, as
fertility decreases, forward looking prime-age agents save more as they expect less retirement support
from the smaller cohorts that follow.
   Applied separately to each country and considering only di↵erences in demographics, the model can
qualitatively replicate the core aspects of the saving patterns in Japan, China, and India. Quantita-
tively, the simulations do not account for all the observed changes; factors other than demographics
a↵ect saving. However, since the large demographic changes occurred at di↵erent times and under
di↵erent circumstances, we think our results represent a powerful confirmation of the life-cycle theory
of household saving.
   We conduct two exercises to disentangle the demographic channels. First, by removing children’s
consumption from the parent’s utility function, we show that the reduction in family size is an important
factor for explaining the increased saving rates in China and India. Second, we hold age-specific saving
rates fixed in the model, while allowing the age distribution to change as in the data. This computation
gives us a measure of the composition e↵ect, which has the largest impact on Japan. The growing
retired population is the most important factor for explaining the decline in Japan’s household saving
rate within our baseline model.
   The main results of the paper are generated by this baseline model, which isolates the e↵ects of
demographics by imposing uniformity in other dimensions across the countries. However, we also run
model simulations with country specific di↵erences in the government-run pension systems, informal
intra-family intergenerational support, returns to saving, wage growth rates, and age-wage and age-
family size profiles. The impact from the changing demographics on household saving remains large
even when incorporating all of these other factors.
   Finally, we use the model to project the changes in household saving rates generated by future
demographic changes for each country through 2050. Japan will age further and is projected to have
a working-age to elderly ratio below 1.25 by 2050. Accordingly, our model predicts that Japanese
household saving rates will continue to fall as the country ages further. Demographic factors also will
cut China’s saving rate. The ratio of working aged Chinese to elderly is projected to fall from 6 in 2014
to around 2 in 2050. As the currently large working age population moves into retirement, our model
predicts a 12 percentage point decline between now and 2050. India, on the other hand, is projected to
maintain a high household saving rate. India is the youngest of the three countries; falling family sizes
and a growing share of the working aged will continue to boost aggregate household saving rates.
  1 See   Bloom et al. (2007) for a more complete analysis of lifespan, retirement age, and saving.



                                                             2
     Our paper employs a common framework to understand how saving rates have responded to demo-
graphic transitions in the three largest Asian economies. The ability of the model to capture the broad
features of the data for populations with varied experiences gives us confidence in the transferability of
the basic mechanisms to other countries. To our knowledge, the application of quantitative life-cycle
saving models of this sort to India is new. Contributions to the modern literature on saving in India
include Athukorala and Sen (2004) and Mehta (2013), but they focus on empirically documenting the
increase in household saving. Related work on Japan includes Chen et al. (2007) and Braun et al.
(2009). These papers cover an earlier period and stop before the population began to decline. Notable
recent papers on saving in China include Banerjee et al. (2014), Chamon and Prasad (2010), Chao et al.
(2011), Choukhmane et al. (2013), Horioka and Wan (2007), Modigliani and Cao (2004), Rosenzweig
and Zhang (2014), Song et al. (2015), Song and Yang (2010), and Wei and Zhang (2011).
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the aggregate data on
household saving and demographics and emphasizes the contrasting patterns over time across the three
countries. Section 2 presents the model used to link demographics to household saving decisions.
Section 3 details the parameterization of the model and presents simulation results demonstrating the
importance of demographics for explaining saving rates. Section 4 concludes.


1      Household Saving and Demographic Patterns
Figure 1 shows aggregate household savings as a percent of household income in Japan, China, and India
over time.2 Saving in each country has displayed substantial variation. Japan’s saving rate increased
from an already high 12 percent in 1955 to a peak of over 23 percent in the mid 1970s. Then, the
saving rate began to fall, while, especially since 2000, the population quickly aged. By 2012 Japanese
households saved less than 5 percent of their income.
     In stark contrast, Chinese households currently save nearly 30 percent of their income, but their
saving rates were quite low before economic reforms began in 1978. China’s saving rate began to climb
around 1980, increasing from 12 percent to 16 percent by 1986, dropping back to 11 percent by 1989,
and then increasing more or less steadily thereafter. India’s saving rate also has risen steadily over
time. Indian households saved less than 10 percent of their income before 1970, but they have saved
nearly 25 percent in recent years.3
     While each country experienced large swings in their household saving rate, the patterns di↵er.
Japan had high saving rates in the 1970s, while Chinese and Indians saved little. Now, Japan has low
saving rates, while China and India enjoy high levels of saving. Our hypothesis is that these divergent
saving patterns are explained, at least in part, by di↵erential demographic patterns across the countries.
     Figure 2 graphs the share of the population in three broad age groups for each country from 1950
through to 2050. The historical and projected data comes from the United Nations (UN) Population
Prospects 2012 Revision. The bottom area corresponds to the share of the population below the age of
    2 The   Appendix lists the sources for the aggregate household saving rates and the demographic information used
throughout the paper.
   3 Our data ends in 2007; however, the available evidence suggests that household saving in India has remained high.




                                                           3
20 (a rough measure of dependent children), the middle group is the share older than 64 (the retired),
with the remainder being the working age population.
    Looking across the three panels, Japan (Panel A) has the oldest population with the lowest share
under 20 and by far the most in retirement. Japan faces a major demographic challenge. While Japan’s
youth share has stabilized near 20 percent, the share of its population in retirement age exceeds 25
percent and is still growing. Japan is now considered the oldest country in the world.
    China (Panel B) has experienced the most dramatic decline in the youngest share. Fifty percent
of the Chinese population was under 20 in the 1970s, compared to less than 25 percent today. China
remains much younger than Japan, but will experience dramatic aging. The proportion of the working
aged population began to fall in 2012 and will continue to decline through the foreseeable future. At
the same time, the relative size of the retired population will expand.
    India’s demographics (Panel C) follow a pattern similar to Japan and China, but the onset of
demographic change was later and more gradual. The share of the population under 20 has been
declining since 1970. However, compared to Japan and China, India has, and is expected to maintain,
a higher share under 20 and a lower share over 63. The working aged share of the population in India
is still increasing and will continue to do so through 2050.
    Declining birth rates have been a key determinant behind these demographic shifts. Figure 3 shows
total fertility rates in each country from 1950-2012. Following a temporary increase after WWII,
Japanese fertility rates declined to 2 in 1960, increased to 2.16 in 1971, then gradually declined to the
current rate of 1.4.4 After peaking at 127 million in 2009, the total population began to decline and
is projected to fall to 87 million by 2060. As documented in Ogawa et al. (2010), Japan was the first
country in the post-war period to experience fertility decline.
    Reasons suggested for Japan’s low fertility are varied.5 Abortion has been legal in Japan since
1949 and was a widely used method of birth control in the 1950s and 1960s.6 A cultural bias against
married women in the labor force, the general unavailability of child care, and low wage growth may
have contributed to fewer marriages and smaller family sizes. Also, compromised quality of family life
due to the grueling ‘salary-man’ culture tied to corporate employment might inhibit family size.
    China also currently has a low fertility rate. In the beginning of our sample, however, Chinese
fertility rates were high. During the 1950s and 60s, Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong’s view
was that a large population, and therefore a large labor force, translated into economic might. As a
result, no e↵orts to reduce fertility were undertaken until 1972. Then, a voluntary campaign, known as
‘Later, Longer and Fewer,’ was launched to encourage couples to delay marriage, increase the spacing
   4 The   sharp dip in fertility during 1966 occurred because it was the year of the Fire Horse (Hineouma) according to the
Japanese Zodiac calendar. Many families avoided having children due to the superstition that children, especially girls,
born during the Fire Horse are bad luck.
   5 Japanese people have had a long history of voluntary limitations on family size and self-imposed population control.

The imposition of a caste system in the 1700s eliminated social mobility and rendered economic advance to inherited
capital, which by convention was available only to the first son. This led to delays in the age of marriage, and abortion
and infanticide in the case of multiple pregnancies (Flath, 2000).
  6 Kato, Mariko. “Abortion Still Key Birth Control.” The Japan Times 20 Oct. 2009. Accessed Japan Times Web. 6

Feb. 2015. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2009/10/20/reference/abortion-still-key-birth-control/#.VPPOA nF98E



                                                              4
between children, and limit the number of children to two. Although Later, Longer and Fewer was
successful, the Communist Party intensified e↵orts to reduce fertility by formally adopting the One-
Child policy in 1980. The first five years of the policy were characterized by compulsory insertion of
intra-uterine devices for women with one child and sterilization for couples with two children (Naughton,
2007). Hefty financial penalties are still sometimes imposed on those with more than one child and
termination of employment is also a possibility. The fertility rate has plummeted in response to the
family-planning policies.
     In 2013, India, the world’s second most populous country, had 1.25 billion people. While China’s
harsh one-child policy is well known, perhaps less known is that India also has a history of fertility
reduction policies. In 1952, India implemented family planning policies using voluntary sterilization
as the primary method. In the 1970s, under the Indira Gandhi government, the National Population
Policy was launched, which allowed individual states to enforce compulsory sterilization. While the
forced sterilization policy was never officially discharged (only one state passed such a law but did not
enforce it), the government’s role in reducing fertility has been viewed as coercive.7 As a result, the
Indian fertility rate (Figure 3) has dramatically declined from above 5 to the current rate of 2.4, and it
is projected to fall below the replacement rate by 2030.
     To summarize, the saving rates and demographic profiles display substantial variation across the
three countries and over time. Each country experienced large swings in their household saving rate,
but the patterns di↵er. Japan had high saving rates in the 1970s, while Chinese and Indians saved
little. Presently, Japanese saving rates are very low, and very high in China and India. The age
distributions depicted in Figure 2 suggest several ways through which demographics may a↵ect saving.
The preponderance of older people in Japan almost certainly reduces its aggregate saving rate because
retirees live o↵ of their accumulated assets rather than accumulating new savings. While in China and
India, the current, relatively large, working age populations are saving in anticipation of their retirement
years. These large cohorts in China and India also have (relatively) few dependent children to support,
as fertility rates have declined. Thus, households in China and India have more resources available to
save than they would with larger families. Plus, looking forward, Chinese and Indian households will
have few working age children to provide support upon retiring, so these households are accumulating
assets now. Next, we build these linkages between demographics and saving into a life-cycle model of
saving decisions.


2       A Life-cycle Model Relating Demographics to Saving
The model is adapted from Curtis et al. (2015) which builds on the framework presented in Auerbach
and Kotliko↵ (1987). The economy is populated by 95 generations. People live up to 95 periods or
years, but only agents aged 20 to 95 make decisions. All agents of the same age are identical, and they
take the current and future age distribution as given.
     We classify the population into three groups: children (age 0 to 19), working age parents (age 20 to
    7 See   Diamond-Smith and Potts (2010).



                                                     5
63), and retirees (age 64+). For the first 19 years, people live as children dependent on their parents,
consuming what their parents choose for them. Parental and dependent children’s consumption both
enter separately into household utility as in Barro and Becker (1989). People support children, supply
labor inelastically, and receive labor income from age 20 until retirement. Children who leave the
household after age 19 no longer receive consumption from their parents, and upon retiring, parents no
longer support children. Retired people live o↵ of their accumulated assets, any family transfers from
their working age children, and their pension (which we model as a pay-as-you-go scheme). Agents die
with an age and cohort specific probability prior to age 95 and with certainty at age 95. In the last
year of life, utility depends only on consumption.8


2.1       Budget Constraints
Let ct,j be the year t consumption of an individual with decision-making age j 2 [0, 75], where j = 0
corresponds to real-life age 20. We suppress the notation indicating country. For a parent with age
j 2 [0, 43], nt,j denotes the number of dependent children in the household, each of whom consumes
cct,j .9 During the parenting years, agents choose their own consumption ct,j , their dependent children’s
consumption cct,j , and (non-negative) assets at+1,j+1 to take into the next period. Working age people
take the gross return on savings 1 + rt and labor income (age-dependent wage) wt,j as given and pay
fraction ⌧t of their wages into the formal pension system, while also transferring fraction ⌧ c of their
wages to retirees through an informal family support network.10 The flow (period-by-period) budget
constraints for households with children are

                 ct,j = (1      ⌧t   ⌧ c ) wt,j + (1 + rt ) at,j     at+1,j+1   nt,j cct,j ,    j 2 [0, 43].          (1)

    The model agents continue working and supporting children until age 64 (j = 44). Retirees consume
out of accumulated assets and (family and pension) transfers pt,j received from the current working
generations. Retirees consume all remaining assets and die with certainty at age 95 (j = 75). The
budget constraints for retirees are

                              ct,j = pt,j + (1 + rt ) at,j         at+1,j+1,    j 2 [44, 75],                         (2)

with at+1,76 = 0.
    Old-age support pt,j = gt,j + ft,j has two components to allow the system of government pension
transfers g to di↵er from informal family transfers f . The tax rate ⌧t adjusts every period to fund
   8 We   experimented with variations of the model including either an explicit bequest motive or accidental bequests due
to early death in the case of China. The simulation results were similar to the model without bequests. For Japan, earlier
research has found that bequests are not an important determinant of saving (Hayashi, 1995). To maintain simplicity in
the model, we proceed without bequests.
   9 Consumption by children should be interpreted broadly to include things like spending on education and housing.

Saving for future education or housing expenditures could be another mechanism relating family size to household saving,
but our model does not explicitly include these considerations. See Wang and Wen (2011) for more on the topic.
  10 The informal family transfer should be interpreted broadly to include non-financial transfers. See Pal (2007) and

Rosenzweig and Zhang (2014) for more on the decision to co-reside, for example.



                                                              6
constant replacement rate government pension payments to retirees, where the replacement rate equals
                                                                                                               gt,j
the percent of final working year (j = 43) wages received as a pension (i.e.                                wt+43 j,43 ,   j 2 [44, 75]). In
                   c
contrast, the rate ⌧ for the informal family transfer remains fixed. Thus, the size of the family transfer
ft,j received depends on the number of working adults paying support to each specific cohort of retirees.
Cohorts of retirees with more children receive a higher family transfer, all else constant, because they
have more children providing support.
   Demographics work through the budget constraints to a↵ect saving decisions in a few ways. First,
in Equation (1) a decline in the number of dependents (nt,j ) frees up resources for asset purchases
(at+1,j+1 ). China and India have had large decreases in family size in recent years, reducing nt,j .
Second, a large population with ages j 2 [0, 43] increases the saving rate through increased numbers of
people who are saving from labor income. Or conversely, as in Japan, large retired cohorts with ages
j 2 [44, 75] reduce aggregate savings as these households consume their accumulated assets. Finally,
looking at Equation (2), the declining support ratios in China and India mean there will be relatively
small future family transfers f , making total old-age support p small for the current working age cohort
upon retiring. Chinese and Indian households can overcome this shortfall by aggressively accumulating
assets during their working years, i.e. now.


2.2      Preferences
Preferences for households with dependent children take the functional form of Barro and Becker (1989),
in which consumption by parents and children enter separately into household utility. The per-period
utility function for a household head of decision-making age j 2 [0, 43] in year t is
                                                                1
                                                    ⌘   cct,j                 c1t,j
                             ut,j = µ (nt,j )                             +         ,       j 2 [0, 43].
                                                         1                    1
The parameter      is the inverse of the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution, and µ 2 [0, 1] and
⌘ 2 [0, 1] characterize the weight parents put on utility from children’s consumption. The number of
children nt,j is expressed on a per-person basis as households are single-parent families. Beginning at
age 64, individuals stop supporting children and have the flow utility function

                                                         c1t,j
                                            ut,j =             ,          j 2 [44, 75].
                                                         1
   Let    2 [0, 1] be the subjective discount factor, and                     t,j   2 [0, 1] be the cohort (and country) specific
probability of living to age j 2 [44, 75]. All agents in the model live to at least age 63. A 20 year old
in year t chooses a sequence of consumption, consumption for children, and asset holdings in order to
maximize lifetime utility,
                                 43                                               1     !                  !!
                                 X
                                        j                   ⌘           cct+j,j                  c1t+j,j
                         Ut =               µ (nt+j,j )                                     +                                           (3)
                                 j=0
                                                                           1                     1
                                 75
                                                                  !
                                 X
                                                j
                                                        c1t+j,j
                             +          t+j,j                         ,
                                 j=44
                                                        1


                                                                    7
subject to the budget constraints in Equations (1) and (2). Agents make decisions taking the current
and future demographic structure and family size (nt,j ) as exogenous and known.
    Family size a↵ects saving through preferences because the e↵ective weight on utility during parental
years depends on the number of dependent children in the household, n. If nt,j = 0 or µ = 0, then the
household problem collapses to the case without children in the utility function. When the e↵ective
weight on parental utility increases with family size, as it does in all our simulations, the household with
more children acts as if it is less patient. Thus, family size a↵ects saving by altering the household’s
e↵ective weight on utility for the parental years. This channel is key for the model’s ability to explain
the evolution of saving rates in China and India. Next, we discuss the selection of parameter values
and use the model to quantify the size of the demographic e↵ect in each country.


3        Quantifying the E↵ect of Demographics on Saving
This section reports the simulated saving rates generated by embedding the demographic data presented
in Section 1 into the model developed in Section 2. We begin by discussing the selection of parameter
values. Then, we study the model’s properties using only the di↵erences in country-specific, time-
varying, age distributions, while keeping the other parameters fixed. This baseline version of the model
focuses on the demographic-based mechanism at the heart of our story; demographics explain a sizable
portion of the variation in the aggregate household saving rates in Japan, China, and India. We present
additional experiments to further illustrate how demographics a↵ect saving in each country. The key
factors generating the saving rate dynamics are the falling number of children in China and India and
the growing share of retirees in Japan. We then consider how altering the country-specific pension
levels, informal intergenerational transfers, interest rates, wages, and cross-sectional fertility and wage
profiles a↵ect saving rates. Lastly, we examine the model’s implications for future household saving
rates.


3.1      Parameter Values
Table 1 reports the parameter values used in the baseline model simulations. The inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution (1/ ) is set to 0.67. We set the time discount factor      to 0.997, as in Song
et al. (2011) and Curtis et al. (2015). This value may seem high, but individuals e↵ectively further
discount the future due to the incorporation of survival probabilities . We calculate these age and
cohort specific survival probabilities along with the age distribution from the UN population estimates
for each country. All parents support the same number of children within a given year (and country),
nt,j = nt for all j 2 [0, 43], as calculated from the UN data. We relax this simplification below.
    In specifying parent’s attitudes toward children, we choose the same values, µ = 0.65 and ⌘ = 0.76,
as estimated in Manuelli and Seshadri (2009) for a model featuring the Barro-Becker children in utility
function and fertility choice. Curtis et al. (2015) select slightly di↵erent values based on a calibration
to China’s pre-reform saving rate. Since the focus is on demographics rather than preferences, we will
proceed with the Manuelli and Seshadri (2009) values.


                                                     8
   The baseline simulations use the identical configurations for intergenerational transfers for each
country so that we can isolate pure age distribution e↵ects. We set the value for the share of labor
income given to retired parents through the informal family transfer ⌧ c to 0.04.11 We set the government
pension payments gt,j so that each retiree receives a 25 percent replacement rate in every year.12 Funding
the model’s pay-as-you-go constant replacement rate pension system requires the tax rate ⌧t on labor
income to vary. Intergenerational transfers a↵ect saving rates, so later we implement di↵erent support
levels across countries.
   We separately simulate the saving decisions for households in Japan, China, and India beginning
from 1955, with no aggregate wage growth and no cross-sectional wage dispersion (wt,j = w, for all t)
and a constant interest rate of 4 percent. Again, our goal is to isolate the demographic e↵ects. Initial
assets equal zero for each 20 year old (decision-age j = 0).13 To solve the utility maximization problem,
a 20 year old takes the next 75 years of demographic observations into account. Agents’ projections for
family size come from the UN data, which in the model is perfect foresight. The UN age distribution
information consists of annual observations by single year age groups.


3.2     Simulated Saving Rates
Figure 4 compares the data to the baseline model economy’s aggregate household saving rates when
only the demographic composition and family size varies. The simulated saving rates for Japan (panel
A) increase from 1955 until the early 1970s. Then, as the population ages, saving rates decrease. The
decrease generated by the model leads the data slightly, and the simulated saving rate does not go as
low as in the data. The model’s saving rate falls below 10 percent in 2010, while the actual saving
rate lies below 5 percent. Overall, however, the model generates the hump-shaped pattern seen in the
Japanese time series.
   For China (panel B), the baseline model generates low saving rates prior to 1980 and an upward
trend thereafter. Between 1970 and 2010, the simulated saving rate increases by over 15 percentage
points (compared to 24 percentage points in the data). By 2010, the implied saving rate is over 17
percent, about two-thirds the size of the actual rate. The timing for the increase in the saving rate
corresponds well with the data; however, the model misses the decline in household saving in the early
1960s and the big increase and decrease during the 1980s. The age distribution evolves too slowly to
explain these shorter run fluctuations.
   For India (panel C), the model generates a sizable portion of the observed increase in the household
saving rate. The simulated saving rate increases by almost 10 percentage points from 1970 to 2007
(compared to 15 percentage points in the data). The level lies about 5 percentage points below the
actual rate over much of the sample. As we discuss in Section 3.2.2, the 25 percent pension replacement
rate is much larger than the reality in India. The generosity of the pension system a↵ects the level of
 11 This   choice comes from an estimate by Choukhmane et al. (2013) based on a survey covering intergenerational
transfers in China.
  12 This choice comes from Curtis et al. (2015) for China.
  13 To generate initial asset holdings for agents older than 20 in 1955, we begin the simulations in 1870 and base the

pre-1950 demographic structure on Maddison Historical Data. The Appendix provides the details.



                                                          9
saving, but, as we show below, smaller pensions do not greatly alter the upward trend in the saving
rate generated by the model.
   Figure 5 plots only the countries’ simulated saving rates for easy comparison. Note how the house-
hold saving rates generated for Japan contrast sharply with China and India. During the early 1970s,
the model reproduces the high saving rates in Japan and low saving in China and India. By the end of
the sample, though, saving in Japan has become comparatively low. In these simulations, the countries
only di↵er in their age distributions and nothing else. Without the changes in demographics over time,
the simulated household saving rates would be straight lines. Comparing the model simulations to the
data, the model generates about 14 of the observed 24 percentage point increase in the Chinese saving
rate since 1978, 10 of the 15 percentage point increase in India since 1970, and over 7 of the observed
20 percentage point decline in Japanese saving since its peak in 1976.
   While the model successfully replicates the general dynamics of the saving patterns, demographic
changes do not account for everything. Institutional and societal factors beyond demographics have
a↵ected saving rates. We have intentionally abstracted from other potential explanations, as they take
us too far afield from demographics.14 Next, we identify how the separate demographic channels impact
each country.

3.2.1      Decomposing the Demographic Channels

We run two exercises in order to separate the demographic channels. In the relatively younger popula-
tions of China and India, the rapid fall in the number of children has the most influence on the rising
saving rates. As fertility rates decline, and families get smaller, households have additional resources
to consume and to save. Parents have additional incentives to save because they foresee fewer children
from which they can draw support in their retirement. In Japan, on the other hand, the composi-
tion e↵ect, stemming from the large and growing retiree share, is quantitatively the most influential
demographic factor for generating the saving rate decline; retirees consume their accumulated assets.

The Impact of Dependent Children                   First, we examine the importance of the reduction in family
size by setting parental valuation of children’s utility from consumption to zero. In these simulations,
the model’s other characteristics (utility functions, parameter values, demographic data, transfers, etc.)
remain unchanged from the baseline. Figure 6 contains the resulting simulated saving rates when µ = 0.
For China (panel A), removing dependent children from utility causes the saving rate implied by the
model to overstate saving (sometimes considerably) before 1996. The implied saving rate becomes much
less variable, and the model can no longer generate as substantial a portion of the observed increase in
saving. The simulation for India (panel B) reacts similarly. For both China and India, the reduction in
family size, working through the parents’ explicit desire to give their o↵spring consumption, is the key
factor increasing household saving rates.
   For Japan (panel C), the story is di↵erent. Even without children in the utility function, the model
 14 Choi   et al. (2014) discuss other important determinants of household saving for China, in particular wage growth and
uncertainty in an environment with a precautionary saving motive.



                                                            10
generates steadily declining savings after 1970. Japanese fertility rates (see Figure 3) have been low for
decades. Thus, the decline in family size has been smaller, with little e↵ect on recent saving behavior.15
Instead for Japan, the composition e↵ect, or growing number of retirees, has the largest impact. Relative
to China and India, Japanese family size has experienced substantially less variation. From 1960 to
2013, total fertility rates fell from 5.8 to 1.7 in China, 5.9 to 2.5 in India, and 2 to 1.4 in Japan. Hence,
we conclude that changes in family size are not as an important factor for explaining the recent Japanese
saving rate dynamics.

The Composition E↵ect The composition e↵ect is the change in aggregate saving rates due solely
to variation in the proportion of households at di↵erent points in their life-cycle. The idea is to mimic
the situation in which agents of the same age face the same economic state (e.g. family size) throughout
time and therefore make the same saving decisions. Thus, a forty year-old, for example, would save
the same way in 2010 as a forty year-old in 1970, only the number of forty year-olds changes. All else
equal, an increase in the share of households in their working, prime saving years should increase the
aggregate saving rate, and a growing retired population should reduce the aggregate saving rate.
    We measure the composition e↵ect by decomposing the model’s implied saving rate in 1970 into
contributions by age group. We then generate counterfactual aggregate saving rates by holding age-
specific saving rates constant and varying the age distribution according to the data. We use 1970 as
the base year because large variation in both saving and demographics have occurred since that time
in all three countries. The decomposition of the aggregate saving rate for each country in 1970 is

                                                    75
                                                    X
                                        SR1970 =          N1970,j ('1970,j ) (sr1970,j ) ,                             (4)
                                                    j=0

where the model’s aggregate saving rate in 1970 is SR1970 , '1970,j is age group j’s per person income
share from the model in 1970, and sr1970,j is the age specific saving rate from the model.16
    The ‘composition e↵ect’ holds the age-specific income share and age-specific saving rates constant
but allows the age distribution, embodied in Nt,j , to vary with t as in the data. This is given as

                                                    75
                                                    X
                                            ct =
                                            SR            Nt,j ('1970,j ) (sr1970,j ) ,                                (7)
                                                    j=0

 15 The   Japanese saving rates in the early part of the sample are higher than for the case with children in the utility
function. This change occurs for the same reasons as outlined for China and India.
  16 The saving rate at any time t can be decomposed as

                                                                 75
                                                                 X
                                                      SRt =            srt,j   t,j                                      (5)
                                                                 j=0

where     t,j   is cohort j’s share of total income in year t. This share can be written as the number of people with age j
times the per person share of total income for that age group

                                                           t,j   = Nj,t 't,j .                                          (6)




                                                                   11
for any year t. The composition e↵ect measure includes only changes in household saving induced by
changes in life-cycle savers and not changes in age-specific saving rates.
   Table 2 reports the changes in aggregate household saving rates since 1970 for the data, the baseline
model, and from the composition e↵ect. In Japan, the data and baseline model saving rates continuously
fall through each decade. Changes in saving rates due to the composition e↵ect are relatively small
through 1990 but account for 5.7 of the 7.9 percentage point decrease in the model’s saving rate by
2010. Overall, the composition e↵ect accounts for a substantial share of the total decline in the Japanese
saving rate within the model simulations. As the country has aged, the growing number of retirees has
placed downward pressure on aggregate saving.
   In China and India, saving rates in the data and model increase each decade. The composition e↵ect
is positive in China until the late 1990s before turning negative due to the aging population. In India,
the composition e↵ect is positive through each decade and by 2010 accounts for one-third of the increase
in the saving rate generated by the model. For both countries, the large di↵erence between changes in
the baseline model’s saving rate and changes from the composition e↵ect means that increases in the
age-specific saving rates, sr, (caused by falling family size) accounts for the bulk of the variation in
aggregate saving rates over time. Thus, while not trivial, the composition e↵ect influences the saving
rates in China and India less than in Japan.
   In the cross section (results not shown), the saving profiles by age have a standard hump shape. In
China and India, declining family size alters the saving rate by age but does not change the general
shape of the cross-sectional saving rate profile; the relatively small composition e↵ect indicates that
the increase in aggregate saving comes from the increasing saving rates for each age group. In Japan,
however, the large composition e↵ect comes from the growing share of households at the far end of the
hump-shaped life-cycle saving profile.

3.2.2    Introducing Country-Specific Characteristics

The baseline model imposes wide-ranging homogeneity across the countries. In this section, we relax
these restrictions by tailoring the model to each country. We let the formal pension support levels
and the intergenerational transfers reflect country-specific characteristics. Table 3 lists the choices. We
also allow additional heterogeneity by introducing country-specific age-fertility and age-wage profiles.
The United Nations demographic data does not allow us to link generations to uncover the number of
children per parent by parent’s age, nt,j . Thus, to construct the cohort-specific number of children nt,j ,
we turn to alternative data sources to estimate the cross-sectional fertility profiles (number of children
per parent). We also consult micro-data to construct the wage profiles in the cross section. Finally, we
input country specific values for average aggregate wage growth and the return to saving r. The other
parameters and features of the model remain unchanged from the baseline simulations. The Appendix
details the construction of the data used in this section. We discuss each country in turn.

Japan    As Japan is an industrialized and developed economy, its social-security system is by far the
most advanced. Mandatory retirement occurs at the relatively low age of 60, even though Japan has


                                                    12
the world’s highest longevity (Ogawa et al., 2010). Universal pension and medical care plans were
established in 1961. From 1980 to 2004, the system was reformed every 5 years. Currently, Japan has a
two-tiered benefit system. All qualified Japanese people receive the first-tier flat-rate basic benefit. This
tier includes the self-employed, students, and all registered residents. The second-tier (earnings-related
benefit), available to employees in the private sector and the government, pays a generous 60 percent
replacement rate. A 2004 reform will gradually reduce the replacement rate.
   We incorporate the frequent reforms of the Japanese social security system into the model.17 We
implement the pension replacement rates from Chen et al. (2007) based on data reported in Oshio and
Yashiro (1999) through 1999. From 1955 through 1973 retirees receive a 17 percent replacement rate.
From 1974 through 1979 the replacement rate equals 35 percent before increasing to 40 percent in 1980.
The replacement rate increases to 50 percent in 2000 where it remains. The OECD (2005) calculates
that the average male earner had a gross replacement rate of 50.3 in 2005 and Ogawa et al. (2010)
reports that the 2004 pension reform targets a leveling o↵ of the public pension replacement rate to
50.2 by 2023 and through 2050.
   Informal intergenerational transfers from working children to retired parents have been falling in
Japan. Ogawa et al. (2010) show that in 1984 net family transfers from the young to the old were
positive for those aged 65 and older. By 2004, net transfers to the elderly were negative until age 77.
Also, the percentage of people over 65 living with their children fell from 70 percent in 1980 to 50
percent in 2005. Accordingly, we decrease ⌧ c over time. We set ⌧ c to 5 percent from 1955 through 1973,
3 percent from 1974 through 1998, and 1 percent thereafter.
   We use data from the Historical Statistics of Japan compiled by the Statistics Bureau of the Ministry
of Internal A↵airs and Communications in Japan to calculate the number of dependent children per
parent by age in the cross section. Household size by age displays a hump shape with the average 40 year
old having more children living at home than the average 20 or 60 year old. We estimate this relative
number of children per parent from the one cross section. Thus, we keep the relative support ratio
across groups constant, even as the absolute number of children per parent varies with demographic
change. We use the same procedure for China and India, as described below and in the Appendix.
   We construct cross-sectional income profiles based on the method of Braun et al. (2009) using data
from the 2012 Basic Survey in Wage Structure by the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare. These
numbers give us an estimate for the relative wages by age, or efficiency wages, in the cross section. For
example, we find that household heads in their prime working years receive more labor income than
younger workers on average. We keep the cross-sectional wage profile fixed throughout time even as the
aggregate wage level grows.
   Finally, aggregate wage growth and interest rates are taken from Hayashi and Prescott (2002), which
report the series from 1960-2000. We use the average annual interest rate before 1991, the year the real
estate bubble burst and the start of Japan’s “Lost Decade”, for years prior to 1991.18 From 1991 on,
we use the average interest rate from 1991-2000. We calculate the average wage growth in the same
 17 Braun   and Joines (2014) consider future reforms to the Japanese social security system.
 18 We   assume no wage growth prior to 1947. The results are not sensitive to this assumption.




                                                           13
sub-sample periods.
    Table 4 reports the saving rates generated by the full model (i.e. including the Japan specific details)
and baseline model alongside the actual data every 10 years from 1960 to 2010. The broad trends in
the simulated saving rates remain unchanged. After 1973, households in the full model receive a higher
replacement rate than in the baseline model, reducing their incentive to save. Conversely, the decline in
the informal transfer encourages saving for retirement, especially after 1999. However, the rapid aging
of the population overcomes this e↵ect, and the simulated saving rate declines after 1980. By 2012, the
saving rate in the full model falls below 5 percent, as it does in the data.

China         China’s old-age security system is in flux. During the central planning era, communes provided
old-age support for rural people and state owned enterprises (SOEs) provided cradle-to-grave protections
to urban workers. The benefits to urban people working at SOEs were extensive. Referred to as the
‘Iron Rice Bowl,’ it included lifetime employment, health care, children’s education and housing in
addition to the old-age pension. While provided by the work unit, the plan was backed by the state,
which subsidized the SOEs and e↵ectively guaranteed the pensions.
    The economic reforms that dismantled the communes left rural people to rely largely on saving and
intergenerational family transfers for old-age support. Although there exists a voluntary public pension
for rural people, the participation rate in 2007 was only 11 percent (Jackson et al., 2009). In urban
areas, individual SOEs assumed financial responsibility for pension obligations. Unprofitable enterprises
simply canceled pension payments. In the early 1990s, a scheme to pool SOE pension contributions
formed the basis of the current basic pension system. This two-tiered system consists of a pay-as-
you-go (PAYGO) benefit and what is supposed to be a funded personal retirement account. The basic
pension system has struggled with ongoing structural issues, such as the un-funding of personal accounts
through diversion of contributions to the PAYGO system and evasion. The structural issues contribute
to incomplete participation and coverage. In 2007, 20 percent of urban workers were covered in the basic
system and an additional 5 percent of urban people were covered by a separate civil service system.
For the country as a whole, Sin (2005) estimates that less than 25 percent of the working population
participated in the formal pension system; Jackson et al. (2009) put the figure at 30 percent.
    For China, we select country specific details by following Curtis et al. (2015). Pension support
(25 percent replacement rate) and informal support (4 percent transfer taken from wages of current
workers) remain the same as in the baseline simulations.19 To construct the cohort-specific number
of children nt,j for China, we turn to the 2007 Rural-urban Migration in China (RUMiC) micro-level
survey. Similarly, we use the RUMiC data to calculate the average household labor income, or efficiency
wage, by age of the household head.
    The aggregate wage growth and interest rate data come from Curtis et al. (2015). We use the
average interest rate before and after 1979 to capture the economy-wide changes from economic reforms.
Similarly, we calculate the average wage growth in each sub-period to construct the average wage series.
  19 Curtis   et al. (2015) provide a justification for these choices and also consider alternative values. Feng et al. (2011)
show that pension levels a↵ect saving in China. He et al. (2014) and Song et al. (2015) study past and future pension
reforms acting to reduce support levels. There also has been evidence of declining informal support for the elderly.


                                                              14
   Table 4 reports the results. The full model uses the wage and interest rate data, and the baseline
model allows only the demographics to vary (keeping aggregate wages and interest rates fixed). The
full model can account for most of the observed increase in the aggregate household saving rate since
the 1970s, more than the baseline. The wage and interest rate series alter the dynamics slightly, but
the demographic channel still drives the upward trend.

India India’s pension system is complex, fragmented, and covers only a small fraction of the pop-
ulation. In 2007 this figure was 10.2 percent (Stelten, 2011). There exists a variety of civil service
plans (Civil Service Pension (1972), Civil Service Provident Fund (1981), New Pension System (2004)),
and plans for workers in firms with more than 20 employees (Employees’ Provident Fund Organiza-
tion (1952)). However, with approximately 80 percent of employment in the informal sector, the vast
majority of Indian people rely on self-funding and familial transfers for old-age support.
   For India, we reduce the replacement rate to 5 percent. Historically, India has had no formal pension
for most of its population. Civil servants receive a combination of a lump-sum pay out and an annuity
based on salary and years of service. Nation-wide pension programs have been recently enacted (e.g.
allowing all workers to contribute to the National Pension System and raising support for impoverished
elderly through the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme). Using data from the National
Transfer Account Program, Lee and Mason (2012) show public transfers play almost no role in funding
consumption net of labor income for the elderly. To this point, Ladusingh and Narayana (2011) find
that inter- and intra- household transfers are negative for the elderly through their 70s. They state
“This finding is contrary to the widespread belief that in the absence of a viable public social security
system net Indian elders depend on their kin...(p. 470)” We thus keep the transfer ⌧ c constant at 0.04
as in the baseline simulation.
   We calculate cross-sectional profiles for fertility and wages using the 2004 India Socio-Economic
Survey data. The Indian Socio-Economic Survey reports wages in 1983, 1987, 1999, and 2004. We use
the implied average annual wage growth through these periods for 1950 on.
   Finally, for the average interest rate series we first calculate the share of saving in bank deposits
versus other assets. We allow the deposits to earn the real deposit rate, while the remaining assets earn
the marginal product of capital. Curtis et al. (2015) use a similar procedure to calculate the return on
savings for China. The Reserve Bank of India reports the share of household saving in deposits from
1973-2012, and the real deposit interest rate is calculated as the nominal deposit rate less the previous
year’s inflation. The marginal product of capital is estimated from a Cobb-Douglas production function
with capital share ↵ = 0.34 using data from the Penn World Tables 8.0 database. The overall interest
rate is the share weighted average of the real deposit rate and the marginal product of capital.
   Table 4 reports the simulations with the Indian specific details. The interest rate and wage series
from the data create a level shift downward in the saving rate time series. Since 1970, the full model
accounts for a 13 percentage point increase in the aggregate household saving rate compared to 11.3
percentage points in the baseline model. Adding wage and interest rate variation leaves the saving rate
dynamics largely unchanged; demographics still push the saving rate higher in India.



                                                   15
   Overall, incorporating country-specific details does not alter our main findings. The baseline sim-
ulations generate a substantial portion of the observed changes in each country’s aggregate household
saving rates using only demographics. These results are robust to the inclusion of country-specific
pension levels, intergenerational transfers, cross-sectional age profiles for wages and fertility, aggregate
wage growth, and interest rates. While each of these factors also impacts saving behavior, demographic
change remains the primary force behind the evolution of the saving rates within the model.


3.3    Projected Saving Rates
We next consider the model’s implications for future saving rates given the projected age distributions
from the UN. These simulations use the baseline version of the model where the only di↵erence between
countries is their age distributions. Our purpose is to quantify the impact from continued demographic
change and not to take a stance on the direction of pension reforms, future growth rates, etc. Figure 7
plots the change in household saving rates relative to 2000 each year from 2000 to 2050.
   The changes in Japan’s simulated household saving rate level o↵ between 2015 and 2030. The
decline in the saving rate prior to 2015 is largely attributed to the retirees of the post-WWII baby
boom generation (i.e. the composition e↵ect). By 2015, most of this cohort has already entered
retirement; however, after 2030 their children begin to enter retirement, pushing saving rates down
even further. The working age population share and retirement support ratio in Japan will remain
substantially lower than in China and India, and the prevalence of Japanese working aged households
will continue to decline.
   The model indicates that demographic factors will now begin to depress aggregate household saving
in China as well. The demographic channels act to lower the simulated saving rates by 12 percentage
points between 2015 and 2050. The Chinese population is set to age rapidly as the current large working
cohort enters retirement, and this large elderly population decreases saving in the model.
   For India, the demographic e↵ect on saving is roughly neutral over the next 25 years. In contrast to
China and Japan, India will stay young with the share of working aged households slowly growing in
the near term. Despite an increasing number of retirees, the growing share of working aged households
coupled with declining family sizes act to keep Indian saving rates high in the model. Only after about
2040 does the population aging in India become severe enough to start reducing the aggregate household
saving rate within the model.
   The demographic implications for future saving rates are important for several reasons. The model
suggests that the demographic contributions to saving rates may be transitory. The rise and predicted
fall in China’s working-aged share of the population mirrors that of Japan’s historical experience. Thus,
China’s future trends in household saving rates might resemble those in present day Japan. Population
aging has greatly reduced saving in Japan and will do the same in China. To the extent household saving
contributes to national saving, these patterns may be an indication of the future external imbalances
across the world (see Backus et al. (2014) for more on this topic). The on-going changes in household
saving rates also partially determine future investment-based economic growth. As Japan’s national
saving rate declined, its growth slowed. The same outcome could occur in China. Meanwhile, in the


                                                    16
near term, India has a more favorable demographic outlook. Finally, all three countries (and much of
the world) must deal with a growing elderly population, and accumulated household savings will, of
course, be central to this issue.


4    Conclusion
In this paper, we explore how the di↵erent demographic profiles across Japan, China, and India have
a↵ected the evolution of each country’s household saving rate. Our main finding is that the changing age
distributions can account for a large portion of the di↵erences in the aggregate household saving rates
over time. We model household saving decisions within a fairly standard life-cycle model, embedding the
observed and projected demographic profiles from 1955 on. A distinguishing feature of our framework
is the incorporation of Barro and Becker (1989) style preferences with children in the utility function.
Within our framework, the rapid decline in the share of dependent children accounts for the majority of
the increased saving rates in China and India. On the other hand, the decrease in Japan’s saving rate
since the mid 1970s is driven by the large and growing retirement-aged population. The model’s success
in explaining the observed saving patterns across three countries with very di↵erent demographics is a
powerful confirmation of the life-cycle hypothesis of household saving.




                                                  17
References
Athukorala, P.-C. and K. Sen (2004): “The Determinants of Private Saving in India,” World
  Development, 32, 491–503.

Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoff (1987): “Evaluating Fiscal Policy with a Dynamic Simulation
  Model,” The American Economic Review, 49–55.

Backus, D., T. Cooley, and E. Henriksen (2014): “Demography and Low-Frequency Capital
  Flows,” Journal of International Economics, 92.

Banerjee, A., X. Meng, T. Porzio, and N. Qian (2014): “Aggregate Fertility and Household
  Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis using Micro Data,” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 20050.

Barro, R. J. and G. S. Becker (1989): “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth,” Econo-
  metrica, 57, 481–501.

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, R. K. Mansfield, and M. Moore (2007): “Demographic Change,
  Social Security Systems, and Savings,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 92–114.

Braun, R. A., D. Ikeda, and D. H. Joines (2009): “The Saving Rate in Japan: Why it has Fallen
  and Why it will Remain Low,” International Economic Review, 50, 291–321.

Braun, R. A. and D. H. Joines (2014): “The Implications of a Graying Japan for Government
  Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2014-18.

Chamon, M. and E. Prasad (2010): “Why Are Saving Rates of Urban Households in China Rising?”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 93–130.

Chao, C.-C., J.-P. Laffargue, and E. Yu (2011): “The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life-Cycle
  Hypothesis: A Revaluation,” China Economic Review, 22, 108–120.

Chen, K., A. İmrohoroğlu, and S. İmrohoroğlu (2007): “The Japanese Saving Rate Between
  1960 and 2000: Productivity, Policy Changes, and Demographics,” Economic Theory, 32, 87–104.

Choi, H., S. Lugauer, and N. C. Mark (2014): “Precautionary Saving of Chinese and US House-
  holds,” NBER Working Paper, 20527.

Choukhmane, T., N. Coeurdacier, and K. Jin (2013): “The One-Child Policy and Household
  Savings,” SciencesPo Paris working paper.

Curtis, C. C., S. Lugauer, and N. C. Mark (2015): “Demographic Patterns and Household Saving
  in China,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 58–94.

Diamond-Smith, N. and M. Potts (2010): “Are the population policies of India and China respon-
  sible for the fertility decline?” International Journal of Environmental Studies, 67, 291–301.


                                                  18
Feng, J., L. He, and H. Sato (2011): “Public pension and household saving: Evidence from urban
  China,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 39, 470–485.

Flath, D. (2000): The Japanese Economy, Oxford University Press.

Hayashi, F. (1995): “Is the Japanese Extended Family Alturistically Linked? A Test Based on Engel
  Curves,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 661–674.

Hayashi, F. and E. C. Prescott (2002): “The 1990s in Japan: A lost decade,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 5, 206–235.

He, H., F. Huang, Z. Liu, and D. Zhu (2014): “Breaking the “Iron Rice Bowl” and Precautionary
  Savings: Evidence from Chinese State-Owned Enterprises Reform,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve
  Bank of San Francisco.

Horioka, C. Y. and J. Wan (2007): “The Determinants of Household Saving in China: A Dynamic
  Panel Analysis of Provincial Data,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39, 2077–2096.

Jackson, R., K. Nakashima, N. Howe, and J. Zhou (2009): “China’s Long March to Retire-
  ment Reform,” Washington DC: Centre for Strategic and International Studies Hallym International
  Journal of Aging.

Ladusingh, L. and M. Narayana (2011): “The Role of Familial Transfers in Supporting the Lifecycle
  Deficit in India,” in Population Aging and the Generational Economy: A Global Perspective, Ronald
  Lee and Andrew Mason, eds. Edward Elgar Publishing: Massachusetts.

Lee, R. and A. Mason (2012): “Population Aging, Intergenerational Transfers, and Economic
  Growth: Asia in a Global Context,” in Aging in Asia: Findings From New and Emerging Data
  Initiatives, James P. Smith and Malay Mayjmundar, Eds. The National Academies Press: Washing-
  ton, D.C.

Manuelli, R. and A. Seshadri (2009): “Explaining International Fertility Di↵erences,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 124, 771–807.

Mehta, R. (2013): “Trends and Patterns of Household Saving in India (Pre and Post Economic
  Reforms),” The Global eLearning Journal, 2, 1–19.

Modigliani, F. and S. L. Cao (2004): “The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life-Cycle Hypothesis,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 145–170.

Naughton, B. (2007): The Chinese Economy: Transitions and Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

OECD (2005): “OECD Pensions at a Glance 2005: Public Policies across OECD Countries,” Paris.

Ogawa, N., A. Mason, A. Chawla, and R. Matsukura (2010): “Japan’s Unprecedented Aging
  and Changing Intergenerational Transfers,” in The Economic Consequences of Demographic Change
  in East Asia, NBER-EASE Volume 19, University of Chicago Press, 131–160.

                                                 19
Oshio, T. and N. Yashiro (1999): “Social Security and Retirement in Japan,” in Social Security
  and Retirement around the World. Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise, eds., University of Chicago
  Press.

Pal, S. (2007): “E↵ects of Intergenerational Transfers on Elderly Coresidence with Adult Children:
  Evidence from Rural India,” IZA Discussion Paper, 2847, 1–34.

Rosenzweig, M. R. and J. Zhang (2014): “Co-residence, Life-Cycle Savings and Inter-generational
  Support in Urban China,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20057.

Sin, Y. (2005): “Pension Liabilities and Reform Options for Old Age Insurance,” World Bank Working
  Paper No. 2005-01.

Song, Z., K. Storesletten, Y. Wang, and F. Zilibotti (2015): “Sharing High Growth Across
  Generations: Pensions and Demographic Transition in China,” American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics, 7, 1–39.

Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2011): “Growing Like China,” American Economic
  Review, 101, 196–233.

Song, Z. and D. T. Yang (2010): “Life Cycle Earnings and Saving in a Fast-Growing Economy,”
  Chinese University of Hong Kong working paper.

Stelten, S. (2011): “Extending Coverage of the New Pension Scheme in India: Analysis of Market
  Forces and Policy Options,” Hertie School of Governance Working Paper.

Wang, X. and Y. Wen (2011): “Can Rising Housing Prices Explain China’s High Household Saving
  Rate?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 93, 67–87.

Wei, S.-J. and X. Zhang (2011): “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising Sex Ratios
  and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 511–564.




                                                20
5        Data Sources
5.1       Aggregate Saving Rate Data
Japan: The Japanese data comes from Japan’s Statistics Bureau. Disposable income and expenditure
data are used to construct the household saving series. The data comes from three releases: 1.) Data
compiled using the 1968 System of National Accounts (SNA) standards (1955-1998). 2.) Data compiled
using the 2005 release which follows 1993 SNA standards (1980-2003). 3.) Data compiled using the
2013 release following the 1993 SNA standards (1994-2012). For the overlapping years of the series, we
average the saving rates together to form a single household saving rate series.
China: The Chinese data comes from various issues of China Statistical Yearbook compiled by the
National Bureau of Statistics. From 1955-1979, the saving rate is computed using the methodology in
Modigliani and Cao (2004). After 1979 the saving rate is disposable income less consumption as a share
of disposable income.
India: The Indian data comes from the Indian Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
Household saving in India is defined as financial and physical asset saving as a share of disposable
income.



5.2       Demographics Data
We use two data sources in conjunction for the year-by-year, age-by-age, age distribution from 1870-
2139: 1.) United Nations Population Prospects 2012 Revision (http://esa.un.org/wpp/) and 2.) Angus
Maddison Historical Data (http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/oriindex.htm).
    The UN data includes the number of people by single age group for ages 0-100 for every year
beginning in 1990 and projected through 2100. Beyond 2100, we assume the number of births remains
constant at the 2100 UN value and set the survival probabilities (from age a to a + 1) to their 2100
values.
    The UN data also provides historical estimates from 1950-1990, but only for ages 1-79. To complete
the age distribution (i.e. ages 80-95), we do the following.
    1.     For ages 80-85, we set the survival probabilities equal to the survival probability projected (by
the UN) for individuals aged 90-95 but 100 years in the future (e.g. we assume the survival probability
for an 80 year-old in 1989 is the same as a 90 year-old in 2089). This is approximately what is observed
in the UN projections for later years.
    2.     For ages 86 and above, we set the remaining population by age according to the share of the
population in each age group in 1990. For example, if 25% of those over 85 are age 86 in 1990, then we
always have 25% of those over 85 be age 86.
    Prior to 1950, we use the Maddison data to backcast the total population. To do this, we calculate
the implied population growth rates from 1870-1950 from the Maddison data (note: for India, we
assumed flat population growth over the period 1947-1948 due to missing observations). We use those
rates to calculate the total population going back in time. The resulting time series of total population is


                                                     21
very close to the Maddison estimates. It is not exact because the UN estimates and Maddison estimates
do not exactly agree for 1950.
   Finally, we break the total population from 1870-1950 down into an age-distribution. We assume
that each age group’s share of the population remained constant at its 1950 share (for ages 1-79). For
ages 80+, we used the same method described above for 1950-1990.
   The results for Japan are in line with (but do not exactly match) the estimates given by the 5-year
Japanese census. The UN 1955 and Japanese census age distributions (and total population estimates)
do not exactly coincide; therefore our backcasts are slightly o↵ from the Japanese census (but still fairly
close, e.g. the share of the population aged 1 in 1884 in our projections is similar to the Japanese census
data).



5.3       Dependent Children in the Cross Section
5.3.1     Number of dependent children per household

In the full model, the number of children in the household varies with the age of the household, producing
a hump shaped age-to-family size profile (i.e. the average 20 year old and 59 year old have fewer children
to support than the average 40 year old in a given year). Below details the construction of these profiles
by country.
China: We use the 2007 Urban Household Survey of China, which is part of the Rural-Urban Migration
in China and Indonesia survey (RUMiC).20 This gives the number of children per parent (by age of
parent) in the cross section for one year. We use a centered three year average of the number of children
per parent to smooth out the profile. We then calculate the implied number of children per parent (by
age) for the rest of the time series by assuming the relative number of children across cohorts stays the
same (although the total number of children changes), as follows
                                                            n2007,j
                                             nt,j =                        Ntc ,                                   (8)
                                                      P
                                                      43
                                                            n2007,j Nt,j
                                                      j=0

where n2007,j is the average number of dependent children per parent that cohort j had in 2007 (from
the RUMiC data), Nt,j is the total number of parents with age j in year t (from the United Nations
data), and Ntc is the aggregate number of children in year t. This calculation ensures that the number
of children used in the simulations agrees with the United Nations data in every year.
Japan: We use data from the Historical Statistics of Japan compiled by the Statistics Bureau (accessed
at http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/chouki/index.htm). We use annual data on the average number
 20 The   Longitudinal Survey on Rural Urban Migration in China (RUMiC) consists of three parts: the Urban Household
Survey, the Rural Household Survey and the Migrant Household Survey. It was initiated by a group of researchers at
the Australian National University, the University of Queensland and the Beijing Normal University and was supported
by the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), which provides the Scientific Use Files. The financial support for RUMiC
was obtained from the Australian Research Council, the Australian Agency for International Development, the Ford
Foundation, IZA and the Chinese Foundation of Social Sciences.



                                                             22
of live births for mothers in 5 year age groups from 1947-2004. We assume that the number of births is
uniform across mothers within a 5 year age group to get the number of births in single year age groups.
Let the number of births at year t for mother’s age group j be bj,t . As in the model, we assume that
there are no births before age 20 and children remain at home until age 20. We find the number of
children per woman (by age) in the cross section for one year, 1990. We calculate the total number of
children per age group j in 1990, Wj , as the sum of total children born in the past 20 years for that
age group

                                                 19
                                                 X
                                          Wj =         bj   i,1990 i .
                                                 i=0

   Since our model is described as single parent households, we assume that the father and mother’s
                                                                           bj , by dividing the number
age is the same and estimate the number of children per household in 1990, n
of children by mother’s age by the total number of people in that age group. We use the predicted
number of children by age of the household head, nj , for the rest of the series by assuming the relative
number of children across cohorts stays the same (although the total number of children changes), using
(8) for the Japanese data. We experimented with using di↵erent years for the cross section, but this
choice had little e↵ect on the quantitative results.
India: We use the 2004 Socio-Economic Survey (obtained through IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2012)),
which samples the non-foreign, non-institutionalized, civilian population. Sample weights are provided
by the National Sample Survey Organization to form a representative sample. This gives the number
of children per parent (by age of parent) in the cross section for one year. We use a centered three year
average of the number of children per parent to smooth out the profile. We then calculate the implied
number of children per parent (by age) for the rest of the time series by assuming the relative number
of children across cohorts stays the same (although the total number of children changes), using (8) for
the Indian data.

5.3.2   Number of Children Supporting the Retired

Finally, for all three countries, we estimate the number of working age children supporting each retiree
(separately for each cohort) using the model in conjunction with the United Nations data. Specifically,
we set the number of working children for a given cohort of retired parents equal to the maximum number
of children that the specific cohort ever supported in their household at one time (in the model). The
intergenerational family transfers from working children to retired parents are distributed accordingly.
For example, an 85 year-old in 2009 receives transfers from more workers than a 65 year-old in 2009
because the 85 year-old cohort had more children on average than the 65 year-olds.


5.4     Age Specific Wages
In the full model, the wage varies by the age of the worker, producing a hump shaped profile of wages
by age (i.e. the average 20 year old earns less than a 50 year old). Below details the construction of
this profile by country.


                                                       23
Japan: We use the Year Book of Labour Statistics 2012 compiled by the Ministry of Health, Labour,
and Welfare (accessed at: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/database/db-yl/2012/03.html) to calculate
wages by age. This data allows us to estimate average hourly earnings. We follow the methodology of
Braun et al. (2009) by defining the following for each age group:
Full time and salary workers:

                      wef t = Average Weekly Earnings
                               Monthly Earnings Annual Special Earnings
                           =                   +
                                      4                   48


                    AHF T = Average Weekly Hours
                               Monthly Scheduled Hours + Monthly Overtime Hours
                           =
                                                       4


                     N F T = Number of Workers
Part time workers:
       wept = Average Weekly Earnings
                 Hourly Earnings · Daily Hours · Monthly Days Worked Annual Special Earnings
             =                                                      +
                                           4                                   48


    AHP T = Average Weekly Hours
                 Daily Hours · Monthly Days Worked
             =
                                  4


      N P T = Number of Workers
For each age group j, we construct the average hourly earnings wj as
                                           wef tj · N F Tj + weptj · N P Tj
                                wj =
                                          AHF Tj · N F Tj + AHP Tj · N P Tj
and overall average hourly earnings are calculated as
                                     P
                                        wef tj · N F Tj + weptj · N P Tj
                                      j
                              w= P
                                      AHF Tj · N F Tj + AHP Tj · N P Tj
                                      j

The data only reports wages by 5 year age groups. To estimate the individual wage by age, we estimate
                                                                                      bj . We use these
(9) using the 5 year age groups. Using the coefficients, we predict the wages by age, w
                                        bj /w.
to construct the age-profile weights as w
China: We use the 2007 RUMiC survey to calculate the average wage by worker’s age. The series is
hump shaped with some high frequency variation. To smooth the series, we estimate the average wage
                 bj , with the following regression
by age j, called w
                                                            2            3            4
                           bj = ↵ +
                           w              1 agej   +   2 agej   +   3 agej   +   4 agej   + ✏j .    (9)


                                                          24
                                                                                               bj /w
We use the predicted wages as the average wage by age and construct the age-profile weights as w
where w is the average wage across all age groups.
India: We use the 2004 wave of the Socio-Economic Survey to calculate wages by age. The series is
hump shaped with some high frequency variation. To smooth the series, we estimate the average wage
                 cj , with (9) using this data. We use the predicted wages as the average wage by age
by age j, called w
                                         bj /w.
and construct the age-profile weights as w


5.5    Wage Growth and Interest Rates
We use various data sources to construct the wage growth and interest rate series for the full model.
Since we are interested in capturing the trend in saving rates, we average wage and interest rate series
over intervals to capture the salient economic conditions in those periods. When simulating the model,
we use the Hodrick-Prescott filtered trend (smoothing parameter     = 100) to smooth the transition of
the series between the intervals.
Japan: We use the wage growth and interest rate series from Hayashi and Prescott (2002) who report
estimated wages and after tax marginal product of capital from 1947-2001. We use their average wage
growth and marginal product of capital as our interest rate from 1947-1991. The wage growth and
interest rates from 1992-2100 are the averages from Hayashi and Prescott (2002) from 1992 to 2001.
We chose 1991 as the break point as this year marks the beginning of Japan’s “Lost Decade”, which
has persisted through to today. Prior to 1947, we assume wage growth is 0 and interest rates are the
same as they were from 1947-2001. The results in the 1955-2012 interval are not sensitive to the initial
wage growth and interest rates.
China: The wage and interest rate series come from Curtis et al. (2015). We use their average wage
growth and interest rate series from 1851-1978, 1979-2015, and 2015-2100. We chose 1979 as a break
point in the series to capture the changes in factor prices following the major economic reforms.
India: We use the 2004 wave of the Indian Socio-Economic Survey to calculate wage growth. The
data is available in 1983, 1987, 1993, 1999, and 2004. We estimate the annual real wage growth from
1983-2004. Since a consistent data source is not available throughout the timeline of our study, we
use this wage growth from 1950 to 2100. Prior to 1950, we set the annual wage growth to 0. The
results are not sensitive to this assumption. To find the interest rate series, we first calculate the
share of saving in bank deposits and other assets. We allow the deposits to earn the real deposit rate
and the remaining assets earn the marginal product of capital. The Reserve Bank of India reports
the share of household saving in deposits from 1973-2012. The real deposit interest rate is calculated
as the nominal deposit rate less the previous year’s inflation (the deposit rate data is available from
1993-2012). The marginal product of capital is estimated from a Cobb-Douglas production function
with capital share ↵ = 0.34 using data from the Penn World Tables 8.0 database (Data accessed at
http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/pwt/.) The overall interest rate is the share weighted average
of the real deposit rate and the marginal product of capital.




                                                  25
                                    Table 1: Parameter Values


                   Parameter                                   Symbol          Value
                   Coef. of relative risk aversion                             1.500
                   Discount factor                                             0.997
                   Weight on children                              µ           0.650
                   Concavity for children                          ⌘           0.760
                                                                       c
                   Transfer share                                 ⌧            0.040
                   Replacement rate                                -           0.250
                   Interest rate                                   r           0.040




                Table 2: Change in the Aggregate Saving Rates since 1970

                                          1970-1980       1970-1990        1970-2000   1970-2010
                        Data                 -0.004         -0.052          -0.103      -0.165
    Japan        Baseline Model              -0.023         -0.036          -0.045      -0.079
               Composition E↵ect             0.002          -0.004          -0.013      -0.057
                        Data                 0.100           0.130           0.205       0.257
    China        Baseline Model              0.035           0.097           0.116       0.159
               Composition E↵ect             0.014           0.033          -0.009      -0.015
                              #
                       Data                  0.032           0.090           0.118       0.142
    India        Baseline Model              0.031           0.058           0.082       0.113
               Composition E↵ect             0.018           0.034           0.027       0.038
#
    The household saving rate series for India extends only to 2007.




                                                   26
                             Table 3: Country-Specific Details


                               Replacement Rate             Transfers ⌧ c
                    China      0.25                       0.04
                     India     0.05                       0.04
                               0.17     –1973             0.05     –1973
                               0.35     1974-1979         0.03     1974-1998
                    Japan
                               0.40     1980-1998         0.01     1999-
                               0.50     1999-




       Table 4: Saving Rates in the Data, Baseline Model, and Full Model

                                      1960       1970      1980        1990    2000    2010
                     Data             0.145     0.177      0.173       0.124   0.074   0.027
    Japan      Baseline Model         0.121     0.164      0.141       0.128   0.119   0.085
                 Full Model           0.046     0.090      0.095       0.093   0.062   0.058
                     Data             0.058     0.020      0.120       0.150   0.225   0.277
    China      Baseline Model         0.064     0.028      0.063       0.125   0.144   0.186
                 Full Model           0.058     -0.006     0.041       0.112   0.154   0.223
                    Data#             0.065     0.095      0.127       0.185   0.213   0.237
    India      Baseline Model         0.058     0.030      0.060       0.088   0.111   0.143
                 Full Model           -0.018    -0.028     0.011       0.028   0.057   0.107
#
    The household saving rate series for India extends only to 2007.




                                                27
              0.3

             0.25

                             Japan
              0.2

             0.15
                         India
              0.1

             0.05

                  0                     China

                       1960             1970            1980           1990          2000         2010

                             Figure 1: Household Saving Rates in Japan, China, and India




               Panel A: Japan                                  Panel B: China                           Panel C: India
 0.6                                                                                                                          0.6
                                Ages 20−63

 0.5                                                                                                                          0.5


 0.4                                                                                                                          0.4
                                 Ages 64+
 0.3                                                                                                                          0.3


 0.2                                                                                                                          0.2


 0.1                                                                                                                          0.1
                                 Ages 0−19

  0                                                                                                                            0
  1950     1975       2000       2025       2050 1950    1975       2000      2025   2050 1950   1975       2000     2025   2050




                                  Figure 2: Demographics in Japan, China, and India

Notes: The three groups sum to 1, but the figure is truncated above at 0.6. The data comes from the United Nations
Population Prospects 2012 Revision medium variant.




                                                               28
               7

                                                    India
               6

               5

               4         China

               3

               2

               1
                       Japan
                0
               1950            1960      1970           1980           1990          2000           2010


                                          Figure 3: Total Fertility Rates

Notes: China and India data are from the United Nations Population Prospects 2012 Revision medium variant.
Japanese data comes from the Japan Statistical Yearbook 2015, Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal A↵airs and
Communications.




                Panel A: Japan                       Panel B: China                         Panel C: India
  0.3                                                                                                              0.3

0.25                                                                                                               0.25
        Data
  0.2                                                                                                              0.2

0.15                                                                                                               0.15

  0.1                                                                                                              0.1
               Model
0.05                                                                                                               0.05

    0                                                                                                              0
        1960          1980       2000        1960        1980        2000           1960       1980        2000


                       Figure 4: Household Saving Rates in the Baseline Model and the Data




                                                            29
        0.2
                                                                               China
                  Japan
       0.15



        0.1



       0.05                                                          India


         0
                  1960               1970                 1980          1990                2000            2010


                            Figure 5: Household Saving Rates in the Baseline Model




              Panel A: China                              Panel B: India                          Panel C: Japan
 0.3                                         0.3                                   0.3

0.25                                        0.25                                  0.25
        No Kids
 0.2                                         0.2                                   0.2

0.15                                        0.15                                  0.15

 0.1                                         0.1                                   0.1

0.05                      Baseline          0.05                                  0.05
                           Model
  0           Data                            0                                        0

       1960       1980        2000                 1960      1980       2000               1960      1980     2000


Figure 6: Household Saving Rates in the Baseline Model, the Data, and the Model Without Dependent
                                                     Children (µ = 0)




                                                             30
 0.06
        China
 0.04
 0.02
   0                    India
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
                Japan
 −0.1
−0.12
−0.14
   2000    2005      2010       2015    2020     2025      2030     2035      2040     2045    2050


          Figure 7: Change in Household Saving Rates relative to 2000 in the Baseline Model.




                                                 31
