                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DIVIDEND DYNAMICS, LEARNING, AND EXPECTED STOCK INDEX RETURNS

                                       Ravi Jagannathan
                                         Binying Liu

                                      Working Paper 21557
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21557


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2015, Revised December 2017




None of the authors have any relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. We are grateful to Kenneth Singleton, an anonymous associate editor and
two anonymous referees at The Journal of Finance for critical advice. We thank Jonathan Berk,
Jules van Binsbergen, Ian Dew-Becker, Wayne Ferson, Lawrence Harris, Gerard Hoberg, Kai Li,
Lars Lochstoer, Narayan Naik, and seminar participants at the 2017 AFA Meeting, HKUST,
London Business School, Purdue University, Norges Bank Wealth Management, Norwegian
School of Economics, Texas A&M University, University of Southern California, for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ravi Jagannathan and Binying Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Dividend Dynamics, Learning, and Expected Stock Index Returns
Ravi Jagannathan and Binying Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 21557
September 2015, Revised December 2017
JEL No. G10,G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a latent variable model of dividends that predicts, out-of-sample, 39.5% to 41.3% of
the variation in annual dividend growth rates between 1975 and 2016. Further, when learning
about dividend dynamics is incorporated into a long-run risks model, the model predicts, out-of-
sample, 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in annual stock index returns over the same time
horizon, and learning contributes approximately half of the predictability in returns. These
findings support the view that both investors' aversion to long-run risks and their learning about
these risks are important in determining the stock index prices and expected returns.


Ravi Jagannathan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Binying Liu
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
b-liu@kellogg.northwestern.edu
The average return on equities has been substantially higher than the average return on
risk free bonds over long periods of time. Between 1946 and 2016, the S&P500 earned
66 basis points per month more than 30 days T-bills (i.e. over 7% annualized). Over
the years, many dynamic equilibrium asset pricing models have been proposed in the
literature to understand the nature of risks in equities that require such a large premium
and why risk free rates are so low. A common feature in most of these models is that
risk premium on equities does not remain constant over time, but varies in a systematic
and stochastic manner. A large number of academic studies have found support for
such predictable variation in equity premium.1 This led Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) to
conclude ”it is now widely accepted that excess returns are predictable by variables such
as price-to-dividend ratios.”

      Goyal and Welch (2008) argue that variables such as price-to-dividend ratios, although
successful in predicting stock index returns in-sample, fail to predict returns out-of-sample.
The difference between in-sample and out-of-sample prediction is the assumption made on
investors’ information set. Traditional dynamic equilibrium asset pricing models assume
that, while investors’ beliefs about investment opportunities and economic conditions
change over time and drive the variation in stock index prices and expected returns, these
investors nevertheless have complete knowledge of the parameters describing the economy.
For example, these models assume that they know the true model and model parameters
governing consumption and dividend dynamics. However, as Hansen (2007) argues, ”this
assumption has been only a matter of analytical convenience” and is unrealistic in that
it requires us to ”burden the investors with some of the specification problems that
challenge the econometrician”. Motivated by this insight, a recent but growing literature
  1
    See, among others, Campbell and Shiller (1988b), Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989), Fama
and French (1993), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), Lamont (1998), Baker and Wurgler (2000),
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), Polk,
Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2006), Ang and Bekaert (2007), van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), Chen,
Da, and Zhao (2013), Kelly and Pruitt (2013), van Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2013), Li,
Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), Da, Jagannathan, and Shen (2014), and Martin (2017).


                                                 1
has focused on the role of learning in asset pricing models. Timmermann (1993) and
Lewellen and Shanken (2002) demonstrate, via simulations, that parameter uncertainty
can lead to excess predictability and volatility in stock returns. Johannes, Lochstoer,
and Mou (2016) propose a Markov-switching model for consumption dynamics and show
that learning about the consumption process is reflected in asset prices. Croce, Lettau,
and Ludvigson (2014) show that a bounded rationality limited information long-run risks
model can generate a downward-sloping equity term structure. Collin-Dufresne, Johannes,
and Lochstoer (2016) provide the theoretical foundation that parameter learning can be
a source of long-run risks under Bayesian learning.2 We add to this literature.

       The main contributions of our paper are as follows. First, we present a model for
aggregate dividends of the stock index, based on simple economic intuition, that explains
large variation in annual dividend growth rates out-of-sample. Then, we show that,
when learning about dividend dynamics is incorporated into a long-run risks model, the
model predicts large variation in annual stock index returns out-of-sample. This not
only addresses the Goyal and Welch (2008) critique and significantly revises upward the
degree of return predictability in the existing literature, but also lends support that both
investors’ aversion to long-run risks and learning about these risks play important roles
in determining asset prices and expected returns.34

       To study how learning about dividend dynamics affects stock index prices and expected
returns, we first need a dividend model that is able to realistically capture how investors
form expectations about future dividends. Inspired by Lintner (1956) and Campbell
and Shiller (1988b), we put forth a model of dividend growth rates that incorporates
information in corporate payout policy into the latent variable model used in Cochrane
   2
     Instead of learning, an alternative path that researchers have taken is through introducing preferences
shocks. See Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2015).
   3
     Our paper is also consistent with the argument of Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) that steady-
state economic fundamentals, or in our interpretation, investors beliefs about these fundamentals, vary
over time and these variations are critical in determining asset prices and expected returns.
   4
     Following the existing literature, we adopt the stock index as a proxy for the market portfolio.

                                                     2
(2008), van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), and others. Our model predicts 42.4% to 46.4%
of the variation in annual dividend growth rates between 1946 and 2016 in-sample and
predicts 39.5% to 41.3% of the variation in annual dividend growth rates between 1976 and
2016 out-of-sample. Based on these results, we comfortably reject the null that expected
dividend growth rates are constant and demonstrate that the superior performance of
our dividend model over alternative models in predicting annual dividend growth rates is
statistically significant and economically meaningful.

      We document that uncertainties about parameters in our dividend model, especially
parameters surrounding the persistent latent variable, are high and resolve slowly. That
is, these uncertainties remain substantial even at the end of our 71 years data sample,
suggesting that learning about dividend dynamics is a difficult and slow process. Further,
when our dividend model is estimated at each point in time based on data available
at the time, model parameter estimates fluctuate, some significantly, over time as more
data become available. In other words, if investors estimate dividend dynamics using our
model, we expect their beliefs about the parameters governing the dividend process to
vary significantly over time. We then show that these changes in investors’ beliefs can
have large effects on their expectations of future dividends. Through this channel, changes
in investors’ beliefs about the parameters governing the dividend process can contribute
significantly to the variation in stock prices and expected returns.

      We provide evidence that investors behave as if they learn about dividend dynamics
and price stocks using our model. First, we define stock yields as discount rates that
equate the present value of expected future dividends to the current prices of the stock
index. From the log-linearized present value relationship of Campbell and Shiller (1988),
we write stock yields as a function of price-to-dividend ratios and long-run dividend
growth expectations.5       We show that, assuming that investors learn about dividend
  5
      See Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2001) for the dynamic version of the Gordon (1959)


                                                 3
dynamics, these stock yields explain 18.7% of the variation in annual stock index returns
between 1975 and 2016. In comparison, stock yields, assuming full information, predict
a statistically significantly lower 13.0% of the same variation over the same horizon.
Next, we embed our dividend model into an dynamic equilibrium asset pricing model
that features Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences, which capture preferences for the early
resolution of uncertainty, and consumption dynamics similar to the long-run risks model of
Bansal and Yaron (2004). We refer to this model as our long-run risks model. We find that,
assuming learning, our long-run risks model predicts 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in
annual stock index returns between 1975 and 2016. Learning accounts for approximately
half of the predictability in returns. Both the model’s forecasting performance and the
incremental contribution of learning to this performance are statistically significant and
economically meaningful.

    Our results suggest that, aside from a common persistent component in consumption
and dividend growth rates, the assumption that investors hold Epstein and Zin (1989)
preferences with early resolution of uncertainty, a critical component of any long-run risks
model, is essential to the model’s strong performance in predicting annual stock index
returns.6 More specifically, we find that, replacing Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences
with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences, R-square value for predicting
annual stock index returns, between 1975 and 2016, drops from 13.3% to 11.8% assuming
full information and drops from at least 25.3 percent to at most 15.1 percent after learning
is incorporated. This substantial deterioration in forecasting performance is evidence that
the assumption of early resolution of uncertainty, as modeled through Epstein and Zin
growth model that gives an expression for stock yield in levels. When expected dividend growth rates
vary over time, according to the present value relationship, stock yield, that is, the long-run expected
return on stocks, is the current dividend yield plus a weighted average of expected future one period
dividend growth rates.
   6
     Alternatively, as Hansen and Sargent (2010) and Bidder and Dew-Becker (2016) show, if investors
are ambiguity averse, they may behave as if there is such a common persistent component even if the
actual consumption and dividend processes are not persistent.



                                                   4
(1989) preferences, is potentially important for building an asset pricing model consistent
with investors behavior.

      We follow Cogley and Sargent (2008), Piazzesi and Schneider (2010), and Johannes,
Lochstoer, and Mou (2016), and define learning based on the anticipated utility of Kreps
(1998), where agents update using Bayes’ law but optimize myopically in that they do not
take into account uncertainties associated with learning in their decision making process.
That is, anticipated utility assumes agents form expectations not knowing that their
beliefs will continue to evolve going forward in time as the model keeps updating.7

      The rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 1, we introduce our dividend model
and evaluate its performance in capturing dividend dynamics. In Section 2, we show
that investors’ beliefs about dividend model parameters can vary significantly over time
as a result of Kreps’ learning about dividend dynamics. In Sections 3, we show that
learning accounts for a significant fraction of the variation in both long-run and short-run
expected stock index returns. In Section 4, we first discuss how an asset pricing model’s
performance in predicting stock index returns can be used as a criterion to evaluate that
model. Then, we demonstrate that, between 1975 and 2016, a model that incorporates
Kreps’ learning into a long-run risks model predicts 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in
annual stock index returns and explain why such a finding provides us insight into investor
preferences and the role of learning in describing investors’ behavior. In Section 5, we
conclude.



                               I. The Dividend Model

In this section, we present a model for dividend growth rates that extends the latent
variable model of Cochrane (2008), van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), and others by
  7
    Collin-Dufresne, Johannes, and Lochstoer (2016) provide the theoretical foundation for studying
uncertainties about model parameters as priced risk factors.


                                                5
incorporating information in corporate payout policy into the model. The inclusion of
corporate payout policy in explaining dividend dynamics is inspired by Campbell and
Shiller (1988b), who show that cyclical-adjusted price-to-earnings (CAPE) ratios, defined
as the log ratios between real prices and real earnings averaged over the past decade, can
predict future growth rates in dividends.

       We begin with the latent variable model used in Cochrane (2008), van Binsbergen and
Koijen (2010), and others. Let Dt be nominal dividend of the stock index, dt = log(Dt ),
and ∆dt+1 = dt+1 − dt be log dividend growth rate. The model is described as:


                             ∆dt+1 − µd = xt + σ d d,t+1

                                     xt+1 = ρxt + σ x x,t+1
                                                                   
                               d,t+1               1 λdx 
                                       ∼ i.i.d. N 0,        ,                                   (1)
                                x,t+1                   λdx 1


where time-t is defined in years to control for potential seasonality in dividend payments.
Following van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), we fit our model to the nominal dividend
process. As shown in Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000) and Boudoukh,
Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2007), equity issuance and repurchase tend to be
more sporadic and random compared to cash dividends. For this reason, we focus on
modeling the cash dividend process.8 In (1), expected dividend growth rates are a function
of the latent variable xt , the unconditional mean µd of dividend growth rates, and the
persistence coefficient ρ of the latent variable xt :


                                   Et [∆dt+s+1 ] = µd + ρs xt , ∀s ≥ 0.                               (2)




   8
    A firm’s investment opportunities set includes repurchasing its own shares. It will, all else equal,
lead to an increase in future earnings of the remaining shares, just as investment in any other productive
assets would. This is another reason to focus on cash dividends in our study.



                                                    6
   Before we introduce corporate payout policy into this model, we first recall the dividend
model used in Campbell and Shiller (1988b). Define pt as log nominal price of the
stock index, et as log nominal earnings, π t as log consumer price index, and, following
Campbell and Shiller (1988b), consider the following vector-autoregression for annual
nominal dividend growth rates, log price-to-dividend ratios, and CAPE ratios:
                                                                                      
           ∆dt+1           β
                        10   11     β    β 12 β 13     ∆d t           σ    
                                                                                d d,t+1        
                                                                                      
       p
         t+1 − d t+1
                       =  β    
                        20   21 +  β    β 22 β     
                                                    23   pt − d t   (p−d) (p−d),t+1  ,
                                                                     + σ                    
                                                                                      
         pt+1 − ēt+1       β 30        β 31 β 32 β 33     pt − ēt       σ (p−ē) (p−ē),t+1
                                                                     
                         d,t+1                   1 λ12 λ13 
                                                                     
                         (p−d),t+1  ∼ i.i.d. N 0, λ12 1 λ23  .                               (3)
                                                                    
                                                                     
                          (p−ē),t+1                    λ13 λ23 1


where, as in Campbell and Shiller (1988b), CAPE ratio is defined as:

                                                        10
                                                   1 X
                          pt − ēt = (pt − π t ) −     (et−s+1 − π t−s+1 ) .                       (4)
                                                   10
                                                        s=1


Estimates of β 10 , β 11 , β 12 , and β 13 from (3), based on data between 1946 and 2016, are
reported in the first row of Table I. We see that both price-to-dividend ratios and CAPE
ratios have significant effects on future dividends, but in the opposite direction. That is,
increases in price-to-dividend ratios predict increases in future dividend growth rates, but
increases in CAPE ratios predict decreases in future dividend growth rates. Further, we
note from Table I that β 12 + β 13 = 0 cannot be statistically rejected. For this reason, we
restrict β 13 = −β 12 and re-write (3) as:


              ∆dt+1 = β 0 + β 1 ∆dt + β 2 (ēt − dt ) + σ d d,t+1 , d,t+1 ∼ i.i.d N(0, 1).       (5)


Stock index price pt does not appear in (5). Instead, future dividend growth rates are a
function of some measure of retention ratios, that is, ēt − dt . Estimated coefficients from


                                                    7
(5) are in the second row of Table I. We see that the β 2 estimate is significant, suggesting
that expected dividend growth rates respond to corporate payout policy. High earnings
relative to dividends implies that firms have been retaining earnings in the past and so
they are expected to pay more dividends in the future.

                                  [Table I is about here.]

   We extend (1) based on this insight that corporate payout policy contains information
about future dividends. Define ∆et+1 = et+1 − et as log nominal earnings growth rate
and qt = et − dt as log earnings-to-dividend ratio, that is, retention ratio. We write our
dividend model as the following system of equations:

                                                 
                      ∆dt+1 − µd = xt + φ qt − µq + σ d d,t+1 ,

                             xt+1 = ρxt + σ x x,t+1 ,
                                               
                        qt+1 − µq = θ qt − µq + σ q q,t+1 ,
                                                              
                        d,t+1                1 λdx λdq 
                                                              
                                  ∼ i.i.d. N 0, λ
                                                               xq  .                    (6)
                                                         1 λ    
                         x,t+1                dx
                                                              
                          q,t+1                   λdq λxq 1


In our model, future dividend growth rates are a linear combination of three components.
First, they consist of the latent variable xt , which follows a stationary AR[1] process.
Second, they are affected by changes in retention ratios. That is, we expect firms to
pay more future dividends if they have retained more earnings. Third, they consist of
white noises d,t . For convenience, we model retention ratios as an AR[1] process, and
assuming that it is stationary implies that dividend and earnings growth rates have the
same unconditional mean µd . In (6), expected dividend growth rates are:


                      Et [∆dt+s+1 ] = µd + ρs xt + φθs (qt − µq ), ∀s ≥ 0.                (7)


This means that, aside from the latent variable xt and retention ratios, expected dividend

                                               8
growth rates are a function of the unconditional mean µd of dividend growth rates, the
unconditional mean µq and persistence θ of retention ratios, the persistence ρ of the latent
variable xt , and coefficient φ that connects corporate payout policy to dividend dynamics.
The earnings process is not modeled explicitly in (6). However, because earnings growth
rates are, by definition, a function of dividend growth rates and retention ratios, that is,


                                   ∆et+1 = (qt+1 − qt ) + ∆dt+1 ,                                  (8)


and because both dividend growth rates and retention ratios are modeled in (6), we can
solve for earnings growth rates as:


           ∆et+1 = µd + xt + (θ + φ − 1)(qt − µq ) + σ e e,t+1 , e,t+1 ∼ i.i.d    N(0, 1),       (9)

              q
                                                         σ d d,t+1 +σ q q,t+1
where σ e =    σ 2d + σ 2q + 2σ d σ q λdq and e,t+1 =             σe
                                                                                .

   A type of model commonly used to forecast macroeconomic variables is a Markov-
switching model. We take the Markov-switching model describing consumption dynamics
in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016). It is conceivable that the same model can be
applied to dividend growth rates:


                          ∆dt+1 = µd (st ) + σ d (st )d,t+1 , st ∈ {1, 2, 3},

                                 p(st+1 = i|st = j) = φij ,
                                                       3
                                                       X
                     φij ∈ [0, 1] ∀i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3},         φij = 1 ∀j ∈ {1, 2, 3}.             (10)
                                                       i=1


That is, st is the underlying state of the economy,              p(st+1 = i|st = j) is the probability
that the economy transfers from state j ∈ {1, 2, 3} to state i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and µd (st ) and
σ d (st ) are the mean and volatility of dividend growth rates in a particular state. A key
feature of this model that is not present in dividend models discussed so far is that it

                                                   9
is able to incorporate, albeit in a restricted manner, both regime changes and stochastic
volatility. We adopt (10) as another baseline to compare against our dividend model.


A. Estimation and Results

Due to the lack of reliable historical earnings data on the CRSP value-weighted market
index, we use the S&P500 index as the proxy for the market portfolio. That is, throughout
this study, data on prices, dividends, and earnings are from the S&P500 index. These
data can be found on Prof. Robert Shiller’s website.

      We estimate model parameters:


                                            Θ = {µd , φ, σ d , ρ, σ x , µq , θ, σ q }                                        (11)


based on maximum-likelihood. For parameter reduction, we assume in our model that
cross-correlations λ(·, ·) of different shocks to the dividends are zeros, that is, λ(d,t+1 , q,t+1 ) =
0, λ(d,t+1 , x,t+1 ) = 0, and λ(x,t+1 , q,t+1 ) = 0. The log-likelihood function l(·) is then
separable and maximizing it is equivalent to:


max l (∆d1 , ..∆dT , q0 , ...qT |Θ) = max l1 +                            max              l2
  Θ                                              {µq ,θ,σ q }        {µd ,φ,σ d ,ρ,σ x }
                                        
   l1 = l q0 , .., qT |{µq , θ, σ q }
                                                        T −1
                                                        X
   l2 = l (∆d1 |q0 , {µd , φ, σ d , ρ, σ x }) +                 l (∆dt+1 |q0 , ..., qt , ∆d1 , .., ∆dt , {µd , φ, σ d , ρ, σ x }) .
                                                        t=0

                                                                                                                             (12)


Thus, we can separately estimate {µq , θ, σ q } from the AR[1] process of retention ratios by
maximizing l1 using least squares, and estimate {µd , φ, σ d , ρ, σ x } from the rest of the
dividend model by maximizing l2 using Kalman filter (Hamilton (1994)). Appendix
A describes Kalman filter. Table II reports model parameter estimates based on non-

                                                                   10
overlapping annual data between 1946 and 2016.9 Standard errors of parameter estimates
are based on bootstrap simulation, as described in Appendix B. Previous works have
suggested a regime shift in dividend dynamics before and after World War II. Fama and
French (1988) note that dividends are more smoothed in the post-war period. Chen, Da,
and Priestley (2012) argue that the lack of predictability in dividend growth rates by
price-to-dividend ratios in the post-war period is attributable to this dividend smoothing
behavior. So our sample is for the post-war period between 1946 and 2016. Consistent
with our intuition, coefficient φ that connects corporate payout policy to dividend dy-
namics is estimated to be positive and significant. That is, high retention ratios imply
high future dividend growth rates. The annual persistence of retention ratios is estimated
to be 0.370. The latent variable xt is estimated to be slightly more persistent at 0.469. So
there is a moderate level of persistence in dividend growth rates between 1946 and 2016
based on estimates from our model.

                                      [Table II is about here.]

       In the first column of Table III, we report our dividend model’s performance in
predicting annual dividend growth rates. Between 1946 and 2016, our model predicts
46.4% of the variation in annual dividend growth rates, which is a significant improvement
over the baseline models. Given these statistics are in-sample, we know that at least a part
of this improved forecasting performance comes from adding more parameters to existing
models and is thus mechanical. Thus, to address the concern that our model overfits the
data, we also assess our model based on how it predicts annual dividend growth rates
out-of-sample. That is, instead of estimating model parameters based on the full data
sample, we predict dividend growth rates at each point in time using model parameters
estimated based on data available at the time. Model Mi ’s out-of-sample performance is
   9
     All annual statistics reported are based on year-end data, that is, from January to December. For
all of the results in this paper, we have also replicated them using overlapping annual data, the findings
are very similar.




                                                   11
then evaluated using out-of-sample R-square value in Goyal and Welch (2008):
                                         PT −1
                                            t=T0   (∆dt+1 − Et [∆dt+1 |Mi ])2
                       R2O (Mi )   =1−            PT −1                2     ,           (13)
                                                    t=T0 ∆dt+1 − µ̂d,t


where µ̂d,t is the average of dividend growth rates up to time-t:

                                                    t−1
                                                  1X
                                        µ̂d,t =      ∆ds+1 .                              (14)
                                                  t
                                                    s=0


We use time-0 to denote the start of the data sample, time-T0 to denote the end of the
training period, and time-T to denote the end of the data sample. We use the data
sample prior to 1975 as the training period and out-of-sample prediction is for the 42
years period between 1975 and 2016. In the second and third columns of Table III, we
report out-of-sample R-square values for predicting annual dividend growth rates and the
corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. Results show that our model predicts 41.3%
of the variation in annual dividend growth rates between 1975 and 2016 out-of-sample,
which is economically meaningful improvement over the 16.1%, 25.6%, and -4.2% from
the baseline models.

                                     [Table III is about here.]

   We proceed to show that the differences in performance between our model and the
baseline models in predicting dividend growth rates are statistically significant. For two
models Mi and Mj , we define incremental R-square value of Mi over Mj as:
                                           PT −1
                                                     (∆dt+1 − Et [∆dt+1 |Mi ])2
                    R2I (Mi , Mj )   = 1 − PTt=T
                                              −1
                                                 0
                                                                                  ,       (15)
                                              t=T0   (∆dt+1 − Et [∆dt+1 |Mj ])2


and report statistics in Table III. If incremental R-square value is significantly positive, it
suggests that our dividend model is an improvement over the baseline models in predicting
annual dividend growth rates. Taken as a whole, we note that the differences in forecasting
performance between our model and the baseline models are significant.

                                                    12
B. Inflation and Real Rates

In a standard neoclassical asset pricing model, real dividend growth rates, not nominal
rates, are of interest to investors in forming their investment decisions. To convert nominal
dividend growth rates into real rates, we need to specify a process for inflation. We model
inflation as a stationary AR[1] process:


                     ∆π t+1 − µπ = η (∆π t − µπ ) + σ π π,t+1 , π,t+1 ∼ i.i.d.   N(0, 1).              (16)


Table IV reports parameter estimates of the inflation model based on non-overlapping
annual data between 1946 and 2016. There is a moderate level of persistence in inflation
rates. Based on the reported R-square value for predicting inflation rates, which is 44.8%
in-sample between 1946 and 2016 and 54.0% out-of-sample between 1975 and 2016, we
see that the AR[1] model does a reasonable job in describing the inflation process.

                                        [Table IV is about here.]

       For parameter reduction, we assume cross-correlations of different shocks to inflation
and shocks to the dividend process, that is, λdπ = λ (d,t+1 , π,t+1 ), λxπ = λ (x,t+1 , π,t+1 ),
and λqπ = λ (q,t+1 , π,t+1 ), are zeros. This assumption also implies that estimating the
inflation model separately from dividend dynamics using least squares is equivalent to a
joint maximum likelihood estimation. Given this inflation model, we can then derive the
expression for expected real dividend growth rates based on expected nominal rates and
inflation as:


              Et [∆d˜t+s+1 ] = (µd − µπ ) + ρs xt + φθs (qt − µq ) − η s+1 (∆π t − µπ ) , ∀s ≥ 0.        (17)


where ∆d˜t = ∆dt − ∆π t denotes real dividend growth rate.10 To provide a more intuitive
visualization of how various types of shocks to real dividend growth rates at a given time
  10
       Throughout, we put ∼ on top of a variable to denote that the variable is defined in real terms.



                                                      13
affect investors’ expectations of real dividends going forward, we consider an one unit
change to shocks to the real dividend process, that is, d,t , x,t , q,t , and π,t , and show
how such a change affects both real dividend growth rates immediately and expected real
dividend growth rates up to 10 years into the future. We report these impulse response
functions in Figure 1. We see that d,t affects dividend growth rates instantly but its effect
does not persist into the future, whereas x,t and q,t affect dividend growth rates with a
one-period lag but their effects are persistent over time. Figure 1 shows that expected
inflation 1-to-1 negatively affects expected real dividend growth rates. This is a result
of our choice to fit our dividend model to the nominal dividend process and extract real
dividend growth rate expectations by subtracting from it expected inflation rates. The
underlying assumption behind this choice is that firms do not adjust for inflation in paying
out dividends to investors, so we expect real rates to fall as inflation expectations rise.
This is supported in the data and is consistent with the economic rationale that expected
inflation is negatively related to expected growth in real activity.11

                                       [Figure 1 is about here.]

       In Table V, we report the in-sample and out-of-sample R-square values for predicting
real, rather than nominal, annual dividend growth rates using either our model or one
of the baseline models. We find that our model also outperforms the baseline models in
forecasting real annual dividend growth rates. It predicts 42.4% of the variation in real
annual dividend growth rates between 1946 and 2016 in-sample and 39.5% of the variation
in real rates between 1975 and 2016 out-of-sample.

                                       [Table V is about here.]

  11
       See, among others, Fama (1981) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2006).




                                                   14
                    II. Parameter Uncertainty and Learning

The difference between in-sample and out-of-sample prediction is the assumption made
on investors’ information set. Model parameters reported in Table II are estimated using
data up to 2016, so they reflect investors’ knowledge of dividend dynamics at the end
of 2016. So if investors were to estimate our dividend model at an earlier date, they
would have estimated a set of parameter values different from those reported in Table
II. This is a result of investors’ knowledge of dividend dynamics evolving as more data
become available. We call this learning. That is, we use learning to refer to investors
estimating model parameters at each point in time based on data available at the time.
In this section, we summarize how learning affects investors’ beliefs about the parameters
governing the dividend process, assuming that investors behave as if they learn about
dividend dynamics using our model. We then show evidences supporting that learning
about dividend dynamics can have significant asset pricing implications.

    To better reflect investors’ information set, from this point onwards, we assume in-
vestors have access to earnings information 6 months after fiscal quarter or year end. The
choice of 6 months is reasonably conservative and is based on Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) rules since 1934 that require public companies to file 10-Q reports
no later than 45 days after fiscal quarter end and 10-K reports no later than 90 days
after fiscal year end.12 We report, in Figure 2, model parameters estimated based on
non-overlapping annual data up to time-τ , for τ between 1975 and 2016. There are
several points we take away from Figure 2. First, there is a gradual upward drift in
investors’ beliefs about the unconditional mean µq of retention ratios. This suggests that
firms have been paying a smaller fraction of earnings as cash dividends in recent decades.
Second, there are gradual downward drifts in investors’ beliefs about φ that connects
   12
      In 2002, these rules were updated to require large firms file 10-Q reports no later than 40 days after
fiscal quarter end and 10-K reports no later than 60 days after fiscal year end. However, in our research
we find that a small percentage of firms do miss these deadlines.


                                                    15
corporate payout policy to dividend dynamics. This means that dividends have become
more smoothed over time. The decline in the impact of retained earnings on future
dividends is consistenet with declining investment opportunities and more of the retained
earnings being used for share repurchases. Third, a sharp drop in investors’ beliefs about
the persistence θ of retention ratios towards the end of our data sample is due to the
abnormally low earnings reported around the time of the 2009 recession and the strong
stock market recovery that followed. The changes in the volatility of shocks to dividends
and retention ratios are products of these trends.

                                 [Figure 2 is about here.]

   Figure 2 shows that the persistence ρ of the latent variable xt appears to be the
parameter hardest to learn and least stable over time. Investors’ belief about ρ fluctuates
significantly over the sample period. For example, there are three times when investors’
beliefs about ρ sharply drops during our sample. The first is around the time of the 2001
recession. The second is at the start of what is sometimes referred to as the Dot-Com
bubble. The third is around the time of the 2009 recession. This is a standard feature of
a latent variable model. That is, when a large and unexpected shock hits, in our context
either in the form of a recession or what is sometimes referred to as a bubble, our model
assigns some positive probability that such a shock belongs to the persistent process and
revises ρ downward.

   We can infer, from standard errors reported in Table II, that learning about dividend
dynamics is a slow process. That is, even with 71 years of data, there are still significant
uncertainties surrounding the estimates of some model parameters. To quantify the
speed of learning, following Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016), for a parameter in
our dividend model, we construct a measure that is one minus the inverse ratio between
the bootstrap simulated standard error assuming that the parameter is estimated based on
data up to 2016 and the bootstrap simulated standard error assuming that the parameter

                                            16
is estimated based on 10 more years of data, that is, if the parameter were estimated using
data up to 2026. In other words, this ratio reports how much an estimated parameter’s
standard error would have reduced in 10 years. So the closer this ratio is to zero, the
more difficult it is for investors to learn about that parameter. In Table VI, we report
this measure for each of the eight model parameters. Overall, 10 years of additional data
would decrease the standard errors of parameter estimates by between approximately 3%
and 8%. Further, consistent with results in Figure 2 and in Table I, reducing uncertainties
surrounding ρ is the most difficult among these parameters.

                                         [Table VI is about here.]



A. Parameter Uncertainty and Expectations for the Long-Run

We show that learning about dividend dynamics can have significant asset pricing impli-
cations. That is, consider the log linearized present value relationship in Campbell and
Shiller (1988):
                                                   ∞
                                       κ0     X
                         pt − dt =          +   κs1 (Et [∆dt+s+1 ] − Et [Rt+s+1 ]) ,                       (18)
                                     1 − κ1
                                                  s=0

where κ0 and κ1 are log-linearizing constants and Rt+1 is the stock index’s log return.13
The expression is a mathematical identity that connects price-to-dividend ratios, expected
dividend growth rates, and discount rates, that is, expected returns. We define stock yields
as discount rates that equate the present value of expected future dividends to the current
price of the stock index. That is, rearranging (18), we can write stock yields as:

                                         ∞
                                         X
                       syt ≡ (1 − κ1 )         κs1 Et [∆Rt+s+1 ]
                                         s=0
                                                                     ∞
                                                                     X
                           = κ0 − (1 − κ1 )(pt − dt ) + (1 − κ1 )          κs1 Et [∆dt+s+1 ].              (19)
                                                                     s=0

  13                                                                  exp(p−d)
       To solve for κ0 = log(1 + exp(p − d)) − κ1 (p − d) and κ1 =   1+exp(p−d)
                                                                                ,   we set unconditional mean of
log price-to-dividend ratios p − d to 3.474.



                                                         17
We define long-run dividend growth expectations as:

                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                               ∂t ≡ (1 − κ1 )           κs1 Et [∆dt+s+1 ].              (20)
                                                  s=0


Given that price-to-dividend ratios are observed, there is a one-to-one mapping between
long-run dividend growth expectations and stock yields. Further, long-run dividend
growth expectations are specific to the dividend model and its parameters. For example,
using our dividend model, we can re-write expected long-run dividend growth rates as:

                                        ∞
                                        X
                                              κs1 µd + ρs xt + φθs (qt − µq ) .
                                                                             
                       ∂t = (1 − κ1 )                                                   (21)
                                        s=0


If investors instead use a different dividend model, their expectations of long-run dividend
growth rates will also be different. For example, if we assume that dividend growth rates
follow a white noise process centered around µd , we can rewrite (21) instead as ∂t = µd .
Further, because long-run dividend growth expectations are functions of dividend model
parameters, it is also affected by whether these parameters are estimated once based
on the full data sample, or estimated at each point in time based on data available
at the time. The first case corresponds to investors having complete knowledge of the
parameters describing the dividend process. The second case corresponds to investors
having to learn about dividend dynamics. In Figure 3, we plot our model’s long-run
dividend growth expectations, either assuming learning or assuming full information. The
plot shows that learning can have a considerable effect on investors’ long-run dividend
growth expectations.

                                  [Figure 3 is about here.]

   In Figure 4, we plot stock yields, either assuming learning or assuming full information,




                                                   18
computed by substituting (21) into (19):

                                                                                                
                                                                   1             φ
          syt = κ0 − (1 − κ1 )(pt − dt ) + µd + (1 − κ1 )                xt +          (qt − µq ) .   (22)
                                                                1 − κ1 ρ      1 − κ1 θ


We also plot price-to-dividend ratios in Figure 4, and scale price-to-dividend ratios to
allow for easy comparison to stock yields. We note that, assuming full information,
there is almost no noticeable difference between the time series of scaled price-to-dividend
ratios and stock yields. This suggests that the variation in long-run dividend growth
expectations, assuming that investors do not learn, is minimal relative to the variation
in price-to-dividend ratios, so the latter dominates the variation in stock yields, as stock
yields are a linear combination of these two components. However, assuming learning, we
find significant differences between the time series of price-to-dividend ratios and stock
yields.

                                     [Figure 4 is about here.]



     III. Learning about Dividends and the Time Variation in

                                           Discount Rates

So far in our analysis, we have focused on how learning affects the econometrician.
From this point onwards, we examine the asset pricing implications of assuming that
investors have to learn about dividend dynamics in a manner similar to learning by
the econometrician. While the econometrician does not price assets, investors do. So,
assuming investors behave as if they learn about dividend dynamic using our model, we
expect such behavior to affect stock index prices and returns. This assumption is not
unreasonable. Because our dividend model outperforms alternative models in forecasting
dividends, it is natural to assume that investors behave as if they use a model that is
more similar to ours in their investment decisions, at least among the choices examined.

                                                  19
In this section, we present evidence that are consistent with this assumption.

   First, we show that stock yields, assuming learning, predict annual stock index returns.
To establish a baseline, note that, if we assume dividend growth rates follow a white noise
process centered around µd , stock yields can be simplified to:


                             syt = κ0 − (1 − κ1 )(pt − dt ) + µd .                      (23)


That is, under the white noise assumption, stock yields are just scaled price-to-dividend
ratios. So, we regress future annual stock index returns on price-to-dividend ratios, based
on non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016. Statistics are in the first column
of Table VII. Results from Table VII show that, between 1975 and 2016, price-to-dividend
ratios predict 13.6% of the variation in annual stock index returns.

   We then regress future annual stock index returns on stock yields in (22), assuming
learning. We report regression statistics in the second column of Table VII. We see that
R-square value from this regression is 18.7%. We note that the only difference between
this regression and the baseline regression is the assumption on the dividend process.
That is, here we assume that investors behave as if they learn about dividend dynamics
using our model, whereas in the baseline regression we assume that expected dividend
growth rates are constant. This means that we can attribute the increase in R-square
value from 13.6% to 18.7% to our modeling of learning about dividend dynamics. To
emphasize the importance of learning, we regress future annual stock index returns on
stock yields in (22), assuming full information. Statistics are in the third column of Table
VII. Results show that stock yields, assuming full information, perform roughly as well
as price-to-dividend ratios in predicting annual stock index returns. This is consistent
with results in Figure 4, which show that there is very little difference between the time
series of price-to-dividend ratios and stock yields, assuming full information. To show
the superior predictive power of stock yields, assuming learning, is significant, we run

                                              20
bi-variate regressions of future annual stock index returns on both stock yields, assuming
learning, and either price-to-dividend ratios or stock yields, assuming full information.
Statistics are in the fourth and fifth columns of Table VII. Results show that stock yields,
assuming learning, significantly dominate both price-to-dividend ratios and stock yields,
assuming full information, in predicting annual stock index returns.

                                [Table VII is about here.]

   It is worth noting that, for learning to be relevant in our context, investors must
behave as if they are learning about dividend dynamics using our model. To illustrate
this point, we regress stock index returns over the next year on stock yields, assuming
instead that investors behave as if they learn about dividend dynamics using one of the
three baseline models. Statistics are in the sixth to eighth columns of Table VII. We
find that stock yields, assuming learning based on one of the baseline models, perform no
better than price-to-dividend ratios in predicting annual stock index returns.

   We can also demonstrate the relevance of our dividend model by showing that stock
index prices respond to contemporaneous changes in long-run dividend growth rates from
our model better than the alternatives. That is, if investors behave as if they price the
stock index using our model, we expect that, all else equal, when dividend expectations
rise according to our model, so should prices, and vice versa. We regress annual stock
index returns on contemporaneous changes in long-run dividend expectations, assuming
investors behave as if they learn using our dividend model. We report regression statistics
in the first column of Table VIII. Results confirm that increases in expectations about
future dividends is accompanied by more positive stock index returns, and vice versa. In
fact, contemporaneous changes to expected dividends account for a statistically significant
10.6% of the variation in annual stock index returns. As points of reference, we also
run regressions of annual stock index returns on contemporaneous changes in long-run
dividend expectations, either based on our model but assuming full information, or based

                                            21
on assuming learning using one of the alternative models. These results are reported in the
second to fifth columns of Table VIII. We note that, under any other cases considered,
the relationship between annual stock index returns and contemporaneous changes in
expected dividends is negative. Taken as a whole, our findings suggest that the absence
of a relationship between dividend expectations and stock index pricing documented in
the existing literature may be due to a failure to simultaneously account for corporate
payout policy and the role of learning in pricing.14

                                     [Table VIII is about here.]



                 IV. Learning about Dividends in a Dynamic

                                     Equilibrium Model

Although long-run discount rates can be uniquely pinned down based on the price-to-
dividend ratios and expectations of long-run dividend growth rates, the present value
relationship cannot fully capture how discount rates over short horizons vary over time.
In other words, the variation of expected long-run returns and expected returns over
the short-run are not necessarily perfectly correlated with each other. In this section, we
search for a dynamic equilibrium asset pricing model that is able to quantitatively capture
the possible role of learning in determining short-run expected returns. That is, a model
that, after incorporating parameter uncertainty, is able to show strong performance in
predicting short horizon stock index returns that is consistent with the data.

      For the rest of this section, we first argue that an asset pricing model’s performance
in predicting stock index returns can be used to assess that model. Then, we incorporate
learning into a long-run risks model and show that 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in
annual stock index returns can be predicted using such a model.
 14
      See, for example, Cochrane (2008).


                                                 22
A. Return Predictability and Assessing Asset Pricing Models

The criterion we propose to assess an asset pricing model is the deviation of that candidate
model’s expected returns on a given asset from the expected returns of the true model.
The true model here is defined as the asset pricing model that best describes the behavior
of the marginal investor who prices that asset, in a frictionless and efficient market. Let
Mi be a candidate model, M0 be the unobserved true asset pricing model, Rt be log
return of that asset, Et [Rt+1 |Mi ] be the Mi -endowed-investors’ expectation of that asset
over the next time period, and Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] be expected return under the true model.
The following definition defines a better asset pricing model, that is, the candidate model
that is closer to the true model, as the model that minimizes the mean squared difference
between its expected returns and the expected returns of the true model.

Definition 1 A candidate asset pricing model Mi is a better approximation of the true
asset pricing model (M0 ) than model Mj if and only if:

          h                                  i   h                                  i
         E (Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 < E (Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] − Et [Rt+1 |Mj ])2 .


A clear inconvenience of this definition is that the true asset pricing model M0 is never
observable, and thus Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] is unobservable. To circumvent this issue, we notice
that, assuming markets are frictionless and efficient and investors form rational expecta-
tions, the error term t+1 = Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] is orthogonal to any information that is
time-t measurable. This leads to the following proposition.

Proposition 1 A candidate asset pricing model Mi is a better approximation of the true
asset pricing model (M0 ) than model Mj if and only if:
                 h                         i  h                         i
                E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2   E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mj ])2
             1−    h                   i >1−    h                   i
                 E (Rt+1 − E[Rt+1 ])2         E (Rt+1 − E[Rt+1 ])2



                                              23
Proofs are in Appendix C. In other words, if we define out-of-sample R-square value:
                                             PT −1
                               2                t=T0(Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2
                             R (Mi ) = 1 −         PT −1                     ,                          (24)
                                                                         2
                                                    t=T0 (Rt+1 − µ̂r,t )


                 1
                     Pt−1
where µ̂r,t =    t    s=0   Rs+1 is the average of that asset up to time-t, as the performance
of a candidate model Mi in predicting asset returns over the next time period, and
assuming we have a sufficiently long data sample, then we can use it to assess how close
the candidate model is to the true model. The asset in question we use to evaluate models
in this paper is the stock index.



B. The Long-Run Risks Model

We propose a long-run risks model that combines our dividend model, Epstein and Zin
(1989) investor preferences, and persistent consumption growth rates similar to Bansal
and Yaron (2004) and show that such a model predicts 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation
in annual stock index returns.

       Epstein and Zin (1989) has been one of the most widely used expressions for investor
preferences in the literature. Investor preferences are defined recursively as:

                                     1−α
                                                            ζ
                                       ζ
                                                 1−α  ζ1 1−α      1−α
                       Ut = (1 − δ)C̃t    + δ Et Ut+1           , ζ=        ,                           (25)
                                                                     1 − ψ1


where C̃t is real consumption, ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), and
α is the coefficient of risk aversion. We note that, the representative agent prefers early
resolution of uncertainty if ζ < 0 and prefers late resolution of uncertainty if ζ > 0.15 Log
of the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS) is:

                                                   ζ                    c
                               mt+1 = ζ log(δ) −     ∆c̃t+1 + (ζ − 1) R̃t+1 ,                           (26)
                                                   ψ
  15
    Or equivalently, if α > 1, then the representative agent prefers early resolution of uncertainty if ψ > 1
and prefers late resolution of uncertainty if ψ < 1.

                                                       24
                         c
where c̃ = log(C̃) and R̃t+1 denotes the real return of the representative agent’s wealth
portfolio. For quarterly calibration, we set ψ = 1.5 to be consistent with preferences for
the early resolution of uncertainty, and set α = 5 and δ = 0.975, all of which are within
the range of parameter choices commonly made by the existing literature.

       Similar to Bansal and Yaron (2004), we assume that consumption and dividend growth
rates carry the same persistent latent component xt . That is, we describe real consumption
growth rates as:
                                                        1
                               ∆c̃t+1 − (µd − µπ ) =      (xt + σ d c,t+1 ) .               (27)
                                                        γ

Following Bansal and Yaron (2004), we set the unconditional mean of consumption growth
rates to equal to that of dividend growth rates. The parameter γ is the leverage of the
equity market. A common criticism of the long-run risk model has always been that it
requires a small but highly persistent component in consumption and dividend growth
rates that is difficult to find support in the data.16 This criticism serves as the rationale
for why we expect learning to be important in this context.

       Unfortunately, we cannot adopt the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model in its exact
form because our dividend model does not feature stochastic volatility, which is a key
component of Bansal and Yaron (2004). However, our long-run risks model still needs the
additional degree of freedom from a second latent variable to be able to simultaneously
capture the time series of dividends and price-to-dividend ratios in the data. So, instead
of stochastic volatility, our long-run risks model assumes stochastic correlation between
shocks to consumption and shocks to dividend and earnings processes. That is, we
assume that the correlations between shocks c,t+1 to real consumption growth rates
and shocks d,t+1 and e,t+1 to dividend and earnings growth rates are equal, denoted
λt = λ(c,t+1 , d,t+1 ) = λ(c,t+1 , e,t+1 ), and follow an AR[1] process centered around zero:


                           λt+1 = ωλt + σ λ λ,t+1 ,    λ,t+1 ∼ i.i.d.   N(0, 1).           (28)
  16
       See Beeler and Campbell (2012), Jagannathan and Marakani (2015).

                                                   25
It can then be derived that the correlation between consumption and retention ratios is:

                                                        q
                                                             σ 2d + σ 2q − σ d
                               λ (c,t+1 , q,t+1 ) =                            λt                              (29)
                                                                  σq

For those other cross-correlations of different shocks that we cannot identify, we set them
all to zeros. So to summarize, the correlation matrix of shocks to consumption, dividends,
and retention ratios is:
                                                                        √                             
                                                                                 σ 2d +σ 2q −σ d
                                   1                   λt       0     0                         λt   0
      c,t+1                                                                       σq                  
                                                                                                      
      d,t+1                   λt                    1       0     0               0              0   
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
     x,t+1                       0                    0       1     0               0              0
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                        
              ∼ i.i.d. N 0,                                                                            .   (30)
                                                                                                      
     λ,t+1                     0                    0       0     1               0              0   
                          √                                                                           
                           σ2 +σ2 −σ                                                                  
                          d q dλ                    0       0     0               1              0   
      q,t+1                   σq     t                                                                
                                                                                                      
      π,t+1                        0                    0       0     0               0              1




C. Estimation and Results

We solve our long-run risk model in Appendix D. In solving this model, we closely follow
the steps in Bansal and Yaron (2004). The model consists of four state variables: latent
variables xt and λt , retention ratios, and inflation rates. We can solve for price-to-dividend
ratio as a linear function of these four state variables:

                                                               
              pt − dt = Ad,0 + Ad,1 xt + Ad,2 λt + Ad,3 qt − µq + Ad,4 (∆π t − µπ ).                             (31)


Expectation of stock return over the next period is:


                     Et [Rt+1 ] = Ar,0 + Ar,1 xt + Ar,2 λt + Ar,4 (∆π t − µπ ),                                  (32)




                                                    26
The coefficients Ad,· and Ar,· , derived in Appendix D, are functions of the parameters
that describe investor preferences, and the joint processes of consumption and dividends.
We note that, substituting (31) into (32), we can avoid estimating the latent variable λt
directly from macroeconomic data and instead write expected future returns as a function
of price-to-dividend ratios and the other three state variables:


              Et [Rt+1 ] = A0 + A1 xt + A2 qt + A3 ∆π t + A4 (pt − dt ),
                                                                               
                           Ar,0 Ad,2 − Ar,2 Ad,0    Ar,2        Ar,2 Ad,3
                    A0 =                          −      µ +              − Ar,4 µπ ,
                                   Ad,2             Ad,2 q       Ad,2
                           Ar,1 Ad,2 − Ar,2 Ad,1          Ar,2             Ar,2 Ad,3
                    A1 =                         , A2 =        , A3 = −              ,
                                   Ad,2                   Ad,2               Ad,2
                           Ar,4 Ad,2 − Ar,2 Ad,4
                    A4 =                         .                                       (33)
                                   Ad,2




   Price-to-dividend ratios, earnings-to-dividend ratios, and inflation rates are directly
observable. Aside from those in investors preferences, all but three parameters in our
long-run risks model, as well as the latent variable xt , appears in either (6) or (16) and
can thus be estimated from dividend dynamics. We follow Krep’s learning and use these
parameters and state variable estimates as if they were their true values. There are
multiple ways through which we can estimate the remaining three parameters, that is,
ω, σ λ , and γ, that are not part of dividends or preferences. One approach is to estimate
them from consumption data. However, as discussed in Savov (2011), consumption is
measured with significant noise and the right measure of consumption itself is still up for
debate. So instead, we estimate them from price-to-dividend ratios. That is, fix a set of
parameters ω, σ λ , and γ, then for each time-t, by substituting in price-to-dividend ratios,
retention ratios, inflation rates, and dividend model estimates, we can back out λt as:

                                                           
                 (pt − dt ) − Ad,0 − Ad,1 xt − Ad,3 qt − µq − Ad,4 (∆π t − µπ )
            λt =                                                                         (34)
                                               Ad,2


                                                27
From (28), we know that the latent variable λt should be an AR[1] process with an
unconditional distribution of     N(0, √1−ω
                                        σ λ
                                            ). So we can choose the set of parameters ω, σ λ ,
                                              2


and γ to best fit these distributional characteristics λt . In other words, we solve for ω, σ λ ,
and γ using Generalized Method of Moments, fitting the three parameters to the three
moments:


                                                                         E[λt ] = 0
                                                                          σ 2λ
                                                  E[λ2t − E[λt ]2 ] −          =0
                                                                        1 − ω2
                       E[(λt − E[λt ]) ((λt+1 − ωλt ) − E[λt+1 − ωλt ])] = 0                (35)


Under the assumption that our long-run risks model holds, exactly three independent
moment conditions, as in (35), are required to identify the three parameters ω, σ λ , and
γ. Our choice of the three moment conditions is standard. First, we choose the three
parameters so that the sample mean of the latent variable λt is set to zero. Second, the
sample variance of the latent variable λt is set to equal the variance specified in our model.
Third, the sample first-order serial covariance of the latent variable λt is made to match
the covariance specified in our model. Standard errors of parameter estimates are based
on bootstrap simulation, as described in Appendix B.

       Our choice to estimate ω, σ λ , and γ from price-to-dividend ratios is consistent with
the existing literature on learning from prices.17 Still, the fact that our model feature
consumption but our estimation of the model does not is a drawback of our approach.
Including clean consumption data in our estimation, if such data were avaliable, would
mean having extra independent observations for estimating state variables and parame-
ters. However, as simulation results in Table VI suggest, the gain in efficiency as a result
of having this extra data would be rather limited.18
  17
       For example, the literature on Rational Expectations Equilibrium models.
  18
       Also, we need high frequency consumption data to reasonably fit a model with time-varying

                                                    28
   To focus on the role of learning about dividends on asset pricing and differentiate
ourselves from Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016), we first run (35) by fitting the
three moments of the latent variable λt based on the entire data sample between 1946
and 2015. This is a senario where learning is restricted to parameters in the dividend
model, that is, learning about dividends. However, because the entire data sample is
used, a forward-looking bias may be introduced. To overcome this concern, we also run
(35) at each point in time using only data avaliable at the time. That is, in this scenario,
learning is applied to parameters both in and beyond the dividend model, that is, full
learning.

   In Figure 5, we report parameters in our long-run risks model not in the dividend
process, estimated based on non-overlapping annual data up to time-τ , for τ between 1975
and 2016. In the same figure, we also report coefficients A· that relate price-to-dividend
ratios and state variables to expected returns in (33), assuming full information, learning
about dividends, or full learning. We see that coefficients A· fluctuates significantly over
time. In other words, as learning is introduced, these coefficients become additional model
specific state variables in determining stock index expected returns. This observation is
consistent with the findings of Collin-Dufresne, Johannes, and Lochstoer (2016). Un-
surprisingly, the fluctuations of coefficients A· are more intensive for full learning than
learning about dividends.

                                    [Figure 5 is about here.]

   In Figure 6, we report the evolution of the four state variables of our long-run risks
model, that is, latent variables xt and λt , earnings-to-dividend ratios, and inflation
rates, as well as expected excess stock index returns returns and risk free rate, over
time, assuming full information, learning about dividends, or full learning. We see that,
consistent with data, most of the variation in expected stock index returns is attributable
correlations in dividends and consumption shocks.


                                                    29
to variation in expected excess returns. Unsurprisingly, learning increases the volatility
of both expected excess returns and risk free rate.       Interestingly, Figure 6 suggests
that, around the time of the 2001 recession, expectations of one-year excess returns are
negative. This is a result of model implied correlations between shocks to dividends and
consumption being highly negative, that is, the stock index temporarily serving as a hedge
to consumption, during this period and is an equilibrium outcome, based on parameters
estimated from data, of our model.

                                 [Figure 6 is about here.]

   We examine how our long-run risks model, assuming either learning about dividends
or full learning, that is, our learning models, perform in predicting annual stock index
returns. We then measure forecasting performance using out-of-sample R-square value:

                                       PT −1
                                            (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |L])2
                                         t=T0
                       R2O (L)   =1−      PT −1                2  .                 (36)
                                           t=T0 R t+1 − µ̂ r,t


where L stands for learning. We use data since 1946 as the training period and compute
the out-of-sample R-square value using non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and
2016. In the second and third rows of Table IX, we report out-of-sample R-square value for
predicting annual stock index returns using our learning models. We find that, between
1975 and 2016, our learning models predict 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in annual
stock index returns out-of-sample.

   To better quantify the incremental contribution of learning to the model’s performance
in predicting annual stock index returns, we compute expected returns in (32) using
dividend model parameters estimated based on the entire data sample between 1975
and 2016, that is, our full information model. We report out-of-sample R-square value
for predicting stock index returns using our full information model in the third row
of Table IX. From learning to full information, R-square value reduces from at least
25.3% to 13.3%. So learning acounts for approximately half of the return predictability

                                               30
documented. To examine the significance of this difference, we report, also in Table IX,
incremental R-square value of our learning models over our full information model:
                                                PT −1
                                                         (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |L])2
                           R2I (L, F)    = 1 − PTt=T
                                                  −1
                                                     0
                                                                            2
                                                                                   .                (37)
                                                  t=T0 (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |F])


Results from Table IX show that there is a statistically significant gain in forecasting
performance from modeling investors’ learning about dividend dynamics.19 Also, perfor-
mance for predicting annual stock index returns is slightly better for full learning than
learning about dividends. However, we do not have enough statistical power to conclude
that learning about parameters beyond the dividend model plays a statistically significant
role.

                                        [Table IX is about here.]

       For additional details on how our learning models’ forecasting performance evolves
over time, at each time-τ , we follow Goyal and Welch (2008) and define the cumulative
sum of squared errors difference (SSED) between predicting annual stock index return
using our learning models and using the historical mean of returns as:

                                τ −1                               τ −1
                                X                                  X                      2
                     Dτ (L) =          (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |L])2 −            Rt+1 − µ̂r,τ        .    (39)
                                t=T0                               t=T0


The SSED for our learning models are plotted in Figure 7. If the forecasting performance
of our learning model is stable and robust over time, we should observe a steady but con-
stant and consistent decline in SSED. Instead, if the forecasting performance is especially
poor in certain sub-period of the data, we should see a significant drawback in SSED
during that sub-period. A flat SSED suggests that our model neither adds or destroys
  19
     We note that R2I (L, F), R2 (L) and out-of-sample R-square value of our full information model, that
is, R2 (F), are related through the following equation:

                                                            1 − R2 (L)
                                         R2I (L, F) = 1 −              .                            (38)
                                                            1 − R2 (F)



                                                     31
forecasting performance. We note that our model’s forecasting performance is positive
through the majority of the data sample. Overall, as shown in Figure 7, most of the
forecasting performance can be attributed to the early three-fourth of the sample, while
performance is relatively flat during the most recent decade.

                                      [Figure 7 is about here.]

   To see the incremental contribution of learning to SSED over time, we plot, in Figure
8, the incremental SSED defined as the difference in SSED between our learning model
and our full information model:

                              τ −1
                              X                                t−1
                                                               X
                                                        2
          Dτ (L) − Dτ (F) =          (Rs+1 − Et [Rs+1 |L]) −          (Rs+1 − Et [Rs+1 |F])2 .   (40)
                              t=T0                             s=T0


Similar to what we observed earlier, the incremental gain in forecasting performance
from learning is large and reasonably consistent, but is mostly concentrated in the early
three-fourth of the sample.

                                      [Figure 8 is about here.]


                 1. Long-Run Risks Model and Other Return Forecasts

Goyal and Welch (2008) document that empirical forecasts of stock index returns over-
whelmingly lack out-of-sample predictive power. However, subsequent literature, such
as Kelly and Pruitt (2013) and Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), overcomes the Goyal
and Welch (2008) critique and finds out-of-sample return predictability. We compare
the out-of-sample forecasting performance of our long-run risks model, assuming either
learning about dividends or full learning, with these more successful empirical proxies of
stock index returns in the existing literature.

   To avoid the concern of selection bias in our reporting of results, we compare our
learning models with these emprical proxies of returns based on the sample period used

                                                 32
by the corresponding original authors. For Kelly and Pruitt (2013), this is between 1981
and 2009. For Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), this is between 1995 and 2013. To
evaluate performance, we report, in Table X, incremental R-square values for predicting
stock index returns using our learning models over these alternative expected return
proxies for the selected periods. Results show that our learning models outperform these
empirical proxies of expected stock index returns.20
                                    [Table X is about here.]


                                 2. Recession versus Expansion

Figure 7 suggests that the times around the 2001 recession plays an especially important
role in the return predictability results. It appears, from Figure 7, that the learning
models’ performance in most of the other recessions are positive as well. To make more
clear on how return predictability differs between periods of expansions and periods of
recessions, we divide our data sample between 1975 and 2016 into expansion versus
recession periods and report separate forecasting performance results. We define a year
to be in recession if any of its months overlap with the NBER recession dates. There
are six such years in our 42 years data sample. Results are reported in Table XI. We
find that the forecasting performance of our learning models is much stronger during
recessions than expansions, but performance during expansions is nevertheless robust,
with an R-square value of 19.1% to 19.6% assuming learning versus 13.2% assuming full
information. The finding that predictability is strongest during market downturns is not
surprising and is consistent with the existing literature. For example, Golez and Koudijs
(2017) find, based on four centuries of stock market data, that most of the predictability
of future stock returns using price-to-dividend ratios stems from recessions. However,
in both expansions and recessions, our learning models outperform our full information
  20
    Although when compared to Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), the outperformance is not statistically
significant due to the much shorter data sample.


                                                 33
model, suggesting that learning plays an important role regardless of economic conditions.



                                [Table XI is about here.]


                   3. The Role of Epstein and Zin (1989) Preferences

To emphasize that Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences are critical to our return pre-
dictability results, we build a model where we replace Epstein and Zin (1989) preference
with Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) preferences:

                                           ∞
                                           X
                                                  tC̃t1−α
                                    Ut =         δ                                   (41)
                                           t=0
                                                   1−α

and set α = 5 and δ = 0.975. While estimates of parameters in the dividend model do
not change with preferences, the three remaining parameters, ω, σ λ , and γ, need to be
reset. That is, we estimate parameters ω, σ λ , and γ of our model using General Method
of Moments by fitting the same set of moments in (35) under CRRA preferences and the
chosen preference parameters. We then derive expected returns under CRRA preferences.
We report, in Table XII, R-square values for predicting annual stock index returns using
the CRRA model, assuming learning about dividends, full learning, or full information.
We see that, assuming learning, R-square values for predicting annual stock index returns
reduce from at least 25.3% for Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences to at most 15.1% for
CRRA preferences, and the lack of the incremental contribution of learning to R-square
value accounts for most of this reduction. These results suggest that modeling investors
behavior using CRRA preferences cannot fully capture the effect of learning on expected
stock index returns.

                                [Table XII is about here.]




                                            34
                                   V. Conclusion

In this paper, we develop a time series model for dividend growth rates that is inspired
by both the latent variable model of Cochrane (2008), van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010),
and others and the vector-autoregressive model of Campbell and Shiller (1988b). The
model shows strong performance in predicting annual dividend growth rates. We find
that some parameters in our dividend model are difficult to estimate with precision in
finite sample. As a consequence, learning about dividend model parameters significantly
changes investors beliefs about future dividends and the nature of the long run risks in
the economy.

   We evaluate the economic and statistical significance of learning about parameters in
the dividend process in determining asset prices and expected returns. We argue that a
better asset pricing model should forecast returns better. We find that a long run risks
model that incorporates learning about dividend dynamics is surprisingly successful in
forecasting stock index returns. While our long run risks model, featuring Epstein and
Zin (1989) preferences and persistence shocks to dividends and consumption, assuming
learning, explains 25.3% to 27.1% of the variation in annual stock index returns, shutting
down learning reduces the R-square value to 13.3%. This drop in R-square value is
statistically significant and economically meaningful.    We also show that we cannot
replicate our learning results under CRRA preferences. Our findings highlight the joint
importance of investors aversion to long run risks and investors learning about these risks
in understanding asset pricing dynamics.




                                            35
                                   REFERENCES


Albuquerque, R., M. S. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2015): “Valuation Risk and
  Asset Pricing,” Working Paper.

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2007): “Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?,” Review
  of Financial Studies, 20, 651–707.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler (2000): “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate
  Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 55, 2219–2257.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution
  of Asset Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481–1509.

Beeler, J., and J. Y. Campbell (2012): “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate
  Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment,” Critical Finance Review, 1, 141–182.

Bidder, R., and I. Dew-Becker (2016): “Long-Run Risk is the Worst-Case Scenario,”
  The American Economic Review, 106.

Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. R. Roberts (2007): “On
  the Importance of Measuring Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing,”
  The Journal of Finance, 62, 877–915.

Breen, W., L. R. Glosten, and R. Jagannathan (1989): “Economic Significance
  of Predictable Variations in Stock Index Returns,” Journal of Finance, 44, 1177–1189.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and
  Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of financial studies,
  1, 195–228.




                                          36
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988b): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and
  Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies,
  1, 195–227.

Campbell, J. Y., and T. Vuolteenaho (2004): “Bad Beta, Good Beta,” Journal of
  Finance, 55, 2219–2257.

Chen, L., Z. Da, and R. Priestley (2012): “Dividend Smoothing and Predictability,”
  Management Science, 58, 1834–1853.

Chen, L., Z. Da, and X. Zhao (2013): “What Drives Stock Price Movements,” Review
  of financial studies, 26, 841–876.

Cochrane, J. H. (2008): “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return
  Predictability,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1533–1575.

Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2008): “Anticipated Utility and Rational Expecta-
  tions as Approximations of Bayesian Decision Making,” International Economic Review,
  49, 185–221.

Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. A. Lochstoer (2016): “Parameter
  Learning in General Equilibrium: The Asset Pricing Implications,” The American
  Economic Review, 106, 664–698.

Croce, M. M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2014): “Investor Information,
  Long-Run Risk, and the Term Structure of Equity,” Working Paper.

Da, Z., R. Jagannathan, and J. Shen (2014): “Growth Expectations, Dividend
  Yields, and Future Stock Returns,” Working Paper.




                                           37
Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin (1989): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the In-
  tertemporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,”
  Econometrica, 57, 937–969.

Fama, E. F. (1981): “Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money,” The American
  Economic Review, 71, 545–565.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yield and Expected Stock
  Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3–25.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
  Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.

Glosten, L. R., R. Jagannathan, and D. E. Runkle (1993): “On the Relation
  between the Expeted Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks,”
  Journal of Finance, 48, 1779–1801.

Golez, B., and P. Koudijs (2017): “Four Centuries of Return Predictability,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Gordon, M. J. (1959): “Dividends, Earnings, and Stock Prices,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 41, 99–105.

Goyal, A., and I. Welch (2008): “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Perfor-
  mance of Equity Premium Prediction,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1455–1508.

Hamilton, J. D. (1994): Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press.

Hansen, L. P. (2007): “Beliefs, Doubts and Learning: Valuing Macroeconomic Risk,”
  The American Economic Review, 97, 1–30.

Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (2010): “Fragile Beliefs and the Price of
  Uncertainty,” Quantitative Economics, 1, 129–162.

                                          38
Jagannathan, R., and S. Marakani (2015): “Price-Dividend Ratio Factor Proxies
  for Long-Run Risks,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 5, 1–47.

Jagannathan, R., E. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina (2000): “The Declining US
  Equity Premium,” Quarterly Review, pp. 3–19.

Jagannathan, R., E. R. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina (2001): “The Declining
  US Equity Premium,” Working Paper.

Johannes, M., L. A. Lochstoer, and Y. Mou (2016): “Learning about Consumption
  Dynamics,” The Journal of Finance, pp. 551–600.

Kelly, B., and S. Pruitt (2013): “Market Expectations in the Cross-Section of Present
  Values,” Journal of Finance, 68, 1721–1756.

Kreps, D. M. (1998): “Anticipated Utility and Dynamic Choice,” Econometric Society
  Monographs, 29, 242–274.

Lamont, O. (1998): “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1563–
  1587.

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and
  Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56, 815–849.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend
  Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 583–626.

Lettau, M., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “Reconciling the Return Predictabil-
  ity Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1607–1652.

Lewellen, J., and J. Shanken (2002): “Learning, Asset-Pricing Tests, and Market
  Efficiency,” The Journal of Finance, 57, 1113–1145.


                                          39
Li, Y., D. T. Ng, and B. Swaminathan (2013): “Predicting Market Returns Using
  Aggregate Implied Cost of Capital,” Journal of Financial Economics, 110, 419–436.

Lintner, J. (1956): “Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends,
  Retained Earnings, and Taxes,” American Economic Review, 46, 97–113.

Martin, I. (2017): “What is the Expected Return on the Market?,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 132, 367–433.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987):              “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
  Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica,
  55, 703–708.

Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2006):          “Equilibrium Yield Curves,” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2006, 21.

        (2010): “Interest Rate Risk in Credit Markets,” The American Economic Review,
  100, 579–584.

Polk, C., S. Thompson, and T. Vuolteenaho (2006): “Cross-Sectional Forecasts
  of the Equity Premium,” Journal of Finance, 55, 2219–2257.

Savov, A. (2011): “Asset Pricing with Garbage,” The Journal of Finance, 66, 177–201.

Timmermann, A. G. (1993): “How Learning in Financial Markets Generates Excess
  Volatility and Predictability in Stock Prices,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  pp. 1135–1145.

van Binsbergen, J., W. Hueskes, R. Koijen, and E. Vrugt (2013): “Equity
  Yields,” Journal of Financial Economics, 110, 503–519.

van Binsbergen, J. H., and R. S. Koijen (2010): “Predictive Regression: A Present-
  Value Approach,” Journal of Finance, 65, 1439–1471.

                                         40
                                          A. Appendix

A. Estimation of Parameters in Our Dividend Model

We estimate parameters of the following system of equations that jointly describe the
dividend, earnings, and inflation processes (see (6), (9), and (16)).

                                                    
                         ∆dt+1 − µd = xt + φ qt − µq + σ d d,t+1 ,

                                 xt+1 = ρxt + σ x x,t+1 ,
                                                
                           qt+1 − µq = θ qt − µq + σ q q,t+1 ,

                         ∆π t+1 − µπ = η (∆π t − µπ ) + σ π π,t+1 ,
                                                                            
                             d,t+1                     1     0      0     0
                                                                         
                                                                         
                          x,t+1                0         1      0     0 
                                      ∼ i.i.d.   0,                         .            (42)
                                                                         
                                             N
                           q,t+1               0         0      1     0 
                                                                         
                                                                         
                             π,t+1                     0     0      0     1



   To estimate parameters in the third equation of (42), we run an autoregression on
retention ratios:

                                          
                     qt+1 − µq = θ qt − µq + σ q q,t+1 ,     q,t+1 ∼ i.i.d.   N(0, 1).     (43)


To estimate parameters in the fourth equation of (42), we run an autoregression on
inflation rates:

                                            
                   ∆π t+1 − µπ = η ∆π t − µq + σ π π,t+1 ,     π,t+1 ∼ i.i.d.   N(0, 1).   (44)


For the remaining parameters in the first to second equations of (42), we note that
dividend growth rates and contemporaneous earnings are related, as shocks to dividends
also impact contemporaneous earnings in (9), and vice versa. So we estimate the process

                                                    41
of dividends and earnings through the following system of equations:


                                 ∆dt+1 = a1 + yt+1 + b1 ∆et+1 + b2 qt + ν d,t+1

                                       yt+1 = b3 yt + ν y,t+1
                                                                               
                           vd,t+1               ς d 0 
                                   ∼ i.i.d. N 0,        .                                                          (45)
                            vy,t+1                    0 ςy


To apply the Kalman filter, let ŷt|s denote the time-s expectation of the latent variable
yt and Pt|s denote the variance of yt conditioning on information in time-s. Set initial
                                          σ 2y
conditions ŷ0|0 = 0 and P0|0 =          1−b23
                                               .   We can then iterate the following system of equations:


                ŷt+1|t = b3 ŷt|t ,     Pt+1|t = b23 Pt|t + ς 2y ,

                 t+1 = ∆dt+1 − a1 − ŷt+1|t − b1 ∆et+1 − b2 qt ,
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                        Pt+1|t
                                       Pt+1|t
             ŷt+1|t+1   = ŷt+1|t +               t+1 ,        Pt+1|t+1 = Pt+1|t −                                 .   (46)
                                     Pt+1|t + ς 2d                                                   Pt+1|t + ς 2d


At each time τ , to estimate parameters in (45), we maximize the log-likelihood function:

                                        τ −1
                                                                                             !
                                        X                                       2t+1
                                                                ς 2d
                                                                       
                              l=−              log Pt+1|t +                +                     .                       (47)
                                        t=0
                                                                             Pt+1|t + ς 2d


Throughout, we apply Kalman filter based on non-overlapping annual data. To then
map parameters in (45) to those in the first and second equation of (42), we substitute
∆et+1 = qt+1 − qt + ∆dt+1 and (43) into (45) and re-arrange (45) into:

               a1 + b2 µq         b1 (θ − 1) + b2                  b1                  1
      ∆dt+1 −             = xt +                   qt − µ q +            σ q q,t+1 +        ν d,t+1
                 1 − b1                1 − b1                     1 − b1              1 − b1
                                                        1
                     xt+1 = b3 xt + ν x,t+1 , xt =           yt ,
                                                    1 − b1
                                                         
              vd,t+1                  ςd          0
                         ∼ i.i.d. N 0,                     .                                                        (48)
                                                             
             
                                                    1
                vx,t+1                        0 1−b    1
                                                         ς y




                                                           42
Thus, the mapping is:

                           a1 + b2 µq            b1 (θ − 1) + b2
                    µd =              ,      φ=                  , ρ = b3 ,
                             1 − b1                   1 − b1
                                                 s          2              2
                             1                          b1               1
                    σx =          ςy,       σd =                  2
                                                                σq +             ς 2d .   (49)
                           1 − b1                     1 − b1           1 − b1




B. Bootstrap Simulation

Each simulation is based on 100,000 iterations. First, we simulate innovations to dividend
growth rates and retention ratios:
                                                                    
                             d,t+1               1 0 0
                                                          
                                     ∼ i.i.d. N 0, 0 1 0 .                         (50)
                              x,t+1                       
                                                          
                               q,t+1                   0 0 1


Dividend model parameters used for simulations are those reported in Table II, which are

estimated based on the full data sample between 1946 and 2015. In our simulations, we use

these estimates as if they were the true parameter values. From these innovations, we can

simulate the latent variable xt and retention ratios iteratively as:


                                        xt+1 = ρxt + σ x x,t+1 ,
                                                      
                                 qt+1 − µq = θ qt − µq + σ q q,t+1 .                     (51)


Given the simulated time series of the latent variable xt and retention ratios, we can
simulate dividend growth rates iteratively as:

                                                       
                            ∆dt+1 − µd = xt + φ qt − µq + σ d d,t+1 ,

                                  ∆et+1 = ∆qt+1 + ∆dt+1 .                                 (52)



                                                      43
To simulate price-to-dividend ratios, we use (31), which is derived from our long-run risks
model.



C. Proof of Proposition 1

Let M0 be the true asset pricing model and let Mi and Mj be two candidate models.
Define t+1 = Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |M0 ]. We can write:

       h                                   i
      E (Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2
       h                         i
    = E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 + E 2t+1 − 2 · E [(Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ]) t+1 ]
                                            

       h                         i
    = E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 + E 2t+1 + 2 · E [(Et [Rt+1 |Mi ]t+1 ] − 2 · E [Rt+1 t+1 ]
                                            

       h                         i
    = E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 + E 2t+1 − 2 · E [Rt+1 t+1 ] .
                                            



Last equality assumes frictionless and efficient market and investors having rational expec-
tations. As a result, marginal investor’s investment decisions are based on all information
                                                                                     
available and so t+1 is orthogonal to any variable that is time-t measurable. E 2t+1 and
E [Rt+1 t+1 ] are independent of the model Mi and so:

            h                                  i   h                                   i
           E (Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 < E (Et [Rt+1 |M0 ] − Et [Rt+1 |Mj ])2
            h                         i      h                      i
         ⇔ E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2 < E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mj ])2
                h                         i         h                        i
              E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mi ])2          E (Rt+1 − Et [Rt+1 |Mj ])2
         ⇔ 1−      h                     i >1−        h                    i .
                E (Rt+1 − E [Rt+1 ])2               E (Rt+1 − E [Rt+1 ])2




                                               44
D. Derivation of Price-Dividend Ratios and Expected Returns in Long-Run

    Risks Model

We derive price-to-dividend ratios and expected returns implied by our long-run risk
model, which features dividend dynamics in (3), consumption dynamics in (27), and
investors preferences in (25).       Our model differs from Bansal and Yaron (2004), as
discussed in the body of the paper. Nevertheless, we can still use the methodology in
Bansal and Yaron (2004) to solve for prices and expected returns in our model. The log
stochastic discount factor is given as:

                                                ζ                   c
                            mt+1 = ζ log(δ) −     ∆c̃t+1 + (ζ − 1)R̃t+1 .                     (53)
                                                ψ


Let zc,t be the log wealth-to-consumption ratio, by first order Taylor series approximation,
log real return of the representative agent’s wealth portfolio can be written as:


                                 c
                               R̃t+1 = g0 + g1 zc,t+1 − zc,t + ∆c̃t+1 .                       (54)


The log-linearizing constants are:

                                                                       exp(z̄c )
                      g0 = log(1 + exp(z̄c )) − g1 (z̄c ) and g1 =                 .
                                                                     1 + exp(z̄c )


Assume that log wealth-to-consumption ratio is of the form:


                                        zc,t = Ac,0 + Ac,1 xt .                               (55)


Let µc = µd − µπ . Then we can write:

                                                      
     h
              c
                  i                    ζ            1
  Et mt+1 + R̃t+1 = ζ log(δ) + ζ −            µc + xt + ζg0 + ζ (g1 − 1) Ac,0 + ζ (g1 ρ − 1) Ac,1 xt ,
                                       ψ            γ
                              2
                           1
              c
vart mt+1 + R̃t+1   = ζ2 1 −      σ 2c + ζ 2 (g1 Ac,1 )2 σ 2x .                             (56)
                             ψ



                                                  45
                       c
Since Et [exp(mt+1 + R̃t+1 )] = 1, we can solve for coefficients Ac,0 , Ac,1 , and Ac,2 as:

                          log(δ) + (1 − ψ1 )µc + g0 + 12 ζ(1 − ψ1 )2 σ 2c + 12 ζ(g1 Ac,1 )2 σ 2x
                 Ac,0 =                                                                            ,
                                                         1 − g1
                                      
                                   1       1
                              1−   ψ       γ
                 Ac,1 =                        .                                                       (57)
                              1 − g1 ρ


Next, let zd,t be log price-to-dividend ratio of the stock index and R̃t+1 be log real stock
index return. Then, by first order Taylor series approximation, we can write:


                                   R̃t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zd,t+1 − zd,t + ∆d˜t+1 .                            (58)


where ∆d˜t+1 is real dividend growth rate.

    Assume that log price-to-dividend ratio is of the form:


                  zd,t = Ad,0 + Ad,1 xt + Ad,2 λt + Ad,3 (qt − µq ) + Ad,4 (∆π t − µπ ).               (59)


Then note that:

    h            i
  Et mt+1 + R̃t+1 = ζ log(δ) + (ζ − 1) (g1 − 1) Ac,0 + (ζ − 1) (g1 ρ − 1) Ac,1 xt
                                
                           ζ
                   + ζ − − 1 (µc + γxt ) + (ζ − 1) g0 + κ0 + (κ1 − 1) Ad,0 + (κ1 ρ − 1) Ad,1 xt
                           ψ
                                                                 
                   + (κ1 ω − 1) Ad,2 λt + (κ1 θ − 1) Ad,3 qt − µq + (κ1 η − 1) Ad,4 (∆π t − µπ )
                                             
                  + µc + xt + φ qt − µq − η(∆π t − µπ ).
                               ζ 2 2
                                   
vart mt+1 + R̃t+1 = ζ − 1 −             σ c + σ 2d + ((ζ − 1)g1 Ac,1 + κ1 Ad,1 )2 σ 2x
                                ψ
                                                                                        
                                                                                       ζ
                  + (κ1 Ad,2 )2 σ 2λ + (κ1 Ad,3 )2 σ 2q + (κ1 Ad,4 )2 σ 2π + 2 ζ − 1 −     σ c σ d λt
                                                                                       ψ
                                     
                                    ζ              q                    
                  +2 ζ −1−              (κ1 Ad,3 )      σ 2d + σ 2q − σ d σ c λt .                    (60)
                                   ψ




                                                       46
Based on Et [exp(mt+1 + R̃t+1 )] = 1, we can solve for Ad,0 , Ad,1 , Ad,2 , Ad,3 , and Ad,4 as:
                                                                                                                             
                                       ζ log(δ) + (ζ − 1)g0 + (ζ − 1)(g1 − 1)Ac,0                                            
                                                                                                                           
                                  ζ
                   + ζ−              − 1 µc + κ0 + µc + 12 σ 2d + 12 ((ζ − 1)g1 Ac,1 + κ1 Ad,1 )2 σ 2x
                                                                                                                             
                                 ψ                                                                                           
                                                                                                                              
                                      + 21 (κ1 Ad,2 )2 σ 2λ + 21 (κ1 Ad,3 )2 σ 2q + 21 (κ1 Ad,4 )2 σ 2π
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
                                                                          2                                                
                                                        + 21 ζ − ζ − ψζ σ 2c
         Ad,0 =                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                       1 − κ1
                                 
                              ζ       1
                      ζ −1−   ψ       γ   + (ζ − 1)(g1 ρ − 1)Ac,1 + 1
         Ad,1 =                                                   ,
                                   1 − κ1 ρ
                                         q                       
                    ζ − 1 − ψζ   (κ1 Ad,3 )    σ 2d + σ 2q − σ d + σ d σ c
         Ad,2 =                                                                                  ,
                                                1 − κ1 ω
                     φ                        −η
         Ad,3 =            , Ad,4         =          .                                                                                   (61)
                  1 − κ1 θ                  1 − κ1 η


Substituting the expression for zd,t into R̃t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zd,t+1 − zd,t + ∆d˜t+1 leads:


                Et [R̃t+1 ] = Ar,0 + Ar,1 xt + Ar,2 λt + Ar,3 (qt − µq ) + Ar,4 (∆π t − µπ ),                                            (62)


where:


          Ar,0 = κ0 − (1 − κ1 )Ad,0 + µd , Ar,1 = 1 − (1 − κ1 ρ)Ad,1 ,

          Ar,2 = −(1 − κ1 ω)Ad,2 , Ar,3 = φ − (1 − κ1 θ)Ad,3 , Ar,4 = −η − (1 − κ1 η)Ad,4 .                                              (63)


Expected real return over the next τ period is:

      τ −1                                τ −1                         τ −1                          τ −1
                                                            !                             !                           !
      X                                   X                            X                             X
                                                 Ar,1 ρs                       Ar,2 ω s                     Ar,3 θs
                                                                                                                                     
             R̃t+s+1 = τ Ar,0 +                                 xt +                          λt +                        qt − µ q
      s=0                                  s=0                           s=0                         s=0
                                          τX−1
                                                            !
                                  +              Ar,4 η s       (∆π t − µπ )                                                             (64)
                                          s=0


For nominal returns, add expected inflation based on the AR[1] model.




                                                                    47
E. Estimating ω, σ λ , and γ by the Generalized Method of Moments

The three parameters of interest in our General Method of Moments (GMM) estimation
are the AR[1] coefficient ω, volatility σ λ , which should be strictly above 0, and leverage
γ. The three moment conditions are described in (35). First, note that we can use the
third moment condition in (35) to write ω as:

                                µ ((λt+1 − µ (λt+1 ))(λt − µ (λt )))
                           ω=                                                             (65)
                                         µ λ2t − µ (λt )2
                                                          


where µ(·) is the sample mean function. Substituting in (65), we can then use the second
moment condition in (35) to write σ λ as:

                q
          σ λ = (1 − ω 2 ) µ λ2t − µ (λt )2
                                            
                v
                u                                              !2 
                          µ ((λt+1 − µ (λt+1 )) (λt − µ (λt ))) 
                u
                                                                        2           2
              = t1 −                                               µ λ   − µ (λ  )       (66)
                u
                                                                        t       t
                                   µ λ2t − µ (λt )2
                                                    



So for a given γ, we can solve for the corresponding equilibrium ω and σ λ , denoted ω ∗
and σ ∗λ , by finding ω and σ λ that are the fixed points to the system of expressions in (34),
(65), and (66). In other words, by finding these fixed points in equilibrium, the second
and third moment conditions in (35) are automatically satisfied.

   We can then solve for γ based on the first moment condition in (35), while satisfying the
equilibrium ω = ω ∗ and σ λ = σ ∗λ . We can do this numerically by maximizing l = −µ (λt )2 .



                                  [Table AI is about here.]

                                  [Table AII is about here.]

                                 [Table AIII is about here.]

                                 [Table AIV is about here.]

                                              48
[Table AV is about here.]

[Table AVI is about here.]

[Table AVII is about here.]

[Figure AI is about here.]




            49
                      β 10                 β 11                  β 12              β 13
                     0.045                0.425∗∗∗              0.184∗∗∗         -0.217∗∗∗
                    (0.054)              (0.061)               (0.064)           (0.077)

                      β0                    β1                    β2
                    -0.037                0.455∗∗∗              0.147∗∗∗
                    (0.024)              (0.070)               (0.052)


Table I: Campbell and Shiller (1988b) Betas for Predicting Dividend Growth Rates:
This table reports coefficients from predicting dividend growth rates using the vector-autoregression
specification in Campbell and Shiller (1988b). Statistics are based on non-overlapping annual data
between 1946 and 2016. Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987) standard errors that account
for up to 10 years of serial correlations. Estimates significant at 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels are
highlighted using ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.




                                 µd                     φ                σd
                                0.064                 0.140             0.015
                               (0.016)               (0.021)           (0.017)

                                                        ρ                σx
                                                      0.469             0.048
                                                     (0.168)           (0.011)

                                 µq                     θ                σq
                                0.729                 0.370             0.251
                               (0.065)               (0.120)           (0.026)


Table II: Dividend Model Parameter Estimates: This table reports estimated parameters from
our dividend model. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Reported
in parentice are bootstrap simulated standard errors.




                                                      50
                                                  In-Sample                 Out-of-Sample
                                                      R2                R2O            p-val.

                  Our Model                          0.464             0.413              0.000

     van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)                0.174             0.161              0.008

        Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                 0.278             0.256              0.001

   Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)               0.137             -0.042             1.000




                                                                  Out-of-Sample
                                                               R2I           p-val.

              van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)                0.301              0.000

                 Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                 0.212              0.002

            Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)               0.437              0.000


Table III: Dividend Growth Rates and Expected Growth Rates. The table on the top reports
R-square values for predicting dividend growth rates using our dividend model, the latent variable model
in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller (1988b), or the Markov-
switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016). The first column reports in-sample R-square
values. The second and third columns report out-of-sample R-square values and the corresponding
bootstrap simulated p-values. The table on the bottom reports incremental R-square values for predicting
dividend growth rates using our model over one of the baseline models. Dividends are estimated based on
non-overlapping annual data since 1946. In-sample (out-of-sample) statistics are based on non-overlapping
annual data between 1946 and 2016 (1975 and 2016).




                                                   51
                                     µπ                  η                σπ
                                    0.036              0.557             0.027
                                   (0.014)            (0.111)           (0.018)




                                         In-Sample               Out-of-Sample
                                             R2                 R2O        p-val.

                         Our Model            0.448             0.540             0.000


Table IV: Inflation Model Parameter Estimates and Inflation Predictability: The table on
the top reports estimated parameters from our inflation model, based on non-overlapping data between
1946 and 2016. Reported in parentice are bootstrap simulated standard errors. The table on the bottom
reports R-square values for predicting inflation rates using our inflation model. The first column reports
in-sample R-square value. The second and third columns report the out-of-sample R-square value and
the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-value. In-sample (out-of-sample) statistics are based on non-
overlapping annual data between 1946 and 2016 (1975 and 2016).




           d,t                        x,t                             q,t                  π,t

Figure 1: Impulse Response Functions of Dividend Shocks. This figure plots the changes to
real annual dividend growth rates immediately and expected real dividend growth rates over the next 10
years as a result of a unit change in shocks to the dividend process, that is, d,t , x,t , q,t , and π,t .



                                                        52
                                                    In-Sample                  Out-of-Sample
                                                        R2                  R2O           p-val.

                  Our Model                           0.424                0.395               0.000

     van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)                 0.160                0.146               0.012

        Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                  0.259                0.234               0.001

   Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)                0.172                -0.058              1.000




                                                                    Out-of-Sample
                                                                 R2I           p-val.

              van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)                   0.292                 0.000

                 Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                    0.210                 0.002

            Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)                  0.428                 0.000


Table V: Dividend Growth Rates and Expected Growth Rates (Real Rates). The table on
the top reports R-square values for predicting (real) dividend growth rates using our dividend model,
the latent variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller
(1988b), or the Markov-switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016). The first column
reports in-sample R-square values. The second and third columns report out-of-sample R-square values
and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. The table on the bottom reports incremental R-
square values for predicting dividend growth rates using our model over one of the baseline models.
Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. In-sample (out-of-sample)
statistics are based on non-overlapping annual data between 1946 and 2016 (1975 and 2016).




              µd         φ         σd         ρ           σx        µq           θ         σq
             0.078     0.076      0.067     0.036        0.041     0.061       0.068      0.080


Table VI: Speed of Learning about Dividend Model Parameters: This table reports the speed
of learning for the eight parameters in our dividend model. Speed of learning is defined as one minus the
inverse ratio between the bootstrap simulated standard errors assuming that parameters are estimated
based on data between 1946 and 2016 and the bootstrap simulated standard errors assuming that
parameters are estimated based on 10 more years of data.



                                                    53
                                                                                Baseline Model
                                           Our Model                      vBK         CS       JLM

    pt − dt      -0.130∗∗∗                            0.014
                 (0.035)                             (0.078)

    syt (L)                   4.399∗∗∗                4.748∗∗ 5.423∗∗     3.379∗∗∗ 4.160∗∗∗ 1.965∗∗
                             (0.775)                 (2.137) (2.024)     (0.850) (1.216) (0.843)

    syt (F)                               4.097∗∗∗             -1.282
                                         (1.036)               (2.100)


      R2          0.136      0.187       0.130       0.187     0.190     0.114      0.114      0.054


Table VII: Stock Index Returns and Stock Yields: This table reports the coefficient estimates
and R-square values from regressing future stock index returns on log price-to-dividend ratios and stock
yields, computed using our dividend model, the latent variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen
(2010) (vBK), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller (1988b) (CS), or the Markov-switching model
in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016) (JLM), and assuming investors either learn, that is, syt (L),
or do not learn, that is, syt (F), about dividends. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping
annual data since 1946. Regressions are based on non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016.
Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987) standard errors that account for up to 10 years of
serial correlation. Estimates significant at 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels are highlighted using ∗,
∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.




                                                     54
                                                               Baseline Model
                                     Our Model             vBK       CS       JLM

                ∆∂t+1 (L)         8.324∗∗∗                -1.800       0.229      -4.183∗∗
                                 (2.702)                  (4.147)     (6.781)     (1.787)

                ∆∂t+1 (F)                      -4.203
                                               (5.411)


                   R2             0.106         0.004      0.002       0.000        0.030


Table VIII: Stock Index Returns and Contemporaneous Shocks to Dividend Expectations:
This table reports the coefficient estimates and R-square values from regressing stock index returns on
contemporaneous shocks to long-run dividend growth rate expectations, computed using our dividend
model, the latent variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) (vBK), the VAR model in Campbell
and Shiller (1988b) (CS), or the Markov-switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016), and
assuming investors either learn, that is, ∆∂t+1 (L), or do not learn, that is, ∆∂t+1 (F), about dividends.
Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Regressions are based on
non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016. Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987)
standard errors that account for up to 10 years of serial correlations. Estimates significant at 90%, 95%,
and 99% confidence levels are highlighted using ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.




                                                                            Incremental
                                              R2          p-val.          R2I        p-val.

                  Full Info.                 0.133        0.017

         Learning about Dividends            0.253        0.001          0.138          0.015

                Full Learning                0.271        0.000          0.159          0.009


Table IX: Stock Index Returns and Expected Returns under Epstein and Zin (1989)
Preferences. This table reports out-of-sample R-square values for predicting stock index returns
using our long-run risks model, assuming investors have full information, learn about dividends, or
learn about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning, and the corresponding
bootstrap simulated p-values. Also reported are incremental out-of-sample R-square values for predicting
stock index returns assuming learning over assuming full information. Dividends are estimated based on
non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Statistics are based on non-overlapping annual data between
1975 and 2016.




                                                     55
                                                              Incremental
                                          Learning about Dividends        Full Learning
                                              RI2         p-val.         R2I         p-val.

        Kelly and Pruitt (2013)              0.140           0.045           0.152          0.036
             (1981 - 2009)
   Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013)            0.083           0.230           0.069          0.276
             (1995 - 2013)

Table X: Long-Run Risks Model and Empirical Proxies of Expected Returns. This table
reports incremental R-square values for predicting stock index returns using our long-run risks model,
assuming learning, over the proxies of expected returns in Kelly and Pruitt (2013) or Li, Ng, and
Swaminathan (2013), and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. Dividends are estimated based
on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Statistics are based on non-overlapping annual data between
1981 and 2009 for Kelly and Pruitt (2013) and between 1995 and 2013 for Li, Ng, and Swaminathan
(2013).




                                               Boom                             Recession
                                                  Incremental                         Incremental
                                    R2     p-val.  R2I  p-val.        R2      p-val.   R2I  p-val.

            Full Info.            0.132    0.029                     0.138    0.455

   Learning about Dividends       0.196    0.007     0.074   0.109   0.516    0.085    0.438   0.128

          Full Learning           0.191    0.008     0.068   0.024   0.641    0.037    0.584   0.056


Table XI: Stock Index Returns and Expected Returns under Epstein and Zin (1989)
Preferences (Expansion versus Recession). This table reports out-of-sample R-square values for
predicting stock index returns using our long-run risks model, assuming investors have full information,
learn about dividends, or learn about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning,
and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. Also reported are incremental R-square values for
predicting stock index returns assuming learning over assuming full information. Statistics are based on
non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016 and are separately reported for expansions versus
recessions. A year is in recession if any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                   56
                                                                          Incremental
                                           R2           p-val.          R2I        p-val.

                 Full Info.               0.118          0.026

        Learning about Dividends          0.144          0.013         0.030         0.276

               Full Learning              0.151          0.011         0.037         0.219


Table XII: Stock Index Returns and Expected Returns under CRRA Preferences. This
table reports out-of-sample R-square values for predicting stock index returns using our CRRA model,
assuming investors have full information, learn about dividends, or learn about all parameters in our
CRRA model, that is, full learning, and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. Also reported
are incremental R-square values for predicting stock index returns assuming learning over assuming full
information. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Statistics are
based on non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016.




                                                  57
                           Full Info.         Learning about Dividends            Full Learning

        Constant              0.016                       0.003                       0.008
                             (0.034)                     (0.013)                     (0.015)

          Slope               0.902∗∗∗                    1.203∗∗∗                    1.174∗∗∗
                             (0.246)                     (0.083)                     (0.140)


           R2                 0.135                       0.254                       0.262



                           Full Info.         Learning about Dividends            Full Learning

         syt (L)                                          3.614∗∗∗                    3.895∗∗∗
                                                         (0.772)                     (0.670)

         syt (F)              4.410∗∗∗
                             (0.103)


           R2                 0.972                       0.708                       0.661


Table AI: Stock Index Returns, Long-Run Risks Expected Returns, and Stock Yields: The
table on the top reports estimated coefficients from regressing future stock index returns on expected
returns from our long-run risks model, assuming investors have full information, learn about dividends,
or learn about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning. The table on the bottom
reports estimated coefficients from regressing expected returns from our long-run risks model, assuming
investors have full information, learn about dividends, or learn about all parameters in our long-run risks
model, that is, full learning, on stock yields, assuming investors either learn, that is, syt (L), or do not
learn, that is, syt (F), about dividends. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data
since 1946. Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987) standard errors that account for up to 10
years of serial correlations. Estimates significant at 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels are highlighted
using ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.




                                                    58
                                                Quarterly        Semi-Annual        Bi-Annual
                                                R2O  p-val.      R2O   p-val.       R2O   p-val.

                  Our Model                    0.502    0.000    0.515   0.000     0.379     0.003

      van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)         0.337    0.000    0.267   0.000     0.151     0.080

        Campbell and Shiller (1988b)           0.328    0.000    0.298   0.000     0.262     0.017

    Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)        0.075    0.079    0.001   0.855     -0.034    1.000


                                                R2I     p-val.   R2I     p-val.     R2I      p-val.

      van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)         0.212    0.002    0.311   0.000     0.268     0.015

        Campbell and Shiller (1988b)           0.222    0.002    0.281   0.000     0.158     0.073

    Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)        0.435    0.000    0.495   0.000     0.399     0.002


Table AII: Dividend Growth Rates and Expected Growth Rates (Quarterly, Semi-Annual,
and Bi-Annual Rates). The table on the top reports out-of-sample R-square values for predicting
dividend growth rates (quarterly, semi-annual, or bi-annual rates) using our dividend model, the latent
variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller (1988b), or
the Markov-switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016), and the corresponding bootstrap
simulated p-values. The table on the bottom reports incremental R-square values for predicting dividend
growth rates using our model over one of the baseline models. Dividends are estimated based on non-
overlapping annual data since 1946. Out-of-sample statistics are based on non-overlapping quarterly,
semi-annual, or bi-annual data between 1975 and 2016.




                                                  59
                                          Our Model                       Baseline Model
                       pt − dt       syt (L)    syt (F)            vBK           CS           JLM

     Quarterly        -0.033∗∗∗       0.993∗∗∗      1.101∗∗∗      0.857∗∗∗      1.183∗∗∗      0.384
                      (0.009)        (0.201)       (0.284)       (0.232)       (0.327)       (0.239)


         R2             0.032         0.035         0.032         0.026         0.029         0.007




    Semi-Annual       -0.065∗∗∗       1.894∗∗∗      2.137∗∗∗      1.686∗∗∗      2.215∗∗∗      0.912
                      (0.016)        (0.409)       (0.531)       (0.415)       (0.615)       (0.480)


         R2             0.069         0.081         0.072         0.058         0.061         0.022




     Bi-Annual        -0.281∗∗∗       9.312∗∗∗      9.311∗∗∗      7.786∗∗∗      9.063∗∗∗      4.868∗∗
                      (0.073)        (2.216)       (2.341)       (1.986)       (2.663)       (1.884)


         R2             0.258         0.299         0.263         0.231         0.208         0.120


Table AIII: Stock Index Returns and Stock Yields (Quarterly, Semi-Annual, and Bi-Annual
Returns): This table reports the coefficient estimates and R-square values from regressing future stock
index returns (quarterly, semi-annual, or bi-annual returns) on log price-to-dividend ratios and stock
yields, computed using our dividend model, the latent variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen
(2010) (vBK), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller (1988b) (CS), or the Markov-switching model in
Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016) (JLM), and assuming investors either learn, that is, syt (L), or do
not learn, that is, syt (F), about dividends. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual
data since 1930. Regressions are based on non-overlapping quarterly, semi-annual, or bi-annual data
between 1975 and 2016. Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987) standard errors that account
for up to 10 years of serial correlation. Estimates significant at 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels are
highlighted using ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.




                                                   60
                                                                            Incremental
                  Quarterly                 R2            p-val.         R2I         p-val.

                  Full Info.               0.034          0.017

        Learning about Dividends           0.051          0.003         0.018          0.079

               Full Learning               0.053          0.003         0.020          0.067


                Semi-Annual

                  Full Info.               0.070          0.015

        Learning about Dividends           0.155          0.000         0.092          0.005

               Full Learning               0.166          0.000         0.103          0.003


                 Bi-Annual

                  Full Info.               0.203          0.039

        Learning about Dividends           0.329          0.006         0.159          0.072

               Full Learning               0.405          0.002         0.253          0.019


Table AIV: Stock Index Returns and Expected Returns under Epstein and Zin (1989)
Preferences (Quarterly, Semi-Annual, and Bi-Annual Returns). This table reports out-of-
sample R-square values for predicting stock index returns (quarterly, semi-annual, or bi-annual returns)
using our long-run risks model, assuming investors have full information, learn about dividends, or learn
about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning, and the corresponding bootstrap
simulated p-values. Also reported are incremental R-square values for predicting stock index returns
assuming learning over assuming full information. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping
annual data since 1946. Statistics are based on non-overlapping quarterly, semi-annual, or bi-annual data
between 1975 and 2016.




                                                   61
                                                In-Sample                Out-of-Sample
                                                    R2                R2O           p-val.

                 Our Model                         0.319             0.258              0.001

     van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)              0.133             0.102              0.039

       Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                0.151             0.137              0.016

   Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)             0.063             -0.033             1.000




                                                                Out-of-Sample
                                                             R2I           p-val.

              van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)              0.174             0.006

                Campbell and Shiller (1988b)                0.140             0.014

            Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)             0.282             0.000


Table AV: Dividend Growth Rates and Expected Growth Rates (Extended Data Sample).
The table on the top reports R-square values for predicting dividend growth rates using our dividend
model, the latent variable model in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), the VAR model in Campbell
and Shiller (1988b), or the Markov-switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016). The first
column reports in-sample R-square values. The second and third columns report out-of-sample R-square
values and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. The table on the bottom reports incremental
R-square values for predicting dividend growth rates using our model over one of the baseline models.
Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data post Great Depression. Out-of-sample
statistics are based on non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016.




                                                 62
                                                                                     Baseline
                                              Our Model                       1         2           3

     pt − dt      -0.130∗∗∗                             -0.008
                  (0.035)                               (0.103)

      syt (L)                    3.676∗∗∗                2.953   3.928∗      2.819∗∗∗ 2.842∗∗ 1.828∗
                                (0.633)                 (2.071) (2.128)     (0.799) (1.519) (1.116)

     syt (F)                                 3.014∗∗∗             -0.666
                                            (1.127)               (1.975)


        R2          0.136       0.173       0.133       0.154      0.153    0.103      0.083      0.049


Table AVI: Stock Index Returns and Stock Yields (Extended Data Sample): This table
reports the coefficient estimates and R-square values from regressing future stock index returns on log
price-to-dividend ratios and stock yields, computed using our dividend model, the latent variable model
in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) (vBK), the VAR model in Campbell and Shiller (1988b) (CS), or the
Markov-switching model in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016) (JLM), and assuming investors either
learn, that is, syt (L), or do not learn, that is, syt (F), about dividends. Dividends are estimated based on
non-overlapping annual data post Great Depression. Regressions are based on non-overlapping annual
data between 1975 and 2016. Reported in parentice are Newey and West (1987) standard errors that
account for up to 10 years of serial correlation. Estimates significant at 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence
levels are highlighted using ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗.



                                                                               Incremental
                                               R2             p-val.        R2I         p-val.

                   Full Info.                 0.122             0.023

         Learning about Dividends             0.198             0.003       0.086         0.058

                Full Learning                 0.219             0.002       0.110         0.031


Table AVII: Stock Index Returns and Expected Returns under Epstein and Zin (1989)
Preferences (Extended Data Sample). This table reports out-of-sample R-square values for
predicting stock index returns using our long-run risks model, assuming investors have full information,
learn about dividends, or learn about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning,
and the corresponding bootstrap simulated p-values. Also reported are incremental R-square values for
predicting stock index returns assuming learning over assuming full information. Dividends are estimated
based on non-overlapping annual data post Great Depression. Statistics are based on non-overlapping
annual data between 1975 and 2016.



                                                        63
           µd                        φ                       σd                        ρ




           σx                       µq                        θ                        σq

Figure 2: Evolution of Dividend Model Parameter Estimates Over Time. This figure plots
estimates of the eight parameters in our dividend model, assuming that these parameters are estimated
based on data up to time-τ for τ between 1975 and 2016. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is
in recession if any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                 64
Figure 3: Expected Long-Run Dividend Growth Rates. This figure plots long-run dividend
growth expectations, computed using our dividend model, for the period between 1975 and 2016.
Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Assuming full information,
parameters are estimated once based on the full data sample. Assuming learning, parameters are
estimated at each point in time based on data available at the time. The shaded regions are recessions.
A year is in recession if any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                  65
Figure 4: Stock Yields. This figure plots stock yields syt , computed using our dividend model, and
log price-to-dividend ratios (scaled) for the period between 1975 and 2016. Dividends are estimated based
on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Assuming full information, parameters are estimated once
based on the full data sample. Assuming learning, parameters are estimated at each point in time based
on data available at the time. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is in recession if any of its
months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                   66
            ω                          σλ                          γ                          A0




            A1                         A2                          A3                         A4

Figure 5: Evolution of Long-Run Risks Model Parameter and Coefficient Estimates Over
Time. This figure plots estimates of the parameters in our long-run risks model, aside from those in the
dividend process, and coefficients A· that relate price-to-dividend ratios, the latent variable xt , retention
ratios, and inflation rates to expected returns, assuming that these parameters are estimated based on
data up to time-τ for τ between 1975 and 2016. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is in recession
if any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                     67
            xt                         qt                       ∆π t                        λt




     Expected Excess Stock Index Returns                               Risk Free Rate

Figure 6: Evolution of Long-Run Risks Model State Variables, Expected Excess Stock
Index Returns, and Risk Free Rate Over Time. This figure plots estimates of the state variables
of our long-run risks model, as well as expected excess returns and risk free rate from our model, assuming
full information, learning about dividends, or learning about all parameters in our long-run risks model,
that is, full learning, between 1975 and 2016. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is in recession if
any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                    68
           Learning about Dividends                                  Full Learning

Figure 7: Cumulative Sum of Squared Errors Difference. The figure on the left plots the
cumulative sum of squared errors difference (SSED) of our long-run risks model, assuming learning
about dividends, in predicting stock index returns. The figure on the right plots the SSED of our
long-run risks model, assuming learning about all parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full
learning. Dividends are estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Statistics are based
on non-overlapping annual data between 1975 and 2016. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is in
recession if any of its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




                                                  69
            Learning about Dividends                                    Full Learning

Figure 8: Incremental Gain in Cumulative Sum of Squared Errors Difference from Learning.
The figure on the left plots the incremental gain in the cumulative sum of squared errors difference (SSED)
of our long-run risks model, assuming learning about dividends versus full information. The figure on
the right plots the incremental gain in SSED of our long-run risks model, assuming learning about all
parameters in our long-run risks model, that is, full learning, versus full information. Dividends are
estimated based on non-overlapping annual data since 1946. Statistics are based on non-overlapping
annual data between 1975 and 2016. The shaded regions are recessions. A year is in recession if any of
its months overlap with NBER recession dates.




        Autocorrelation Function (ACF)                   Partial Autocorrelation Function (PACF)

Figure A1: Autocorrelation Function and Partial Autocorrelation Function of Inflation
Rate. This figure plots the autocorrelation function and partial autocorrelation function of inflation
rates, up to 10 years lag. Correlations are estimated based on data between 1946 and 2015.


                                                    70
