NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COUNTRY-SPECIFIC PREFERENCES AND EMPLOYMENT RATES IN EUROPE
Simone Moriconi
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 21561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21561

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

This paper is part of the project "Is there a Cultural Dimension of Unemployment Attitudes? Theory
and Evidence from International Migration", financed by Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
(EIEF). Work on this paper started when Simone Moriconi visited the Economics Department of the
University of California Davis, which is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Simone Moriconi and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Country-Specific Preferences and Employment Rates in Europe
Simone Moriconi and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 21561
September 2015
JEL No. J22,J61,Z10
ABSTRACT
European countries exhibit significant differences in employment rates of adult males. Differences
in labor-leisure preferences, partly determined by cultural values that vary across countries, can be
responsible for part of these differences. However, differences in labor market institutions, productivity,
and skills of the labor force are also crucial factors and likely correlated with preferences. In this paper
we use variation among first- and second-generation cross-country European migrants to isolate the
effect of culturally transmitted labor-leisure preferences on individual employment rates. If migrants
maintain some of their country of origin labor-leisure preferences as they move to different labor market
conditions, we can separate the impact of preferences from the effect of other factors. We find country-specific
labor-leisure preferences explain about 24% of the top-bottom variation in employment rates across
European countries.

Simone Moriconi
Department of Economics and Finance
Università Cattolica di Milano,
Largo Gemelli 1, 20123 Milano
simone.moriconi@unicatt.it
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

An Online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21561

1

Introduction

Beliefs, values and preferences are important determinants of human behavior including those activities with relevant consequences on the economic welfare of families and
individuals (Guiso et al. [17]). A crucial set of decisions affecting the economic and psychological welfare of individuals are related to their working decisions. Looking for a job
in the labor market, the number of hours worked in a day and weeks worked in the year
are decisions with very important economic and social consequences. Previous studies
have shown attitudes toward the family and family ties (Algan and Cahuc [3], Alesina
and Giuliano [1]) and attitudes toward women and children (Giavazzi et al., [15]) are important determinants of labor market outcomes for women and young individuals. Those
studies emphasize these attitudes are rather persistent from parents to children and differ
across cultures (countries of origin). In order to separate the role of culturally-specific
attitudes transmitted from parents to children, from other determinants of employment,
such as skills, labor demand conditions and institutions of the labor market, which are
also persistent across generations, some recent studies have used children of immigrants
(often to the United States) and linked their employment outcomes to cultural attitudes
measured in the country of origin of parents (e.g. Fernández [13], Alesina and Giuliano
[1]). Those papers have focused heavily on family relationships, the role of women, cultural attitudes towards women and their labor market participation in order to explain
the substantial increase in female labor force participation and its variation across countries.
The present paper is closely related to that literature, but asks a more direct and
straightforward question with bearing on the labor supply decisions of all individuals.
In the basic economic theory of labor supply (e.g. Borjas [7], Chapter 2) the decision to
work and the amount of labor supplied depends crucially on the relative preferences of
an individual for labor (consumption) versus leisure. One can think of these preferences
as partly idiosyncratic and partly affected by the culture and family of origin and, thus,
is transmitted across generations. In a family (culture) in which work is considered rewarding, fulfilling, and an important component of personal success, the dis-utility of
labor is perceived as low, and people may be willing to work for less and supply more
working hours. In a family (culture) in which work is considered, instead, as a burden
and unpleasant and in which people give more importance to leisure and free time, the
dis-utility of work can be high with consequences on employment decisions. While there
is clearly a culturally-based component to these preferences, a significant part is certainly
individual-specific and it may change over time with the employment experience itself.
Even having access to the individual assessment about his/her labor-leisure preferences
the endogenous component can be large. When in a successful job, a person may be more
inclined to say that he/she likes working relative to what he/she would say if employed
in an unpleasant or less successful job. Alternatively, people out of their job for reasons
independent of their will may overemphasize their preference for working, as a way of
regretting their current state. This may generate reverse causality.
This paper has three goals. First, we identify a culture-specific component of the
labor-leisure preference that is different across countries-of-origin and changes slowly
over time, so we can consider it a predetermined preference parameter. In the key part
2

of this paper we analyze whether it affects working decisions of prime-age males (rather
than of more marginally attached groups such as women and youth). Second, we isolate
(and quantify) the effect of such factors relative to other potentially correlated and transmittable factors, such as skills, language ability and other cultural values and perceptions.
Third, we assess how much of the differences in male employment-to-population ratios
across European countries, can be explained by this country-specific labor-leisure preference.
In order to answer these questions we use data from six waves of the European Social Survey (ESS), a biannual survey covering individuals in 26 European countries from
2002 to 2012. In spite of the rich information relative to individual preferences, values
and ideology contained in this survey and its relatively large size, its use among applied
economists has been scant1 . The survey contains information on the country of birth of
the respondent and of his/her father and mother. It also includes a series of labor market variables (employment, hours worked, working history), demographic information
(education, age, gender, occupation), and several questions revealing preferences, values
and beliefs of individuals. The data are representative of the population of each European
country and they include more than 20,000 respondents in each wave, with a significant
number of first- and second-generation migrants. In order to assess the labor-leisure preferences of individuals we use the following statement included in the 2010 wave of the
survey: “I would enjoy having a paid job even if I did not need the money.” The individual
could strongly agree (score of 5), agree, be neutral, disagree, or strongly disagree (score
of 1). As noted above, the current situation of an individual may affect the response to
this statement. To isolate a predetermined part of the individual’s preferences, we use
the answer to this question to extract the country-specific component of the preference.
Namely, we identify a country-specific component for this answer, as a fixed-effect on
a regression including all the native residents of a country and controlling for all their
observable characteristics. Then we associate this country-specific fixed effect with the
country of birth of the parents (father) of each individual. We focus our analysis on individuals who live in a country different from their parents’ birthplace. That is, we focus
on first- and second-generation emigrants. After controlling for individual characteristics,
observable characteristics of parents, and other characteristics of the country-of-residence
and ancestry, we interpret the coefficient on this country-specific preference as the role
of culturally-transmitted preferences about leisure on individual employment and other
measures of labor supply.
Our estimates find a statistically and economically significant effect of culturally transmitted labor-leisure preferences in determining individual employment rates and hours
worked. We focus on working-age males to avoid any family and gender relation issues. We still observe a difference of as much as 12 percentage points in employmentpopulation ratios across some European countries (Sweden – in the top 10% – has a ratio
of 0.94, while in Lithuania – in the bottom 10% – the ratio is 0.83). Using the estimated
effects of country-specific labor-leisure preferences on employment probability, we can
explain about 24% of the 90-10 percentile difference. This is a significant amount and
1 To

our knowledge only Alesina and Giuliano [1] use one wave of the survey for a robustness check of
the effect of family ties on labor supply of women.

3

contributes importantly to cross-country differences in Europe. While the emphasis in
explaining cross-European employment rates has been on labor market institutions (unemployment insurance, labor taxation, unionization) and hysteresis in shocks (see Bassanini and Duval [6] and Arpaia and Mourre [5] for reviews), we emphasize that preferences also play a non-trivial role that may explain up to one quarter of the top-bottom
differences in European employment rates.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames this paper within the
existing literature. Section 3 provides a simple theoretical framework to interpret the
empirical findings. Section 4 presents the empirical specifications and discusses issues of
identification and interpretation of the coefficients. Section 5 presents data and summary
statistics, section 6 shows the main results and Section 7 discusses some robustness checks
and extensions. Section 8 compares the results obtained in this paper with estimates of
similar effects from the literature Section 9 concludes the paper.

2

Literature Review

This paper contributes to two lines of research. One line, originating with the seminal
study of Prescott [23], analyzes the possible determinants of differences in hours worked
(and employment rates) across developed countries, contrasting the USA (with a high
number of hours and weeks worked) and Continental Europe (with a low number of
hours and weeks) and comparing potential effects of different preferences and different
tax rates. The second line of research, beginning with Algan and Cahuc [3] has analyzed,
instead, the role of culturally determined family ties and family attitudes on labor supply
of households. This literature has maintained a specific focus on women, youth and old
individuals’ labor supply. The first line of research can be cast in a very simple question:
how much of the cross-country differences in employment and hours worked is due to
distortions such as taxes, regulations and rigidities that affect the marginal pay rate and
how much is due to different preferences that affect the marginal rate of substitution between labor and leisure? The second line of research, instead, focuses on cultural values
and attitudes towards family, gender and children that differ across countries and change
slowly and may play an important role in labor supply decisions of families and in their
allocation of time. Our paper combines the very simple question of the first group of papers, with the focus on cross-country difference and cultural transmission of preferences
emphasized in the second.
Prescott [23] emphasized how lower labor supply in Europe could be fully explained
by higher marginal tax rates, leaving no roles for difference in preferences and attitudes
that affect the evaluation of labor and leisure. Such explanation, however, requires values for the elasticity of labor supply to wages much larger than those estimated in most
micro-studies. Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote [2] emphasize the crucial role of unions and
mandated holidays as coordination device that allow for longer periods of coordinated
leisure in European Countries. They also dismissed an explanation of differences based
purely on country-specific ”preferences,” as the US-Europe gap was not always present
but opened during the 1980’s a period of important policy changes. More recently, however, several authors have pointed at country-specific preferences for leisure as an impor4

tant factor in explaining employment (or unemployment) differences across European
countries. Brugger et al., [8] is probably the paper most closely related to ours. In this paper the authors use unemployment register data from Switzerland to analyze the impact
of culture on the unemployment outcomes of Swiss prime-age males. The authors distinguish a “Latin-speaking” cultural group (i.e. French, Italian, Romansh) from a “Germanspeaking” cultural group that they associate with two different attitudes/preferences towards working (more pro-leisure the first and more pro-work the second). The authors
exploit variation of unemployment at the Röstigraben i.e. the border between language
(cultural) regions which, however, is not a political border or a labor market border. At
the Röstigraben one observes differences in culture with the same exact labor market and
political institutions. The authors estimate a significant causal impact of culture on unemployment spells. While the paper is interesting and convincing, limitation due to the
Swiss case, the fact that in that context it is hard to separate culture and language which
may proxy for skills as well as culture, imply the estimates are hard to generalize.
In the literature on cultural attitudes and labor market outcomes, Algan and Cahuc [3]
were the first to investigate the role of family ties and family preferences as an explanation for the heterogeneity between employment rates of females, youth and elderly across
developed economies. The authors indicate that people in different countries have very
different attitudes with respect to females and young/old individual, and this correlates
with the employment rates of different demographic groups over the period even after
controlling for country-specific characteristics and time dummies.2 More recently, Alesina
and Giuliano [1] have studied the impact of family ties on work decisions using individual responses from the World Value Survey (WVS) on the role of the family and the attitude that children are expected to have towards their parents. Their results suggest strong
family ties are associated with higher home production, larger families, and lower labor
force participation of women and youngsters. Giavazzi et al., [15] use data from WVS
to analyze whether attitudes towards gender, youth and leisure are significant determinants of the employment rates of women and youth, and hours of work. They emphasize
the fact that even country-specific cultural attitudes change over time and use a panel
of countries and migrants to identify this country-specific, yet changing, component of
attitudes. They find perception of gender roles matters for the labor market outcomes
of female workers. While Algan and Cahuc [3] used panel regressions with controls to
argue the relationship between cultural attitudes and labor market outcomes, Alesina
and Giuliano [1] and Giavazzi et al., [15] leverage the variation of ”cultural attitudes”
within the second generation of immigrants to the US. When combined with a rich set
of individual and parental controls, variation within this group allows the researcher to
separate the cultural attitudes associated with country of ancestry from individual skills
and economic incentives affected by the country of destination. The use of migrants to
analyze these issues is sometimes called the “epidemiological approach” and has been
used extensively to analyze the link between culture and several demographic and economic outcomes (Fernández [13] and Fernández and Fogli [14]), or between culture and
2 Algan

and Cahuc [3] predict culture as the coefficients of the country fixed effects in individual level
regressions, after controlling for an extensive set of individual characteristics. These predicted coefficients
are then regressed on local employment rates, after controlling for the traditional set of LMI.

5

policy preferences (Luttmer and Singhal [19], and Algan and Cahuc [4]). Our paper is the
first to use data on cross-country inter-European migrants to extract the country-specific
preferences towards work/leisure as collected by the European Social Survey (ESS) and
to tackle directly the question of how country-specific preferences affect employment and
hours worked, how such effects compare with the effect of skills, institutions and labor
demand, solving the hard issue of reverse causality.

3

Theoretical Framework

In this section we present a framework, rooted in the simplest textbook model of labor demand and supply, that allows us to give a foundation to our empirical analysis. It
also helps provide an interpretation (although not fully structural) to the estimated coefficients. We consider a simple, representative agent static model that produces an equilibrium prediction about the individual labor supply that can be interpreted as fraction of
total time worked, or as probability of working.

3.1

Labor Supply

Consider an individual i of type o, which denotes his culture of origin, working in
country r (for residence). This individual splits his/her time endowment, which we standardize to 1 for convenience, between supply of labor in the measure of li and leisure,
in the measure of 1 − li .3 The choice of li is made in order to maximize a utility function which depends positively on consumption ci and negatively on the amount of labor
supplied li as follows:
η

Ui = θio ciδ − li

(1)

For simplicity, we assume the parameters δ and η (≥ δ) are between 0 and 1 and common to all individuals so that the marginal utility of consumption is positive and decreasing and the marginal utility of labor is negative and also decreasing in absolute value.
The term θio captures the individual preference for consumption relative to leisure, which
we call the preference for working or for labor versus leisure. This preference is specific to
individual i and we assume that it has a component that depends on the culture of origin
o, common to all individuals from that culture of origin, and an idiosyncratic component
that varies across individuals and may be correlated with other individual characteristics
such as their education, ability, or innate characteristics. With this assumption the ”laborleisure preference” can be decomposed as: θio = θ o ∗ θi . In particular we assume that θ o
and θi are orthogonal in logs, and the logarithm of θi has 0 mean so the expected value of
log(θio ) is equal to log(θ o ). We use this property and write log θio = log(θ o ) + log(θi ). One
important thing is the idiosyncratic component log(θi ) may not be orthogonal to other
3 If

time is continuous one can think of li as fractions of hours worked every day. If there are indivisibilities of labor one can think of li as fraction of weeks worked in a year. This would translate, when we
observe data about employment in a specific week, into the probability of working (being employed) that
week.

6

characteristics of the individual (such as the productivity ei introduced below). This implies part of the correlation between log θio and labor supply can be due to correlation
with the unobserved component of ei . However, by construction, the country-of-origin
component of preferences, log(θ o ), is orthogonal to individual characteristics as it does
not depend at all on them; only on the country of origin.
We assume individuals have only labor income and they consume all of it in one period (that can be considered as one year). This implies the following budget constraint:
ci = li wior where wior is the wage (yearly earnings) earned by an individual i from culture of origin o in country of work and residence r. Substituting this constraint into the
utility function (1) and maximizing with respect to li we obtain the labor supply for the
individual worker i of origin/culture o in country of residence r as interior solution of the
optimization problem:
lior

  1
δ η −δ η −1 δ γ
θio wior
=
η

(2)

The expression (2) is a log-linear individual labor supply that depends on individual
1
η −δ

labor-leisure preferences, θio and on the individual wage wior with an elasticity equal to
δ
γ = η−
δ = 0 that captures how individual supply of labor responds to the wage rate.
Such elasticity is positive but typically small in the order of 0.1 to 0.2. The larger the
labor-leisure preference θio , the larger is the labor supply of an individual.

3.2

Labor demand

We consider all individuals of origin o as perfect substitutes in production. However,
we allow the productivity of each individual i to be different and captured by a scalar
term ei that depends on the skills of the individual (education, age, occupation, as well as
some non-observable features such as innate ability and effort). We can call this term the
individual labor effectiveness. Hence, we define the aggregate effective labor input from
individual of origin o in country of residence r as:
lor =

∑ ei lior

(3)

i

We also assume the production function of the final good in country r, Yr , can be
expressed (as in Card, [9]) as a constant returns to scale aggregation of workers from
different countries of origins. In particular, we allow some characteristics of country of
origin such as the quality of its schools, the prevailing culture, religion or set of beliefs,
to affect productivity of workers through the term Ao in the same way across countries
of residence. Finally, the country of residence may have specific productivity level Ar
affecting all workers employed there. The aggregate production will be as follows:
!
Yr = Ar

∑ Ao lor
r

7

(4)

In equation (4) the term Ar captures technological and institutional factors of country
r that affect the efficiency and productivity of the country and its labor demand. Similarly, Ao captures common characteristics of workers from culture of origin o that affect
their productivity. We have assumed perfect substitutability between workers of different countries of origin and skill, but the framework can easily extend to imperfect substitutability of immigrants and natives or workers of different skills (as in Ottaviano and
Peri [21], or in Ottaviano and Peri [22]). In case of imperfect substitutability, the final
expression will include an extra term that depends on the relative supply of immigrants
and natives, or of different skill groups. Taking the marginal productivity of worker i
from culture/country of origin o working in country r and assuming that in equilibrium
this has to equal the wage the worker is paid, we obtain the following labor demand
condition:
wior = ei Ar Ao

(5)

This condition implies an horizontal labor demand for each individual i of culture of
origin o in residence r. It essentially allows for the (marginal) productivity of a worker to
depend on three components. First, it depends on individual observable and unobservable abilities, ei , determined by his/her schooling, ability, experience and skills. Second,
it depends on the productivity of the country of residence, Ar , that vary with institutions, labor market conditions, demand, technology and efficiency in that country. Third,
it depends on persistent characteristics of the country/culture of origin, Ao that affect
productivity of individuals from that culture, such as work ethic, values, language and
beliefs.

3.3

Equilibrium Employment and Estimating equation

If we substitute the marginal productivity expression (5) into the individual labor
supply (2) we obtain the following equilibrium relation, representing the crossing point
(equilibrium) of an upward sloping labor supply and an horizontal labor demand. The
relationship represents how individual time worked as a fraction of total time available
(or the probability of working) is related to individual preferences and determinants of
productivity:
lior

  1
δ η −δ η −1 δ γ γ γ
θio ei Ar Ao
=
η

(6)

Taking the logarithm on both sides of equation (6) and substituting the expression of
ln(θio ) with its decomposition into the culture-of-origin-specific and idiosyncratic/individual
components we obtain:
ln(lior ) = α + β ln(θ o ) + β ln(θi ) + γ ln (ei ) + γ ln Ar + γ ln( Ao )
(7)
  1
η −δ
1
In expression (7) the parameter α equals ln ηδ
and the parameter β equals η −
δ.
The variable ln(lior ) measures (the logarithm of) the fraction of time (year) worked by
8

individual i with culture of origin o who resides and works in country r. The variable
ln(θ o ) captures the country-of-origin specific preference for working which is culturally
determined, slow to change, and most importantly, uncorrelated with the individualspecific part β ln(θi ). Hence, this variable can be used to identify the effect of culturallydetermined labor-leisure preferences on the labor supply as long as those preferences do
not affect other aspects of the labor market. While one might guess the labor-leisure preferences – specific to country o – may affect the labor market institutions and regulations
of country o itself, the impact on employment of individuals of culture o working in a
different country, r is likely mediated by preferences alone. By considering first- and
second-generation migrants, for whom r 6= o, we are able to isolate such an effect. We
describe in the next section how we implement empirically and estimate the theoreticallymotivated equation (7) and the threats to the identification of parameter β, capturing the
impact of country-specific labor-leisure preferences on employment probability and time
worked, and how we address them.

4

Empirical Implementation and Discussion of Identification

We use equation (7) as the basis for our empirical analysis. This equation also provides the structure to discuss important issues of estimation, identification and potential
biases. First, let us emphasize that we are interested in the estimates of parameter β in
(7). This parameter captures the causal impact of culture-of-origin specific preferences,
ln(θ o ) on employment outcomes for individual i from culture o working in country r 6= o
(the specification including migrants only is the preferred one). Notice that in equation
(7) the parameter β is also the coefficient of the term ln(θi ), capturing individual laborleisure preferences. The problem with including the measure of individual preferences
to identify the causal impact on employment is that individual preferences can be correlated with the unobserved component of skills and abilities, the term ln (ei ), so that the
estimated coefficient on ln(θi ) can be a combination of β and γ. For instance, if more
motivated people are more likely to produce more effort at work and to value labor more
than leisure, then this non-observable characteristic will generate a positive correlation
between ln(θi ) and ln (ei ), inducing a bias in the estimate of β. To measure labor-leisure
preferences for an individual, ln(θi ), we use a dummy equal to one if the person strongly
agrees with the statement “I would enjoy having a paid job even if did not need the money” and
equal to 0 otherwise. Then, in order to ”extract” the country-specific component, ln(θ o ),
we regress the individual preferences on a set of controls for individual and parental
characteristics (identical to those used in the regressions in Table 2) and country-specific
dummies. This regression is performed only on data of the 2010 wave of the ESS which
was the only one in which the question relative to labor-leisure preferences was posed.
The coefficient on the country-specific variable are taken as the country-specific component of the preferences. In the regression below these values are attached to the country
of origin of parents of the individuals in the survey as capturing the ”culture of origin”

9

effect on working preferences of an individual ln(θ o )4 .
In our main empirical specification the outcome of interest – a proxy for the fraction
of time worked – ln(lior ) in expression (7), is either a dummy for working/not working in
the reference week, e or the logarithm of hours worked, ln(h). The key explanatory variable is the culture of origin labor-leisure preference calculated as described above that
we call (work pre f erence)o and varies across country of origin, o, but not across individuals and years. The corresponding variable at the individual level is (work pre f erence)ior ,
which includes culture-specific, as well as the idiosyncratic, terms. The units of observation for our regressions are individuals i from country of origin o resident of country r
in year t that corresponds to the survey years. In most regression we limit our analysis
to the first and second generation migrants, hence o 6= r, and we consider as culture of
origin the country of birth of the parents of the individual. Hence the basic estimated
specification is:
eiort = a + b(work pre f erence)o + φrt + b1 Xit + b2 XitParents + b3 Cot + b4 Valuesit + ε irot (8)
The dependent variable eiort is the measure of employment (probability of being employed or the logarithm of hours worked) for individual i from culture o resident in country r in year t. The coefficient of interest, b, captures the impact of culture-of-origin preferences for labor versus leisure (work pre f erence)o . The term φrt indicates a set of country
of residence by year fixed effects. This rich set of fixed effects captures the term ln Ar in
equation (7) and its variation over time. In particular, policies, institutions, endowments,
laws and demand shocks in the country of residence that affect employment in any way
are absorbed by this term. The variable Xit controls for the observable individual characteristics (age, schooling, marital status, children) that are important observable determinants of productivity and efficiency (the term ln (ei ) in equation (7)) while the parental
characteristics XitParents (education and occupation of the father) are also likely to affect human capital inputs and hence other aspects of ln (ei ). The term Cot captures some country
of origin characteristics that potentially affect individual unobserved human capital and
productivity (such as quality of schooling in the country of origin, language, income per
person of country of origin) and that may be correlated with the culture of origin preference for working. That term captures the term ln Ao in equation (7). Finally, the vector
Valuesit includes measures of other individual preferences that have been characterized
by previous studies as ”culturally transmitted” and can be correlated with work attitudes
and employment outcomes (e.g. trust, religious attitudes). Their inclusion allows us to
narrow the effect of (work pre f erence)o to be interpreted as the specific effect of laborleisure preferences (and not of generic cultural traits). The term ε irot is a zero-average
idiosyncratic error, capturing measurement error and other unobservable characteristics
affecting employment of individuals.
Let us emphasize that given the arbitrary units of the variable (work pre f erence)o we
only estimate the ”reduced form” parameter b. It expresses directly the link between
culture-of-origin preferences and individual outcomes, rather than estimating a two-stage
4 The

coefficients for this auxiliary regression are reported in Appendix B. As expected, education is
positively related with the preference for working and age is negatively correlated with it.

10

specification in which culture of origin is a proxy (instrument) for individual labor-leisure
preferences. The identifying assumption in equation (8) is that, conditional on the other
individual, parental and country of residence controls, the culture of origin preferences
for labor and leisure affect individual employment in the country of residence only via
his/her own preferences. To strengthen our confidence in this strategy we provide a series of robustness checks and ”placebo” tests of the main hypothesis. Moreover, in our
preferred specifications we only use migrants, for which the unobservable characteristics
of the country of origin do not affect labor market conditions in the country of work (residence). The use of migrants’ behavior to separate the effects of ”culturally transmitted”
versus ”environment driven” behavior is sometimes referred to as the “epidemiological”
approach (see e.g. Fernández [13]). The migration decision allows to isolate the cultural
incentives (associated with the country of origin of the migrant) and distinguish them
from the economic incentives (determined by the country of destination of the migrant).

5

Data and descriptive statistics

Our primary data source is the European Social Survey (ESS). This is a multi-country
survey, which was administered in 6 waves (one every two years) in 36 countries between
2002 and 2012. The data include detailed information on personal and family characteristics such as age, gender, education, marital status, number of children in the family, place
of birth and labor market characteristics such as employment status and work characteristics. It also includes detailed information on the parental background, such as parents’ education, employment status, occupation when the respondent was 14 years old and their
country of birth . Finally, the data include detailed information on individual preferences
and beliefs (such as the degree of integration in society, attitudes on some social issues,
religious sentiment, self-interest, work and family values). We include in our analysis all
6 waves of the survey covering the period 2002-2012. The last five waves (i.e. ESS2-ESS6)
include identifiers for father’s and mother’s country of birth as well as the year of immigration (the first wave only includes information on the continent of birth of the father
and the mother). This information allows us to identify individuals that are not resident
in the country where their parents were born and hence are first- or second-generation
migrants. In particular, we focus on the country of birth of the father as identifier of the
”culture of origin” of an individual. We will provide checks using the mother’s country of
origin and we will analyze the effect of having both parents foreign-born versus one only.
In contrast to the ”migrants,” we call natives those individuals that are resident in the
country of birth of the father. Let us emphasize that in many European countries secondgeneration migrants do not necessarily have the citizenship of the country of residence
because of the prevalence of the ”ius sanguinis” in transmitting citizenship rights. Hence,
by considering first-and second-generation migrants as belonging to the same culture of
origin, we acknowledge a potentially slow process of cultural assimilation in Europe that
our results will confirm.
Besides a set of core questions on values, attitudes and beliefs, each ESS wave includes
a rotating component. In particular, the 2010 ESS wave included a question describing
individual attitudes towards work in some detail. Respondents were asked to what extent
11

they agreed with the following statement: “I would enjoy having paid job even if I did not
need money”. The corresponding variable is coded by us from 1 to 5 where 1 stands for
“disagree strongly”, 2 for “disagree”, 3 for “neither agree nor disagree”, 4 for “agree” and
5 for “agree strongly”. We use this answer in several different ways. First, we use the
index directly as a measure of the preference of labor versus leisure. Then, we construct a
variable equal to one if the person agrees or strongly agrees with the statement and zero
otherwise. Finally, we code it in a more conservative way, by classifying as equal to one
only people who ”strongly agree” with the statement. All three variables are positively
associated with the preference of labor versus leisure. As described in section 4 above, we
identify the culture-specific component of this preference as the coefficient on the countrydummy after controlling for individual and parental characteristics in a regression with
native individuals only and, as dependent variable, one of the measures of labor-leisure
preference described above, most frequently we use the dummy variable equal to one for
individual who ”strongly agree”.
Our dataset covers 26 countries during the period 2002-2012.5 We exclude observations with missing information on basic individual or father characteristics, and we also
exclude observations of immigrants from countries not included in our sample (i.e. outside Europe). We only include working-age individuals (between 15 and 64 years old), we
exclude individuals who are disabled, in school, retired and people serving in the armed
forces. Finally, we focus only on males. They are often the head of household and have
high attachment to the labor market. This avoids gender and family issues that have been
studied extensively by other authors in connection with culture and labor market decisions (e.g. Fernández and Fogli [14], and Alesina and Giuliano [1]). Our final sample
includes 55, 742 individuals (males aged 15 − 64) of which 53, 068 are natives, 1, 471 are
first-generation migrants and 1, 203 are second-generation migrants.
Table 1 describes some aggregate characteristics of the main dependent variables and
of the explanatory variables and demographic controls of the sample, separately for native, immigrants and for the whole population. We see that, in the aggregate, 10% of the
sampled population strongly agrees with the statement about enjoying paid work and
50% either agrees or strongly agrees. The statement of ”strong agreement” reveals a clear
preference for working and is chosen by a minority (10%), thus, it is a more stringent way
of characterizing the preference for labor versus leisure. These percentages in aggregate
are quite similar for natives and migrants of first or second generation.
In terms of the outcome variables, the employment probability (rate) is on average
about 0.9; however, it exhibits (as we will see below) large cross-country variation. Hours
of work is, on average, 1 full time equivalent (i.e. 40 hours), while the current unemployment probability in the reference week was about 9% and the probability of ever being
unemployed for 12 months or more was about 13%. About 40% of the sample has some
5 We exclude all countries that do not appear in ESS5, as this is the only wave that includes our variable of

interest. We also exclude countries that do not appear at least in two waves and have fewer than 10 people
as emigrants. In the end, the countries in our sample are the following: Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK,
and Ukraine. See the on-line Appendix for details of the construction and harmonization of the aggregate
ESS dataset.

12

tertiary education, while 44 percent has at least some secondary education. We consider
”prime-age” individuals as those between 20 and 50 years of age among all working-age
males. They constitute 72% of all workers in the sample. Finally, about two-thirds of individuals are married and the majority live in households with children. The aggregate
characteristics of the sample of natives and migrants reveal the two groups are rather
similar, with a greater tendency for first-generation migrants to be married and to come
from more educated and entrepreneurial families.
[TABLE 1 AROUND HERE]
Table 2 reports means and standard deviations of employment rates for working-age
native male workers and for workers in the 20-50 years old range for each country in the
sample, averaging across years. Average employment rates display considerable crosscountry variation. Even considering only prime-age males their employment/population
ratio varies from about 0.95 (in Norway and Switzerland) to less than 0.80 (in Croatia
and Bulgaria). Usually, Continental European, UK and Nordic countries show relatively
high employment rates (above the sample average of 90%), and low employment rate
dispersion (below the sample average of 30%). On the other side, Mediterranean European countries, and countries from Central and Eastern Europe (with the exception of the
Czech Republic) are characterized by low average employment rates and high employment rate dispersion.
[TABLE 2 AROUND HERE]
Before presenting the empirical analysis, we show two important features of the data
using simple graphs. They suggest labor-leisure preferences have a component common to all people with the same culture of origin and that this component is correlated with the employment behavior of migrants from that culture of origin6 . Figure 1
shows an interesting scatterplot and linear correlation. On the horizontal axis we report
the country-specific component of labor-leisure preferences, estimated as the coefficient
on the country-fixed effect in the regression of native-only preferences (captured by the
dummy ”strongly agree” with ”I would enjoy having paid job even if I did not need money”)
after controlling for all individual and parental characteristics. On the vertical axis we
report the country-of-origin effect in the labor-leisure preferences (after controlling for
country of residence effects) for migrants only. We see from the graph a statistically significant positive correlation (coefficient equal to 0.12 and standard error equal to 0.06)
between the labor-leisure preference of natives and migrants from the same culture of
origin. When constructing the vertical axis variable we only include migrants outside the
country of origin, hence the correlation is not driven by exposure to common labor market conditions or common institutions. That correlation has to derive from the fact that
emigrants share preferences with people in their country of origin.
[FIGURE 1 AROUND HERE]
The second correlation, shown in Figure 2, is between the culture-of-origin, laborleisure preferences, reported in the horizontal axis and measured exactly as in Figure 1
and the employment rate of emigrants from the same culture-of-origin, aggregating all
6 We

omit Bulgaria in the scatterplots. The labor-leisure average preference for this country is a big
outlier, raising some doubts on the actual comparability of answers between this and other countries. In
the regressions, however, we include Bulgaria, and also check robustness of the results after dropping it.

13

destinations. While there is a large amount of noise and variation, produced by many
other confounding factors, we see a positive correlation that indicates (male, working
age) emigrants from countries with higher labor-leisure preferences have a higher probability of being employed when abroad, wherever they are. The OLS linear coefficient
is equal to 0.38 with a standard deviation of 0.27, hence not quite significant but suggestive of a positive association. Figure 3, finally, shows the correlation of culture-of-origin
labor-leisure preferences with employment of natives in their own country of origin. A
much lower correlation is detected. While the empirical analysis will be able to control for several other factors and isolate a potential causal effect more precisely, the scatterplots help to understand the importance of using emigrants to separate the impact
of culture-of-origin preferences on employment from that of other factors and reverse
causality. Consider, reasonably, that the question on labor-leisure preferences reveals a
part of culturally-based attitudes and also a part that reflects current labor market opportunities. In countries with relatively poor job perspectives one can think that, given
their basic attitudes, people would ”long” for a job and represent a more positive attitude
towards working. This would imply a negative correlation between current employment
and the endogenous part of labor-leisure preferences. However, such a component is not
present in emigrants who retain the culturally transmitted part of the preference, but are
exposed to different labor market conditions depending on the country of residence so the
potential reverse effect from employment to attitudes is averaged out. Hence, the correlation between country-of-origin preferences and emigrant employment isolates the part
working through preferences (causal) and averages out the part due to reverse causality.
In showing this, Figure 2 and 3 already illustrate the important role of the migrant-based
”epidemiological approach” in isolating the effect of preferences, and show a strengthening of the correlation between labor-leisure preference and employment in emigrants,
suggestive of a reduced role for reverse causality among migrants.
[FIGURE 2 AND 3 AROUND HERE]
To complete the description of the data sources, the country level indicators on economic conditions (i.e. economic performance and growth, labor market performance,
and income inequality), and education quality (i.e. expenditure in education, enrollment
rates, pupils-to- teachers ratios, and PISA scores) were obtained from World Bank and
OECD data. More details on the construction of the variables and on the data sources are
contained in the Data Appendix).

6

Main results: the effect of labor-leisure preferences

[TABLE 3 AROUND HERE]
In Table 3 we show the main results of the paper. In Row (c) and below we report the
estimates of the coefficient on the variable (work pre f erence)o that captures the cultureof-origin preference for working, measured as the coefficient on the country fixed effect
of the auxiliary regression described in section 4. Specifications from Column [1] to Column [3] include progressively more controls. In Column [1] we only include countryof-residence-by-year fixed effects, capturing all its institutional and economic features,

14

and removing them from the partial correlation analyzed. In Column [2], we add controls for individual characteristics, namely age, education, marital status, a dummy for
the presence of children living in the household and a dummy for being in the country
fewer than 20 years. These characteristics may clearly affect productivity and preferences,
and have an impact on employment probability. In Column [3], we include additional
controls for parental characteristics, namely father’s education, employment status and
occupation when respondent was 14 years old. Some unobservable human capital characteristics of individuals derive from parental investment, which these controls allow us
to account for. The first two lines (a and b) of Table 3 show the coefficient on the variable
(work pre f erence)i , the individual labor-leisure preference captured as a dummy equal
to one when the individual strongly agrees with the statement “I would enjoy having paid
job even if I did not need money”. As discussed above the individual preference is likely to
have an idiosyncratic – and potentially endogenous – part, as well as a culturally determined, more persistent part captured by (work pre f erence)o . While the estimates in Row
(c) and below can be interpreted as the effect of culture-of-origin preferences on employment probability, the estimates in Rows (a) and (b) show how relevant endogeneity and
omitted variable bias is in affecting the correlation at the individual level.
The dependent variable in each specification of Table 3 is a dummy equal to one if the
person is working during the reference week and zero otherwise. The estimates of Row
(a) show that there is a significant negative correlation between the individual statement
about work preference and the probability of being employed. This estimate include both
native and migrants and is stable across the increasingly demanding specifications. It reveals that individuals who are less likely to be employed are more likely to state that they
enjoy having a paying job. Clearly, frustration with unemployment and non-employment
or perceived job insecurity (see Dickerson and Green [11]) may be a reason for individuals
to overstate their preference for work. Alternately, unobserved individual characteristics,
such as a lack of practical sense, may negatively affect employment chances as well as
lead them to overemphasize their enjoyment of work. Both of these problems would induce a spurious negative correlation between employment and their stated preferences
for labor-leisure. This issue is present even when we restrict the sample to migrants only
(as we do in Row (b)): their individual characteristics and experience may affect both their
statement and their employment probability. Instead, things change when we assign to
individuals the average preference for work from his culture of origin (as show in Row
(c)). We identify a very strong positive and statistically significant effect of labor preference on employment if we limit our analysis to migrants (as done in Row (d)). Using
the more conservative estimate from Column [3], an increase by 0.05 in the country-oforigin preference for work, which is as large as one standard deviation across countries
and equal to about half the difference between the preferences of people from Spain and
Norway, would imply a difference in employment probability by 3.5 percentage point for
males. This is about 70% of the actual difference in employment rates of males between
Spain (0.9) and Norway (0.95).
Specifications (e) and (f) capture the country-of-origin preference for work using different codifications of the variable that states individual’s preferences. In (e), individual
preferences are associated with a dummy equal to one if he/she agrees or strongly agrees
with the statement (rather than only ”strongly agree”) about enjoying work. Hence, this
15

captures a somewhat weaker preference for work, and may add some attenuation in that
the majority of people are likely to have a dummy equal to one (see the average of this
variable in Table 1). The standard deviation of this variable across countries is about
0.15. In line (f), we use the initial index ranging from 1 to 5 (from strong disagreement
to strong agreement) directly. In this case, the standard deviation across countries is 0.32,
larger than for the other two measures. Both measures strongly confirm the findings from
Row (d). Row (e) shows coefficients between 0.2 and 0.225, while Row (f) shows values
around 0.11. For one standard deviation of the variable capturing country-of-origin work
preference, both estimates imply an impact on employment rate of between 3 and 3.5
percentage points.
In Specifications (d) to (f) we have only considered a cross section of individuals in
year 2010, the year in which the question on work preferences is asked in the survey.
Estimates in Row (g) and below include individuals in all waves (from 2004 to 2012)
in the analysis. The variable (work pre f erence)o is still calculated using 2010 data, thus
we assume the country-of-origin preferences for working are stable enough to be a good
proxy for the whole decade. Some studies, such as Giavazzi et al. [15], emphasize that
cultural preferences evolve over time, and may evolve differently in different countries.
In our case, we focus on the cross-country differences in these preferences and the analysis
is limited to one decade – a reasonable period over which we can consider them constant.
Row (g) includes male natives and immigrants in the regression, while Rows (h) and (i)
consider only male migrants. Row (i) focuses on a large group of male migrants aged 2050, the group with higher employment rates in our surveys. The effect of culture-of-origin
preferences are always estimated to be very significant and positive. The coefficient is
somewhat smaller than when estimated for 2010, but it is more precisely estimated as we
leverage a much larger sample. Estimates from Row (h) suggest an increase in preference
for work by one standard deviation in the culture of origin is associated with a 2 to 2.5
percentage point higher employment rate.
[TABLE 4 AROUND HERE]
In Table 4, we focus on the specification used in Row (h) of Table 1, which includes
only migrants and looks at the entire period from 2004 to 2012, and considers different
measures of individual labor supply. In Panel A of Table 4, we use the logarithm of hours
worked in a year as dependent variable and we either consider only employed people
(Row a) or all working-age individuals (Row b). These estimates show a significant impact of country-of-origin preferences for work on the intensive margin of hours worked
for employed people. Estimates in Row (b), which account for both the extensive (employment) and intensive (hours per worker) margins of labor supply, suggest a one standard deviation increase in preferences for work is associated with an increase in hours of
work by about 0.02 full-time equivalents, about 1 hour of work per person.
In Panel B of Table 4 we show the estimates when considering various measures of
unemployment and non-employment as the dependent variable. In particular, these measures relate the country-of-origin preference with ”cumulated” non-employment over the
lifetime of a person. In Row (c), the outcome is being currently unemployed; in Row (d)
it is a dummy for having ever had a 3-to-12 month unemployment spell; and in Row (e)
it is a dummy for having experienced at least one unemployment spell lasting more than
16

12 months. Row (f) considers never having had a paid job as the outcome. The impact
of the country-of-origin preference for work on all these measures of non-employment is
negative and very significant. People from countries of origin with a greater preference
for work are less likely to be unemployed as migrants, and are less likely to have a history
of unemployment or non-employment. This is in line with the idea that the country-oforigin preference for work has a deep and lasting effect on the labor supply of individuals
as migrants.

6.1

Cultural Integration and Cultural Transmission

[TABLE 5 AROUND HERE]
Assimilation into the culture of the country of residence is certainly a process that may
attenuate the influence of the country-of-origin preferences on the behavior of migrants.
Estimates in Tables 3 and 4 consider all migrants together. In this section we separate
them according to some of their characteristics to test whether assimilation in the country
of residence affects the strength of the culture of origin on employment of migrants. A
long period of residence in the host country and more open attitudes towards assimilation into a different culture are features that should affect the degree of assimilation of
migrants. In Table 5, we analyze this issue by partitioning migrants into groups with different characteristics that should be related to their degree of assimilation. By estimating
different coefficients across groups that differ according to these characteristics, we infer
the change in the effect of culture of origin under different degrees of assimilation. The
ESS includes variables that are likely to capture important determinants of assimilation.
The first is the length of time the immigrant has been in the country. Immigrants that
spent a long time in the country of residence and interacted for many years with natives
are more likely to absorb some aspects of the local culture. The second dimension along
which we partition immigrants is their citizenship. The restrictive conditions on obtaining citizenship in European countries (e.g. by marriage, or naturalization) require great
effort from immigrants, a commitment to integrate, and to have long-term residence in
the country. Moreover, the benefits of citizenship can be rather limited for the group we
are considering as they are intra-European migrants, many of which already have access
to most of the rights of citizenship via EU or intra-Schengen agreements.7 Hence, only
immigrants with a strong commitment to their host country, or their children, may decide
to become citizens. A final important feature we consider is immigrants’ own attitude and
inclination to become integrated with the culture of the country of residence. One piece
of information to evaluate the migrants’ attitude is their answer to the question whether
they consider important “understanding different people”. An affirmative answer to this
question probably implies a more open attitude toward different people and cultures. We
interpret this variable as a proxy for the migrant’s individual openness to integration.8
7 Conversely, benefits of acquiring citizenship of the residence country can be relatively high (e.g. in
terms of easiness of getting a work permit) for immigrants coming from countries outside of the Schengen
area. In our sample these are Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Israel, Ukraine and Russian Federation.
8 This may be an imperfect measure of the openness to cultural assimilation. Other measures of such
attitude could be questions related to “speaking the residence language”, “respecting a Host Country’s

17

We split the sample in two groups along the three characteristics described above, analyzed individually, and present the results in Panels A, B and C of Table 5. In each panel,
we report first the coefficient on the preference for work from a regression with the employment probability as dependent variable, conditional on the relevant measure of cultural integration (denoted by (i) in each panel). Then we report the estimated coefficients
when interacting preferences for work with two dummies describing the heterogeneity
in each dimension (denoted by (ii)). For this second set of regressions, we also show the
p-value of a test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the two interactions are
equal.9
First, in each panel we find a significant and positive coefficient of the country-oforigin preference for work, even after controlling for assimilation using our proxy variables. Second, in each of the three cases considered, there is some evidence assimilation
reduces the effect of culture of origin on the probability of employment. Panel A(ii) shows
the effect of culture of origin on employment is strong and stable only for workers who
spent less than 20 years in the country of residence. The coefficient of this effect in the
more conservative specification [3] is equal to 1.01 with a standard error equal to 0.08.
Workers who lived in the host country more than 20 years do not exhibit any significant
effect of country-of-origin work preference on employment after controlling for individual and parental characteristics. The p-value on a test of equal coefficients suggests the
difference in the effects between long-time (more than 20 years) and recent (less than 20
years) immigrants is significant at the 1% level. In Panel B(ii) specification [3] we see, after
controlling for individual characteristics, having the citizenship of the host country does
not seem to reduce the impact of the country-of-origin culture. The estimated coefficient
is 0.44 for non-citizens and 0.32 for citizens, with the difference between the two coefficients being not statistically significant. Finally, Panel C(ii) suggests individuals who
attribute importance to the statement ”it is important to understand different people” are less
affected by their culture of origin in their employment (coefficient 0.39) relative to those
stating that it is not important to understand different people (coefficient of 0.75), with
the difference being significant at the 1%. The variable can be considered a measure of
the openness of an individual to others and, specifically, to the culture of the host country.
Hence, it may affect the likelihood and speed of integration.
Overall, these checks confirm that country-of-origin preferences for working have an
important impact on the probability of employment, and that assimilation may be slow:
the culture of origin may affect employment behavior, especially for individuals who do
not obtain citizenship and are not naturally inclined to adjust to other people’s view. This
effect may persist long after the decision to migrate to a different country: on average, an
individual who has lived more than 20 years in the host country does not exhibit much
effect from country-of-origin preferences on their probability of being employed.
[TABLE 6 AROUND HERE]
In Table 6, we analyze the issue of intergenerational transmission of preferences lookLaw” . These questions, however, are asked in other survey data (e.g. the European Value Study) but not
in the ESS (see Litina et al. [18]).
9 Notice that we focus on the entire pool of migrants. In fact, distinguishing between first and second
generation would entail a large reduction of the number of observations available in each cell.

18

ing more closely at the second generation of migrants. The table shows the effect of
country-of-origin preference on the employment outcomes of second-generation immigrants only. In the analysis we separate the culture of origin effect between individuals
with either an immigrant father, an immigrant mother, or both. We focus on whether
having a native parent (i.e. born in the country of residence) significantly reduces the
culture of origin effect on the second generation. A native parent may certainly increase
the effectiveness of assimilation into the culture and values of the country of residence.
At the same time, a native parent may also have an impact on employment opportunities
independent of the culture of origin, by transferring country-specific skills and network
connections that are useful for productivity and the job finding. In Panel A, we consider
the case of second-generation immigrants with an immigrant father by giving these individuals the working preference in their father’s country of origin. This is as we did
in the previous tables, in which culture of origin was the culture relative to the father’s
country of birth. In Panel B, we consider second-generation immigrants whose mother is
an immigrant. We give these individuals the working preference in the mother’s country of origin.10 The focus on second-generation immigrants completely avoids issues of
selective migration related to employment opportunities as the migration decision of the
migrant parent (first generation) does not depend on the employment outcome of the
offspring (see Fernández [13]).
In Columns [1]-[3], we present the basic results on the effect of culture of origin in
employment, restricted to the second-generation sample. Echoing what we found in Table 5, the second generation – similarly to people who have been in the country for more
than 20 years – does not seem to exhibit much effect from the father’s culture of origin
on employment probability. The estimates in Columns [1]-[3] are small and sometimes
not significant. This changes when we distinguish between individuals who have both
immigrant parents (coefficient in the first row of Specifications [4]-[6]) and those who
have a native mother and immigrant father (sum of the coefficients in the first and third
row of Columns [4]-[6]). Children with two immigrant parents still exhibit a strong positive effect from the father’s country-of-origin preference for work on their employment
probability (coefficient between 0.64 and 0.78 with standard error of 0.10 in Columns [4][6]). To the contrary, having a native mother completely offsets this effect (possibly the
father’s country-of-origin preference has a negative impact on employment in Specification [4]-[6]) and ensures full assimilation. Having a native mother also increases, per
se, the probability of second-generation migrants to be employed (second row), possibly
because having a native mother improves country-specific skills, network, and language
knowledge. Panel B shows similar specifications, but with ”culture of origin” now relative to the mother of the second-generation immigrant. From Specifications [1]-[3], we
see the mother’s country-of-origin preferences have a stronger impact on employment of
the second generation than the father’s country of origin. The coefficient is around 0.77
and very significant. Even in this case, however, the effect is concentrated on secondgeneration immigrants with both immigrant parents (first row, Specifications [4]-[6] of
10 This

implies that for estimates in Panel A we adopt the same definition of migration status as in Tables
3 - 5 (i.e. based on the father’s country of origin), while in Panel B we switch to the mother’s country of
origin.

19

Panel B). The positive effect of mother’s culture-of-origin preference for work is between
1.4 and 1.77 in its impact on employment. However, the presence of a native father reduces, even in this case, the impact of mother’s culture of origin on employment to 0.
Having a native father also provides a similar advantage in the probability of having a
job as a native mother (similar effects in second row coefficients in Panel A and B).
Overall, the culture of origin of parents still affects second generation attitudes towards work if both parents are immigrants. In this case the preference of parent’s country of origin, especially of the mother’s, has a strong positive impact on the probability of
having a job. However, a marriage with a native person would produce much stronger
assimilation for the second generation, and weakens the impact of preferences from the
country of origin of one immigrant parent on the second generation job probability. This
is an interesting result and it points at the great role of intermarriage in the assimilation
of the second generation. Clearly intermarriage is not random, and the effect we estimate may be entirely due to the selection of immigrants with weaker ties to their country
of origin culture into marriage with natives, followed by a weak transmission of their
preferences to the children.

7
7.1

Extensions and Checks
Omitted Variables: Country of origin characteristics

[TABLE 7 AROUND HERE]
One concern in the identification strategy adopted so far is that other country of origin characteristics may be affecting skills and abilities of migrants, and may be correlated
with the variable (work pre f erence)o that measures working preferences in the country of
origin. One characteristic that may have long-lasting effects on the employment possibilities of a migrant – by affecting his/her skills – is the quality of schooling and education
in the country of origin. In Table 7 we address this issue and check the robustness of the
coefficient estimates to the inclusion of country-of-origin indicators capturing variables
that are correlated with school quality. In each panel of Table 7 we show the estimates of
the coefficient of interest on (work pre f erence)o , as well as the coefficient on an indicator
of schooling inputs and quality in the country of origin. In Panel A, we include education
expenditure as a percentage of GDP (Columns [1]-[3]) or as a percentage of total public
expenditure (Columns [4]-[6]) as controls. Then in Panel B we include the school enrollment rate for individuals of primary- and secondary-school age. A measure of pupil-toteacher ratios (PtT) in primary and secondary school are included in Panel C, while the
average PISA scores in reading and science (available for all the considered countries)
are added in Panel D. Each panel shows the estimated effect of country of origin preferences for work in the first row, and the coefficients for the schooling quality variables in
the country of origin in the remaining rows. The estimates for the coefficient of interest
remains stable and significant across panels and specifications. The estimated coefficient
is usually between 0.3 and 0.5. This provides reassurance that our main results are not
driven by unobserved individual skills related to school characteristics. The effects of our
proxies for quality in the education system in the country of origin are also significant.
20

In particular, a larger education expenditure as a % of GDP, higher enrollment rates in
primary education, and lower pupil-to-teacher ratios in the country of origin are all associated with a higher employment probability of migrants in the residence country. Those
indices may indicate better school quality in the country of origin that, when controlling
for years of schooling, may affect the skill and productivity (and hence employment rate)
of workers. We do not find any positive correlation between PISA scores in the country of origin and employment probability of migrants in the country of residence. PISA
scores are outcomes (rather than inputs) of schooling, and also measure innate abilities
and other aspects besides school quality. While individual abilities matter for education,
and are controlled for in our regression, individual abilities in the culture of origin may
matter less. Overall, Table 7 shows quality of schooling in the country of origin is likely to
matter for the human capital of an individual11 and hence his productivity and probability of employment. Nevertheless, the effect of country-of-origin work preference seems
orthogonal to these controls and its effect survives unscathed to their inclusion.
[TABLE 8 AROUND HERE]
More generally, one concern of our approach is that economic conditions in the country of origin may affect the employment outcome of migrants. Economic conditions may
be related to abilities of natives from those countries, which carry on to migrants. Economic conditions may also affect the perception of migrants in destination countries. In
both cases, the economic success in the country of origin may be an omitted driver of employment probability of migrants. An alternative possibility is also that economic characteristics of countries of origin affect the selection of migrants, in turn affecting their
performance in the host country. In Table 8 we control for these possibilities by including several different economic indicators from the migrants country of origin, one at a
time. These vary by year and we check whether the baseline results on the impact of
the culture of origin are robust to their inclusion. In turn, we include GDP per capita
and growth of GDP per capita in Panel A. We include measures of labor market performance (employment to population ratio, and unemployment rate) in Panel B. Finally,
we include measures of income inequality (such as 80/20 and 90/10 percentile ratios)
in Panel C. The effect of culture-of-origin work preferences on individual employment
probability remains strong and positive. At the same time, we identify some negative
correlation between the measures of economic performance in the origin and the employment probability of migrants. Migrants from countries with lower GDP per capita,
a lower employment-population ratio, and higher unemployment seem to have higher
probability of employment in the host country. Moreover, migrants from countries with
lower levels of inequality are more likely to be employed. These effects may be consistent
with the idea that selection of migrants is stronger from countries with worse economic
performance so that more skilled individuals (in some unobservable dimension) are more
likely to migrate and have better employment opportunities in their destination. Alternatively, worse economic conditions at origin push migrants to work harder and to be
more inclined to accept jobs, as their outside option is worse, reducing their probability of non-employment. While some of these effects are interesting per se, we are more
11 See

Schoellman [24] for a quantification of the importance of education quality using migrants’ human

capital.

21

concerned that their inclusion does not affect the estimated effect on the culture-of-origin
work preferences. That coefficient remains significant and stable in all specifications.

7.2

Omitted Variables: General Attitudes and Values

[TABLE 9 AROUND HERE]
Our analysis is focused on isolating the impact of the working preferences on labor
supply, as economic theory suggests. However, country-of-origin culture may have implications for a sequence of personal values, beliefs that may affect social and individual
behaviors of migrants. We considered several other values as potentially having important economic consequences as they may affect inclination and intensity of work, saving,
interacting in markets and so on. Some very important beliefs with a broad range of implications, previously analyzed by several authors, are religious intensity (see e.g. Guiso
et al. [16]; Giavazzi et al. [15]), self-interest or trust (Guiso et al. [17], Algan and Cahuc [4])
and attitudes towards the family and towards gender (Alesina and Giuliano [1], Giavazzi
et al. [15]). In Table 9 we include, in turn, variables controlling for the values and attitudes
revealed by individuals in order to check whether work preferences are robust to the inclusion of these additional characteristics. In panel A we add some measures of religiosity
and religious participation as controls. In Panel B we include an index of loyalty and one
of lack of generalized trust. In panel C we include measures of work attitudes regarding the importance of job security and women’s role in the labor market. The estimates
show that size and significance of the coefficient on preferences for work do not change
much. Among the controls, religious intensity, distrust, and a negative view of women’s
role in the labor market have a negative impact on individual employment rates and are
statistically significant. Indeed, existing studies show these three dimensions of individual preferences are strongly correlated (Guiso et al. [16], Guiso et al. [17], Giavazzi et
al. [15].) and the presented regression shows they are associated with decreased employment probability of men. Perceived job insecurity is associated with a higher employment
probability, which is consistent with the view that insecurity increases job-search and inwork effort (Clark et al. [10]). Finally, lack of loyalty towards friends does not seem to be
correlated with individual employment probabilities.
[TABLE 10 AROUND HERE]
Complementary to Table 9, which considers the impact of other individual values on
employment, Table 10 looks at how personal attitudes and choices (different from employment) are affected by the country-of-origin preference for working. In Table 10, we
investigate the effect of country-of-origin work preferences on opinions and choices in
the area of social equality and government intervention. A low preference for working,
implies an individual considers labor a burdensome activity, seems more compatible with
a position in favor of government intervention and redistribution and in favor of regulation of labor. The outcome variables we explore in the first two rows of Table 10 are a
dummy equal to 1 if the respondent indicates the government should ensure safety for all
workers (Row a), or if the respondent agrees that the government is responsible for the
living standards of the unemployed (Row b). Then we consider whether the respondent
has ever been a member of a trade union (Row c), or if he/she self-reports a left-wing
22

ideology (Row d), or if he/she reports it is important ”to treat people equally” (Row e).
Individuals from cultures of origin that value labor over leisure are less likely to state
the government should ensure safety and living standards of workers, and are less likely
to participate in a trade union. A one standard deviation increase in country-of-origin
preferences for work is associated with about a 2.5 percentage point decrease in the probability the respondent indicates the government should guarantee safety, and about a
3 percentage points decrease in the probability the respondent has been a member of a
trade union. No significant association of preferences for work emerges with preferences
for equality or left wing ideology. Stronger preferences for working seem to go together
with more ”market oriented” attitudes vis-a-vis labor interactions and with the support
for a smaller role of the government in it.

8

Comparisons and Magnitude

The results presented in the previous sections are consistent with a significant and
long-lasting impact of culture-of-origin preferences for work on individual employment
outcomes. How large and economically relevant is such an effect when compared to other
determinants of employment rates? To get an idea of the importance of this factor relative
to others, we compare the magnitude of the estimated effects of culture of origin workpreferences with other important determinants of employment probability both at the
individual level and in the host country. The results are shown in Table 11 . In particular,
we compare the effect of this specific trait with that of other cultural preferences and then
with the effect of some specific institutions. In regressions shown in Panel A of Table 11,
we show the effect of other indicators of culture of origin that have been associated with
higher propensity to work. Brugger et al. [8] find cultural differences between Latin and
German native speakers account for about 20% of the variation in Swiss unemployment
across regions. Giavazzi et al. [15] find a negative effect of a conservative family culture
on the employment outcomes of females and youth. In Column [1] we include a dummy
for Latin language of origin and a measure of Linguistic proximity proposed by Melitz
and Toubal [20] as explanatory variables for the probability of being employed. The first
variable captures a general idea that the ”Latin” culture is less inclined to value work
than the German and Northern-European. The second variable instead checks whether
cultural distance, measured as language affects the probability of finding employment. In
Column [2], we include proxies for differences in the quality of education in the country
of origin such as education expenditure as a percentage of GDP and the enrollment rates
and pupil-to-teacher ratios, both in primary education. In Column [3] we include both the
language and education quality variables. This first set of estimates confirms that having
a Latin native language is associated with a lower probability of being employed, even
after we account for the effect of a transferability of linguistic skills (proxied by linguistic
proximity of workers to the language spoken in the country of residence), and lower unobserved skills of immigrants (proxied by the education quality in the country of origin).
In Column [4], we include our indicator of culturally transmitted preferences for work,
and the indicator measuring a conservative view regarding women’s role in the labor
market used by Giavazzi et al. [15]. Both indicators have a strong and significant impact
23

on employment probability, and so do linguistic indicators. Evidence in Columns [1]-[4]
shows the culture-of-origin preference for work is still highly significant when controlling
for the other cultural characteristics.12 To generate insight on the relative magnitude of
these forces, in Column [5] we perform the same regression as in Column [4], but we use
standardized variables. Namely, we divide each variable by its standard deviation so we
are able to compare the relative magnitude of the effect of culture and preferences. Our
results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the culture-of-origin preferences
for work produces an increase in employment probability by about 1 percentage point,
which is broadly comparable with the overall effect of linguistic variables13 . Also, the
effect of preferences for work is similar in size to the effect of a conservative work culture.
In Panel B we include the effect of preferences for work and that of some indicators
of labor market institutions that are often considered important in determining the employment rate of a country (see Bassanini and Duval [6], and Arpaia and Mourre [5] for
reviews). The first is the unemployment benefits replacement rate that captures the generosity of the unemployment system in a country and the second is the share of unionized
workers (Union density) that captures the impact of bargaining power on unemployment.
The results in columns [1]-[3] confirm the finding of previous research that implies lower
employment probability, when the replacement rate is higher (as measured by the unemployment benefits replacement rate) and marginally lower employment probability
in highly unionized economies. Even controlling for those factors, the country of origin
preference for work is significant (column [4]). Estimates in column [5] confirm that the
relative magnitude of this effect is larger and more significant than the effect of unionization on the employment probability, but it is about one seventh of the effect of unemployment benefits. All in all, the effect of culture of origin preferences for work seems as
important as some other cultural traits and labor market institutions in affecting individual probability of employment, confirming that part, but by no means all, of the variation
in adult employment rates across countries may be due to preferences and not to frictions
or inefficiencies.
We finally want to use these estimates to make some simple calculations that provide
an order of magnitude for the effects of culturally transmitted preferences on employment performance. Let’s focus on the 90-10 percentile difference in employment rates
across the considered European countries. In order to explain it, we take the coefficient
of preferences for work estimated in Table 11, we multiply it for the country specific
dummy differences between the 90-10, and see how this difference compares with the
90-10 difference in employment rates of males in those countries. The 90-10 difference
in employment rates is given by the difference between the average employment rates
of Sweden and Ireland (0.11 = 0.94 − 0.83), while the 90-10 difference in work prefer12 Notice

that both Brugger et al. [8] and Giavazzi et al. [15] provide some insight over the role of preferences for work. Brugger et al. [8] interpret the remarkable differences in employment outcomes between
Latin and German speakers in terms of preferences for leisure: Latin speakers are “bon vivants”, relative to
“workaholic” German speakers. Giavazzi et al. [15] describe a cultural dimension, related to the value of
leisure, and find that preferences for holidays have a negative impact on hours of work.
13 In fact, a one standard deviation decrease in the probability of speaking a Latin language together with
a one standard deviation increase in linguistic proximity produce a 1.2 percentage point increase in the
employment probability.

24

ences is given by the difference between the country effect in working preferences of
Hungary and Sweden (0.10 = 0.23 − 0.13). This implies that preferences explain up to
[(0.10 ∗ 0.267)/0.11] ∗ 100 ≈ 24% of 90-10 variation in employment in the sample. This is
significant. It is also much smaller than what could be explained by the estimated effects
of differences in replacement rates: the 90-10 variation in the unemployment benefits
replacement rate (0.25, i.e. the difference between the replacement rates of Ireland and
Slovakia) explain up to [0.25 ∗ (−0.588)/0.11] ∗ 100 ≈ 134% of 90-10 reduction in employment in the sample. So while institutional variables are certainly very relevant, cultural
differences may be responsible for up to a fourth of the employment rate differences between high and low employment rate countries.

9

Conclusions

People whose preference for working is low should be less likely to work and should
work fewer hours than people who strongly enjoy working. The attitude toward working
is, in part, determined by one’s experience or personality, but also by family and the culture of origin. In some cultures, working hard, being successful at work and passionate
about it, is considered a great virtue. Other cultures, however, emphasize the importance of enjoying free time, regarding work as a needed annoyance. It is hard, however,
to extract information on these cultural attitudes about work and to identify how much
they affect one’s preferences and, hence, the probability of working. In this paper we do
just that: we estimate how much a taste for working translates in higher probability of
employment by using differences across European countries and the country of origin of
cross-European migrants. Recognizing the basic model of labor supply across individuals
implies that different relative preferences for leisure and work imply different probability of work and different working hours, we use information on how much individuals
”would enjoy having a paid job even if (they) did not need the money” to extract this preference at the individual level. However, as the individual response can be contaminated
by omitted variables and reverse causation, we proxy the ”deep” attitudes towards work
– derived from the country-of-origin culture – using a cleaned index of this preference
in the country of origin of an individual. We then focus only on migrants, exposed to
labor market conditions of European countries different from that of origin, and analyze
whether the country-of-origin preference for work still affects employment probability in
the country of residence, controlling for all individual and parent’s observable characteristics. We find that country-of-origin preference for work strongly affects the probability
of being employed up to 20 years after migration. This effect is also present in the second
generation if both parents are migrants. This effect generates a variation in employment
probability that can explain up to 24% of the differences in working-age male employment rates between the high and low employment-population ratio countries in Europe.

25

Figure 1: Culture of origin and labor-leisure preferences of migrants

Notes: labor-leisure preferences of migrants, conditional on country of residence FE (y-axis) vs. culture of
origin preferences (x-axis).

26

Figure 2: Culture of origin preferences and employment rate of migrants

Notes: The employment rate of migrants predicted by origin country FE (y-axis) vs. culture of origin
preferences (x-axis). Data refer to 2004-2012.

27

Figure 3: Culture of origin preferences and employment rate of natives

Notes: The employment rate of natives (y-axis) vs. culture of origin preferences (x-axis). Data refer to
2004-2012.

28

29

Migrants, 1st
mean
sd
0.11
0.31
0.56
0.50
0.88
0.33
0.97
0.45
0.10
0.30
0.13
0.34
0.01
0.11
0.42
0.49
0.42
0.49
0.76
0.43
0.67
0.47
0.32
0.46
0.64
0.48

Migrants, 2nd
mean
sd
0.05
0.22
0.44
0.50
0.88
0.32
1.00
0.46
0.10
0.30
0.15
0.36
0.01
0.08
0.40
0.49
0.49
0.50
0.68
0.47
0.60
0.49
0.23
0.42
0.00
0.00

Total
mean
sd
0.10
0.30
0.50
0.50
0.89
0.31
1.00
0.44
0.09
0.28
0.13
0.34
0.01
0.10
0.39
0.49
0.44
0.50
0.72
0.45
0.62
0.49
0.22
0.41
0.01
0.12

Notes: All the statistics are calculated on the population of Male individuals in working age (age 15-64), merging all the waves
of the survey (years 2002-2012)

Enjoy paid job, strongly agree
Enjoy paid job, agree or strongly agree
Employed
Hours of work (Full Time Equivalent)
Unemployed
Ever unemployed for 12 months or more
Never employed
Tertiary educated
Secondary educated
Age 20-50
Married
Father with tertiary education
Less than 20 years spent in the country (migrants, 1st only)

Natives
mean
sd
0.10
0.31
0.50
0.50
0.89
0.31
1.00
0.44
0.09
0.28
0.13
0.34
0.01
0.10
0.39
0.49
0.44
0.50
0.72
0.45
0.62
0.49
0.22
0.41
0.00
0.00

Table 1: Summary statistics for Migrants, Natives and Total Population

Table 2: Employment Rates by country
country
Working age Age 20-50 country
Working age
Belgium
92.3
94.2
Bulgaria
76.2
(26.6)
(23.4)
(42.6)
Switzerland
96.1
96.2
Cyprus
89.9
(19.3)
(19.2)
(30.1)
Czech Republic
93.0
93.3
Germany
90.9
(25.6)
(25.1)
(29.6)
Denmark
93.2
92.8
Estonia
90.2
(25.2)
(25.8)
(29.7)
Spain
89.9
90.5
Finland
91.8
(30.1)
(29.3)
(27.5)
France
92.1
92.5
UK
91.6
(27.0)
(26.3)
(27.8)
Greece
87.7
88.6
Croatia
78.7
(32.9)
(31.8)
(41.0)
Hungary
86.6
86.9
Ireland
83.0
(34.0)
(33.8)
(37.6)
Israel
88.2
89.4
Lithuania
82.5
(32.2)
(30.8)
(38.0)
Netherlands
94.1
95.2
Norway
95.0
(23.6)
(21.4)
(21.8)
Poland
87.25
88.9
Portugal
89.8
(33.4)
(31.5)
(30.3)
Russia
90.3
90.6
Sweden
93.9
(29.7)
(29.9)
(23.9)
Slovakia
87.6
88.1
Ukraine
83.6
(33.0)
(32.4)
(37.1)
Total
90.02
90.5
(30.0)
(29.3)

Age 20-50
76.6
(42.3)
90.1
(29.8)
90.7
(29.0)
90.5
(29.2)
93.4
(24.9)
91.8
(27.5)
81.7
(38.7)
82.7
(37.8)
85.7
(35.1)
95.0
(21.9)
91.6
(27.8)
94.6
(22.6)
85.0
(35.7)

Notes: The population of reference are all male individuals; the average and standard deviation of
employment rates are calculated across all years of the survey 2002-2012.

30

31

–0.08***
(0.01)
–0.06
(0.04)
0.54***
(0.06)
0.97***
(0.08)
0.25***
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.01)
0.29***
(0.05)
0.53***
(0.05)
0.40***
(0.06)
yes
no
no

[1]
–0.08***
(0.01)
–0.05
(0.03)
0.37***
(0.06)
0.80***
(0.10)
0.22***
(0.05)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.28***
(0.03)
0.50***
(0.05)
0.37***
(0.06)
yes
yes
no

[2]
–0.08***
(0.01)
–0.05
(0.04)
0.32***
(0.05)
0.71***
(0.12)
0.20***
(0.06)
0.11***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.03)
0.41***
(0.05)
0.32***
(0.06)
yes
yes
yes

[3]

1919

2674

48027

521

521

521

9564

521

9564

Observations

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one for working during the reference week and 0 otherwise.
The sample includes working age male natives and first, second generation migrants. Specifications (a),(b), show
the estimated coefficient of the individual explanatory variable capturing preference for working measured by a
dummy equal to 1 if the respondent strongly agrees with the statement ”I would enjoy having paid job even if did not
need money”. In rows (c),(d), and (g)-(i), we show the coefficient on the culture of origin preference for working
obtained from the auxiliary regression described in the text. In row (e), the country-of-origin preference for working
is constructed using in the auxiliary regression a dummy equal to one if respondents agree or strongly agrees with
the statement above. In row (f), country-of-origin preference for working is constructed as an average index, from
1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) in the country of origin of the migrant. As described in the text culture
of origin is based on father’s country of birth. Column [1] includes country-by-year FE only. Column [2] includes
country-by-year FE and individual characteristics (dummies for age, education, marital status, child living in family,
dummy for migrant spending less than 20 years in a country) as controls. Column [3] includes country-by-year
FE, individual characteristics and father characteristics (dummies for father’s education, employment status and
occupation when respondent was 14 years old) as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by residence and origin
country in parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

country-by-year FE
individual controls
parental controls

(i) reduced form IV, migrants with age 20-50 (2004-2012)

(h) reduced form IV, migrants only (2004-2012)

(g) reduced form IV, natives and migrants (2004-2012)

(f) reduced form IV, migrants only (2010) – 1-5 index

(e) reduced form IV, migrants only (2010) – agree or strongly agree

(d) reduced form IV, migrants only (2010)

(c) reduced form IV, natives and migrants (2010)

(b) OLS, migrants, 2010

Panel A: Employment
(a) OLS, natives and migrants (2010)

Table 3: Preferences for working in the culture of origin and employment probability

32

[2]

[3]

0.07***
0.07***
0.09***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.48***
0.45***
0.40***
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.02)
baseline specification (f)
–0.45*** –0.40*** –0.31***
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.04)
–0.73*** –0.53*** –0.39***
(0.10)
(0.12)
(0.14)
–0.27** –0.40*** –0.32***
(0.10)
(0.12)
(0.11)
–0.08*** –0.08*** –0.06***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes

[1]

2569

2569

2569

2527

2569

2273

Observations

Notes: The dependent variable in rows (a) and (b) is equal to the logarithm of hours of work, computed in FTE
terms (40 hours per week). In rows (c)-(f) the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual
experiences the type of unemployment described in the first column of the table. Each entry of the table is the
coefficient of the country of origin preference for work obtained from the auxiliary regression described in the
text. Column [1] includes country-by-year FE. Column [2] includes country-by-year FE and individual characteristics (dummies for age, education, marital status, child living in family, dummy for migrant spending less
than 20 years in a country) as controls. Column [3] includes country-by-year FE, individual characteristics and
father characteristics (dummies for father’s education, employment status and occupation when respondent
was 14 years old) as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by host and origin country in parentheses.
Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

country-by-year FE
individual controls
parental controls

(f) never had a paid job

(e) ever had long unemployment spell (12 months or more)

(d) ever had short unemployment spell (3-12 months)

Panel B: Unemployment
(c) currently unemployed

(b) weekly hours per person

Panel A: Hours of work (Full Time Equivalent)
(a) weekly hours per employee

Table 4: Preferences for working in the culture of origin and hours worked, unemployment

Table 5: Assimilation and the relationship between culture of origin and employment
probability

Panel A: Length of Stay (LoS) in the residence country
(i) average effect of preference for work, (baseline)

[1]

[2]

[3]

0.53***

0.50***

0.41***

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

1.01***
(0.08)
0.11***
(0.04)
0.00

1.07***
(0.08)
0.07
(0.05)
0.00

1.01***
(0.08)
–0.05
(0.04)
0.00

0.53***

0.46***

0.36***

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.30***
(0.07)
0.62***
(0.07)
0.00

0.44***
(0.09)
0.46***
(0.06)
0.88

0.44***
(0.08)
0.32***
(0.06)
0.25

0.55***

0.52***

0.43***

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.06)

0.93***
(0.07)
0.50***
(0.05)
0.00

0.87***
(0.10)
0.48***
(0.06)
0.00

0.75***
(0.08)
0.39***
(0.07)
0.00

Observations
2674

(ii) heterogeneous effects, by LoS (years)
(Preferences for work)*(LoS<20)
(Preferences for work)*(LoS>20)
pvalue on test of equal coefficients
Panel B: Citizenship of the residence country
(i) average effect, conditional on citizenship

2673

(ii) heterogeneous effects, by citizenship
(Preferences for work)*(not citizens)
(Preferences for work)*(citizens)
pvalue on test of equal coefficients
Panel C: Important to understand different people
(i) average effect, conditional on important

2599

(ii) heterogeneous effects, by importance of understanding
(Preferences for work)*(not important)
(Preferences for work)*(important)
pvalue on test of equal coefficients

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual is employed in the reference
week. The entry of the table represents the estimated coefficient on the explanatory variable of interest,
equal to the country of origin preference for work and in specifications (ii) of each panel we include the
interaction of that variable with a dummy defined in the first column. In panel A the effect is separated
by length of stay, in panel B by citizenship and in panel C by individual attitudes. Column [1] includes
country-by-year FE. Column [2] includes country-by-year FE and individual characteristics (dummies
for age, education, marital status, child living in family, dummy for migrant spending less than 20
years in a country) as controls. Column [3] includes country-by-year FE, individual characteristics
and father characteristics (dummies for father’s education, employment status and occupation when
respondent was 14 years old) as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by host and origin country
in parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

33

Table 6: Second generation migrants: The role of father, mother and inter-marriage

Panel A: Origin based on father
Preferences for work

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

0.06***
(0.02)

0.05*
(0.03)

–0.01
(0.05)

1203

1203

1203

0.64***
(0.09)
0.19***
(0.03)
–0.94***
(0.11)
1203

0.71***
(0.11)
0.22***
(0.03)
–1.11***
(0.13)
1203

0.78***
(0.10)
0.25***
(0.03)
–1.35***
(0.10)
1203

0.78***
(0.07)

0.75***
(0.10)

0.77***
(0.10)

1240

1240

1240

1.41***
(0.07)
0.24***
(0.03)
–1.04***
(0.18)
1240

1.65***
(0.10)
0.32***
(0.04)
–1.52***
(0.18)
1240

1.77***
(0.09)
0.34***
(0.04)
–1.70***
(0.22)
1240

Native mother
(Preferences for work)*(Native mother)
Observations
Panel B: Origin based on mother
Preferences for work
Native father
(Preferences for work)*(Native father)
Observations

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual is employed in the reference
week. The entry of the table represents the estimated coefficient on the variable of interest, listed in
the first column. Columns [1] and [4] include country-by-year FE as controls. Columns [2] and [5]
include country-by-year FE and individual characteristics as controls. Columns [3] and [6] include
country-by-year FE, individual characteristics and father characteristics as controls. Native father and
mother are defined as father, mother born in the country of residence of the child. Robust standard
errors and reported in parenthesis, clustered by residence and origin country. Significance levels:
∗
: 10%
∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

34

35
2472

0.39***
(0.08)
–0.01*
(0.00)

0.43***
(0.08)
–0.00
(0.00)

2472

2674

0.39***
(0.07)
–0.05*
(0.03)

0.44***
(0.07)
–0.04**
(0.02)

2674

2674

0.47***
(0.06)
0.03***
(0.01)

0.50***
(0.06)
0.03***
(0.01)

2674

2674

0.36***
(0.04)
0.02***
(0.00)

[2]

2674

0.37***
(0.03)
0.02***
(0.00)

[1]

2472

0.30***
(0.07)
–0.01**
(0.00)

2674

0.30***
(0.07)
–0.05*
(0.03)

2674

0.39***
(0.06)
0.03***
(0.01)

2674

0.28***
(0.04)
0.01***
(0.00)

[3]

0.00
(0.00)
2472

0.43***
(0.07)

–0.02***
(0.01)
2674

0.54***
(0.05)

0.02
(0.01)
2674

0.53***
(0.06)

–0.00*
(0.00)
2674

0.53***
(0.07)

[4]

–0.00
(0.00)
2472

0.41***
(0.07)

–0.03***
(0.01)
2674

0.52***
(0.05)

0.01
(0.01)
2674

0.50***
(0.06)

–0.00**
(0.00)
2674

0.49***
(0.07)

[5]

–0.00
(0.00)
2472

0.32***
(0.07)

–0.03***
(0.01)
2674

0.42***
(0.04)

0.01
(0.01)
2674

0.40***
(0.06)

–0.00**
(0.00)
2674

0.40***
(0.06)

[6]

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual works in the reference week.
The entry of the table is the estimated coefficient on the variable listed in the first column. In each
panel we control for a different measure of the quality of schooling in the country of origin. Columns
[1] and [4] include country-by-year FE as controls. Columns [2] and [5] include country-by-year FE
and individual characteristics as controls. Columns [3] and [6] include country-by-year FE, individual
characteristics and father characteristics as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by host and
origin country are reported in parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

Observations

PISA, science

PISA, reading

Observations
Panel D: PISA scores
Preferences for work

PtT, secondary school

PtT, primary school

Observations
Panel C: Pupils-to-Teachers ratio (PtT)
Preferences for work

Enrollment rates, secondary

Enrollment rates, primary

Observations
Panel B: Enrollment rates
Preferences for work

Education expenditure, % of public exp.

Education expenditure, % of GDP

Panel A: Expenditure in education
Preferences for work

Table 7: Controlling for the quality of education in the country of origin

36
2662

0.20***
(0.06)
–0.02***
(0.00)

0.20***
(0.05)
–0.02***
(0.00)

2662

2674

2662

0.14**
(0.06)
–0.02***
(0.00)

2674

0.20***
(0.08)
–0.04***
(0.01)

0.32***
(0.08)
–0.04***
(0.01)

2674

2674

0.47***
(0.06)
–0.01***
(0.00)

0.55***
(0.06)
–0.01***
(0.00)

2674

[3]

[2]

–0.08***
(0.01)
2662

–0.07***
(0.01)
2662

0.25***
(0.06)

0.02*
(0.01)
2674

0.02*
(0.01)
2674
0.25***
(0.05)

0.49***
(0.05)

–0.01***
(0.00)
2674

–0.01***
(0.00)
2674
0.53***
(0.05)

0.26***
(0.05)

[5]

0.27***
(0.04)

[4]

–0.07***
(0.01)
2662

0.17***
(0.06)

0.03**
(0.01)
2674

0.39***
(0.04)

–0.01***
(0.00)
2674

0.19***
(0.05)

[6]

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual works in the reference
week. The entry of the table is the estimated coefficient on the variable listed in the first column. In
each panel we control for a different measure of the economic conditions in the country of origin.
Columns [1] and [4] include country-by-year FE as controls. Columns [2] and [5] include countryby-year FE and individual characteristics as controls. Columns [3] and [6] include country-byyear FE, individual characteristics and father characteristics as controls. Robust standard errors,
clustered by host and origin country are reported in parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10%
∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

Observations

90/10 percentile ratio

80/20 percentile ratio

Observations
Panel C: Income inequality
Preferences for work

Observations
2674
Panel B: Labor market performance
Preferences for work
0.38***
(0.08)
Employment to population ratio –0.03***
(0.01)
Unemployment rate

[1]
Panel A: Economic performance, growth
Preferences for work
0.55***
(0.05)
GDP per capita (logs)
–0.00
(0.00)
GDP per capita (growth)

Table 8: Controlling for Economic conditions in the country of origin

37

0.54***
(0.05)
–0.02**
(0.01)

[1]

933

933

0.46***
(0.10)
0.03***
(0.01)

0.69***
(0.08)
0.03***
(0.01)

933

2636

0.43***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.01)

0.52***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.01)

2636

2658

0.42***
(0.05)
–0.04***
(0.01)

[3]

2658

0.51***
(0.05)
–0.04***
(0.01)

[2]

0.33***
(0.07)

–0.04**
(0.02)
1544

–0.04
(0.02)
1544

–0.03***
(0.01)
2665

–0.04***
(0.01)
2665
0.27***
(0.07)

0.51***
(0.06)

–0.05***
(0.01)
2649

0.52***
(0.05)

[5]

0.54***
(0.06)

–0.04***
(0.01)
2649

0.55***
(0.05)

[4]

–0.04**
(0.02)
1544

0.22***
(0.06)

–0.04***
(0.01)
2665

0.41***
(0.06)

–0.05***
(0.02)
2649

0.45***
(0.05)

[6]

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual works in the reference
week. The entry of the table is the estimated coefficient on the variable listed in the first column.
In each panel we control for a different measure of individual attitudes. Columns [1] and [4]
include country-by-year FE as controls. Columns [2] and [5] include country-by-year FE and
individual characteristics as controls. Columns [3] and [6] include country-by-year FE, individual characteristics and father characteristics as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by
host and origin country are reported in parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10%
∗∗ : 5%
∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

Observations

Observations
2636
Panel C: Conservative work culture
Preferences for work
0.68***
(0.06)
Job security important
0.03***
(0.00)
Jobs scarce: more right to men

Observations
2658
Panel B: Self-Interest, distrust
Preferences for work
0.55***
(0.06)
Loyal to friends: not like me
0.02**
(0.01)
Distrust other people

Pray > once a week

Attend service > once a week

Panel A: Religious intensity
Preferences for work

Table 9: Controlling for individual attitudes and beliefs

38

[2]
–0.62***
(0.16)
–0.66***
(0.16)
–0.74***
(0.20)
–0.18
(0.16)
–0.34
(0.30)

[3]
–0.53***
(0.17)
–0.55***
(0.11)
–0.71***
(0.21)
–0.15
(0.17)
–0.40
(0.33)

2600

2345

2657

619

Observations
2593

Notes: The dependent variable in each regression is the variable described in the first column. The entries of the table are
the coefficients on the culture of origin variable obtained from the auxiliary regression as defined in the text. Column [1]
includes country-by-year FE as controls. Column [2] includes country-by-year FE and individual characteristics as controls. Column [3] includes country-by-year FE, individual characteristics and father characteristics as controls. Method
of estimation is least squares. Robust standard errors, clustered by host and origin country, are reported in parentheses.
Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

(e) important treating people equally

(d) leftwing ideology

(c) ever member of a trade union

(b) government partly responsible for living standards of unemployed

(a) important the government ensures safety

[1]
–0.63***
(0.17)
–0.62***
(0.05)
–0.31
(0.21)
–0.17
(0.11)
–0.34
(0.26)

Table 10: Effect on other outcomes and choices

Table 11: Impact of alternative determinants of employment outcomes
[1]

[2]

Panel A: Culture and skills from the country of origin
Latin language
–0.020***
(0.003)
Linguistic proximity
0.006
(0.004)
Education expenditure, % of GDP
0.008***
(0.002)
PtT, primary school
–0.024***
(0.008)
Enrollment rates, primary
0.020***
(0.005)
Conservative work culture

[3]

[4]

standardized
coefficients

–0.021***
(0.003)
–0.001
(0.004)
0.007***
(0.002)
–0.026***
(0.008)
0.022***
(0.004)

–0.016***
(0.004)
0.031***
(0.006)
–0.004*
(0.002)
–0.022**
(0.011)
0.026***
(0.006)
–0.018***
(0.003)
0.183***
(0.064)
29220

–0.006***
(0.001)
0.006***
(0.001)
–0.005*
(0.003)
–0.007**
(0.003)
0.009***
(0.002)
–0.007***
(0.001)
0.008***
(0.003)
29220

–0.588***
(0.025)
–0.048
(0.052)
0.267***
(0.039)
48955

–0.072***
(0.003)
–0.010
(0.011)
0.010***
(0.002)
48955

Preferences for work
Observations
47809
Panel B: Institutions in the country of residence
Unemployment benefits replacement rate –0.592***
(0.020)
Union density

47809

47809

–0.415***
(0.058)

–0.582***
(0.025)
–0.052
(0.052)

48955

48955

Preferences for work
Observations

48955

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the person is employed in the reference week.
The entries of the table are the coefficient on the variable described in the first column. In column [1] the
reference group is the group of countries speaking German language. The other explanatory varfiables
are described in the previous tables. ”Conservative work culture” is measured as dummy variable =1 if
the respondent answers ”I Agree strongly” or ”I Agree”, to the statement: When jobs are scarce, men should
have more right to a job than women, 0 otherwise. Specifications in Panel A include country by year FE.
Specifications in Panel B include only country of residence and time fixed effects because we include some
variables that vary only by country of residence and year. All specification include individual and father
characteristics. In the last column the explanatory variables are subtracted of their means and divided
by their standard deviation. Robust standard errors, clustered by host and origin country are reported in
parentheses. Significance levels:
∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗: 1%.

39

References
[1] Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, (2010). “The power of the family,” Journal of Economic
Growth, Springer, vol. 15(2), pages 93-125, June.
[2] Alesina, A., Glaeser E., and B. Sacerdote (2006), “Work and Leisure in the U.S.
and Europe. Why so Different?”NBER Macroeconomics Annual (eds. M.Gertler and
K.Rogoff).
[3] Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2007). “The Roots of Low European Employment: Family
Culture?” In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2005, edited by C. Pissarides and J. Frenkel. MIT Press, pp. 65-109.
[4] Algan Y. and P. Cahuc (2009) “Civic Culture and the Design of Labor Market institutions” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 111-145.
[5] Arpaia A., and G. Mourre (2010), “Institutions and performance in European labour
markets: Taking a fresh look at evidence”, Journal of Economic Surveys vol. 26 (1),
2–48.
[6] Bassanini A., and R. Duval (2009), “Unemployment, institutions and reform complementarities: Re-assessing the aggregate evidence for OECD countries”, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 25 (1), 40–59.
[7] Borjas G. (2013) ”Labor Economics”, Sixth Edition, Mc Graw Hill, Irwin, New York.
[8] Brugger, B. Lalive, R. and J. Zweimuller (2009) “Does Culture affect Unemployment?
Evidence from the Rostigraben” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4283. - revised version in
2012
[9] Card, D. (2009) ”Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review, 99(2): 1-21.
[10] Clark, A., Knabe, A., Ratzel, S. (2010). “Boon or bane?
Others’unemployment, well-being and job insecurity.”Labour Economics, 17, 5261.
doi:10.1016/j.labeco.2009.05.007.
[11] Dickerson, A., Green, F. (2012). Fears and realisations of employment insecurity.
Labour Economics, 19(2), 198-210. doi:10.1016/j.labeco.2011.10.001.
[12] Dustmann, C. and van Soest, A. (2002), “Language and the earnings of immigrants
”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55: 473-492.
[13] Fernández, R. (2007). “Women, work, and culture.”Journal of the European Economic
Association 5(2-3): 305-332.
[14] Fernández, R. and A. Fogli (2009) “Culture, an Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1:1, 146-177.
[15] Giavazzi, F., Schiantarelli, F. and M. Serafinelli (2013) “Attitudes, Policies and Work”,
Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(6):1256-1289.
40

[16] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales. 2003. “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes.” Journal of Monetary Economics., 50:1, pp. 225-82.
[17] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L., Zingales (2006). “Does culture affect economic outcomes?”Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23–48.
[18] Litina A., Moriconi S. and S. Zanaj (2014), ”The cultural transmission of environmental preferences: Evidence from international migration”, CREA Discussion Paper No. 2014-12.
[19] Luttmer E.F.P. and M. Singhal (2011) “Culture, Context and the Taste for Redistribution” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (February): 157-1.
[20] Melitz, J. and F. Toubal (2014). ”Native language, spoken language, translation and
trade,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 93(2), pages 351-363.
[21] Ottaviano, G.I.P. and G. Peri (2005). ”Cities and cultures,” Journal of Urban Economics,
Elsevier, vol. 58(2), pages 304-337, September.
[22] Ottaviano, G.I.P. and G. Peri (2012). ”Rethinking The Effect Of Immigration On
Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, European Economic Association, vol. 10(1), pages 152-197, 02.
[23] Prescott E. C. (2004) ”Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 28, No. 1, July 2004,
pp.2-13.
[24] Schoellman Todd (2012) ”Education Quality and Development Accounting”, Review
of Economic Studies, January 2012. Vol. 79 (1), 388–417.

41

