                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DOES HOUSEHOLD INCOME AFFECT CHILD PERSONALITY TRAITS
                           AND BEHAVIORS?

                                            Randall Akee
                                          Emilia Simeonova
                                           E. Jane Costello
                                          William Copeland

                                        Working Paper 21562
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21562


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




The work presented here was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (MH080230, MH63970,
MH63671, MH48085, MH075766, MH094605), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (DA/MH11301,
DA011301, DA016977, DA011301, DA036523), NARSAD (Early Career Award to WEC), and the
William T Grant Foundation. We are grateful to Richard Murnane, Caroline Hoxby, Greg Duncan,
Sarah Reber, Manisha Shah, Wesley Yin, Leah Boustan and participants in the NBER Children’s Workshop,
the Royal Economic Society, the Western Economic Association Society, Midwest Economics Association
meetings, UC All California Labor Economics Conference, University of North Dakota Economics
Seminar, UC Santa Barbara Center for Demography, UC Irvine Education Seminar, University of
Hawaii Economics Seminar. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Randall Akee, Emilia Simeonova, E. Jane Costello, and William Copeland. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Household Income Affect Child Personality Traits and Behaviors?
Randall Akee, Emilia Simeonova, E. Jane Costello, and William Copeland
NBER Working Paper No. 21562
September 2015
JEL No. H24,H3,H31,I14,I3,I38,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Existing research has investigated the effect of early childhood educational interventions on the child’s
later-life outcomes. These studies have found limited impact of supplementary programs on children’s
cognitive skills, but sustained effects on personality traits. We examine how a positive change in unearned
household income affects children’s emotional and behavioral health and personality traits. Our results
indicate that there are large beneficial effects of improved household financial wellbeing on children’s
emotional and behavioral health and positive personality trait development. Moreover, we find that
these effects are most pronounced for children who are lagging behind their peers in these measures
before the intervention. Increasing household incomes reduce differences across adolescents with different
levels of initial emotional-behavioral symptoms and personality traits. We also examine potential channels
through which the increased household income may contribute to these positive changes. Parenting
and relationships within the family appear to be an important mechanism. We also find evidence that
a sub-sample of the population moves to census tracts with better income levels and educational attainment.


Randall Akee                                         E. Jane Costello
Assistant Professor of Public Policy                 Brightleaf Sq Ste 22
University of California, Los Angeles                905 W Main St
Luskin School of Public Affairs                      Durham, NC 27701
3250 Public Affairs Building                         elizabeth.costello@duke.edu
Los Angeles, California 90095-1656
rakee@ucla.edu                                       William Copeland
                                                     905 W Main St, Ste 22
Emilia Simeonova                                     Durham, NC 27701
JHU Carey School of Business                         william.copeland@duke.edu
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER
emilia.simeonova@gmail.com
   I. Introduction

       Household income plays an important role in the current and future health and socio-
economic outcomes of its members. Social scientists have spent a considerable amount of effort
uncovering the theoretical and empirical linkages between household resources and human capital
formation in children (Currie and Almond, 2011; Becker and Tomes, 1986; Duncan and Brooks-
Gunn, 1997; Cameron and Heckman, 1998; Blau, 1999). The intergenerational transmission of
disadvantage is very closely related to factors determined by the family environment. There are well
known confounding issues as income is closely linked to parental effort, skills and preferences,
which directly affect children’s short- and long-term outcomes. Thus, separating out the direct
effect of household socio-economic status on children’s wellbeing and identifying the channels that
enable this link is an important pre-requisite for any policy intended to break the intergenerational
transmission of human capital. Recent policy initiatives have thus called for two-generation
programs that treat both parents in children in an effort to improve the effectiveness of pre-school
interventions aimed at aiding disadvantaged children close the ability gap (Chase-Lansdale and
Brooks-Gunn, 2014).
       In this study we make two contributions directly relevant for the design of such policies.
First, we show that improving household resources can significantly impact children’s behavioral
and personality outcomes even in the absence of matching child-centered interventions; second,
these effects are non-trivial among children first treated in their early teenage years. We also focus
on traits and conditions that have been shown to correlate with long-term socio-economic success,
but have received less attention in the economics literature mostly because reliable data on these
conditions are scarce. According to data from the National Health Interview Survey, in 2005-2006
15% of US children aged 4-17 had parents who had contacted a health professional or school staff
to talk about the child’s behavioral or emotional difficulties (NCHS Data Brief, no 8, September
2008). Approximately one third of these children (5.1%) were prescribed medication for these
difficulties. By 2011, 7.5% of 6-17 year olds were receiving medication for emotional and
behavioral difficulties. Among children from families with incomes below the poverty line, this
proportion is even higher at 9.2% (NCHS Data Brief No 148, April 2014).
       This study is links two related, but separate branches of the literature – research on human
capital formation, personality traits and long-term economic success; and studies on mental health
and family socio-economic status. Most of the existing research has focused on establishing a


                                                  2
causal link between parental resources and children’s educational attainment, social outcomes or
physical health in childhood and adulthood (see for instance Duncan et al, 1994; Duncan et al,
1998; Shea, 2000; Plug and Vijverberg, 2003; Milligan and Stabile, 2011; Duncan et al 2011; Aizer
et al, 2014) At the same time, studies have demonstrated that the formation of positive personality
traits and cognitive skills is crucial in determining long-term socio-economic wellbeing and may
have strong effects on long-term health (see Campbell et al, 2014; Cunha and Heckman (2008);
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010)). A growing and related branch of the literature has shown
that mental health conditions, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and developmental
delays are more likely to affect poorer children (Currie and Lin, 2007). Indeed, low SES might
work as an early-life stressor that determines part or all of the relationship between low parental
income and children’s mental health problems (see Lundberg, 1997; McLeod and Shanahan, 1993).
A separate strand of the literature links childhood and adolescent cognitive and personality traits to
long-run economic outcomes. Students who display anti-social behavior have a lower probability of
completing high school (Duncan and Magnusson, 2010). Related research by Moffitt et al (2011)
reports that self-control in childhood predicts health outcomes and overall socioeconomic status
later in life.
         In the current analysis, we examine how positive changes in unearned household income
affect children’s behavioral disorders, emotional disorders and personality traits in their teenage
years. Prior research has shown that human capital interventions have a short-lived effect on
cognitive abilities except at very early ages (Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev et al, 2013). However,
we also know that personality traits may still be malleable at older ages (Van den Akker, A. L.,
Dekovic ́, M., Asscher, J., & Prinzie, P., 2014; Terracciano, A., McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. Jr.,
2006; Klimstra, T. A., Bleidorn, W., Asendorpf, J. B., van Aken, M. A. G., & Denissen, J. J. A.,
2013; Denissen, J. J. A., van Aken, M. A. G., & Roberts, B. W.,2011; Kawamoto, Tetsuya and
Toshihiko Endo. 2015; Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Heckman and Stixud, 2006; Meghir, Palme
and Simeonova, 2013). Our study finds that exogenous changes in unearned household income
have large effects on child personality traits and symptoms of emotional and behavioral distress as
measured at age 16. Furthermore, we find that the gains are largest for the children with the most
(pre-intervention) negative personality traits and had the most behavioral and emotional problems.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the direct effect of changes in unearned
household income on personality traits and mental health in a quasi-experimental framework (see



                                                   3
review by Duncan, Magnuson and Votruba-Drzal, 2014).
         We use two separate, but related measures in our analysis.1 The first set of variables is based
on diagnoses from parent-reported symptoms of behavioral or emotional disorders as defined by the
DSM-IV. Using a slightly different sub-set of measures from the survey, we construct index
measures for three of the Big 5 Personality traits. Our results, using either measure, accord with one
another and indicate that there is a marked improvement for the treated cohort of children over time
with regard to personality traits and emotional and behavioral disorders.
         The detailed nature of our survey data allow us to also examine some of the potential
mechanisms through which improved household income may affect the observed improvement in
child personality traits and disorders. Previous research has suggested that parents’ emotional and
physical well-being are affected by household income (Evans and Garthwaite (2014); Milligan and
Stabile (2011); Jones et al (2015)). Using a cohort-level comparison Costello et al (2010) find a
negative association between unearned income receipt and substance and alcohol abuse in the
population we study here at age 19. Wolfe et al (2012) use casino operations to predict household
income for American Indians in the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance System data. They use
this predicted income to explain adult health outcomes and find there is a reduction in adult anxiety,
which may also be physiologically related to children’s long-term wellbeing. High levels of
maternal cortisol, which is closely associated with maternal stress levels during pregnancy, are
predictive of children’s school performance ten years after birth (Aizer et al, 2014).
         Behavioral and personality traits development can be understood as the child’s response to
the perceived environment as signaled by the atmosphere in the family. Coping mechanisms that
prepare a child for dealing with a hostile world do not necessarily foster the personality traits and
behaviors that promote pro-social behavior, scholastic learning and conscientiousness and may
work in the opposite direction. On the positive side, researchers have shown that children who start
out in households with below average parenting skills react positively when their parents receive
interventions aimed at improving skills. Long run earnings converge to that of non-disadvantaged
control groups in the long run (Thompson, 2014).
         In our analysis, we examine the effect of exogenous income transfers on parental behaviors,


1 Appendix Table 1 provides the entire list of variables from the data set used in creating the personality trait measures
as well as the components that are used in diagnosing the emotional or behavioral disorders. There are significant
overlaps between emotional disorders and neuroticism; behavioral disorders and agreeableness; conscientiousness has
some overlap with both emotional and behavioral disorders.


                                                            4
the quality of the relationship between the two parents, and the relationship between parents and
children. We find that there is a marked improvement in parental mental health, the relationship
with the other spouse and between the parents and children in the treated households. We also
explore whether households move residence in response to their increased income levels. A large
strand of the literature has examined whether the neighborhood conditions play a role in affecting
child outcomes (Kling et al, 2007; Jacob et al, 2014; Chetty and Hendren, 2015). Our analysis finds
some suggestive evidence that aligns with this previous research on neighborhood effects; there is
some geographic re-location for a sub-set of households in our data due to the increased household
incomes and that this may explain some of the improvement in child outcomes.
       The next section discusses the existing literature related to changes in educational
interventions on cognitive and personality traits for children. In Section 3 we discuss the data used
in our analysis. We discuss the conceptual framework for our analysis in Section 4 and provide the
empirical framework in Section 5. In Section 6 we provide the empirical results from our analysis
and we investigate the mechanisms in Section 7. We conduct several robustness checks in Section
8. In Section 9 we discuss the relationship between age 16 outcomes and long-run labor market
outcomes for our sample population. Finally, we conclude in Section 9.

   II. Background and Related Literature

       Several different approaches have been utilized to study the impact of extra family income
on child outcomes. Blau (1999) in the US and Dooley and Stewart (2004) in Canada examine
changes to permanent income in a lifecycle framework and find that they had small effects on child
outcomes. However, a series of papers by Duncan et al (1994, 1998) and Hill et al (1987) report
that changes in household income are associated with improvements in IQ scores, child
achievement, children’s long-run wages and a reduction in behavioral problems. In a slightly
different setting, Levy et al (2000) uses changes to household income over the life cycle and
identifies their impacts using sibling pairs (born at different times) who are sufficiently different in
age. Improving household income for one member of the sibling pair relative to the other one had a
positive effect on educational attainment.
       There are a series of papers that use quasi-experimental methods to examine the effect of
changes in household income on child outcomes. The research uses exogenous shocks to parental
income such as changes in tax policy, government transfer programs, macroeconomic conditions,



                                                   5
surprise income windfalls and crop failures to identify the direction of causality between family
SES and child outcomes. Case (2004) found that an unexpected increase in household income due
to pension extension in South Africa improved self-reported health, but also health for the
household as a whole. Using the same reform Duflo (2003) finds that there is a positive effect on
child height and weight in the treated households. Behrman, et al (2005) report on the long-term
results from the conditional cash transfer program in Mexico (known as both Oportunidades and
Progressa). They find that children who resided in households that participated in the program for a
longer period of time have greater educational attainment, but not necessarily an improvement in
test scores. Akee et al (2010) used the Great Smoky Mountain Study data to examine the effect of
changes in household income on child educational attainment, arrests and obesity. Increased income
has a strong effect on reducing criminality and improving educational attainment for the previously
poorest households in a difference-in-difference framework. In Akee et al (2013), we examine the
effect of increases in household income on childhood obesity and find that there is a difference in
effect depending upon initial household income level.
       Displacement of workers or economic shocks have also been used to help identify the
impacts of a long-run change in economic conditions at the household level. The obvious difference
with pure unearned income shocks such as the one in South Africa is that employment-related
economic shocks may have effects on children’s outcomes beyond what is attributed to the
immediate measurable impact on households income. Further, employment shocks are only related
to negative earned income shocks, which may have different propagation mechanisms than positive
unearned income shocks. Shea (2000) uses industry and job loss as an instrument for income. His
results show no long-run effects on the child’s earnings or schooling; however, he reports some
effects for children from households with fathers who have less than a high school degree.
Oreopolous et al (2008) examine the effect of job displacement due to layoffs on the outcomes of
sons from these households. The sons have lower earnings in the future and the results are primarily
driven by children at the lowest end of the income distribution. In examining historical data for
France in the 19th century, Banerjee et al (2007) found that in young adulthood sons from
households residing in wine production areas affected by new grape diseases were shorter than their
counterparts in other French provinces.
       Finally, changes in government programs and provisions have been used extensively to
examine how changes in household income affect long-run household outcomes. Milligan and



                                                 6
Stabile (2011) investigate how positive changes in tax benefits for households with children
affected those children in Canada. They find that there is an increase in child test scores, height and
health. Interestingly, the incidence of mother’s depression also decreases. In recent work in the
same setting, Jones et al (2015) examined changes to the Canada Child Tax Benefit on child
outcomes and investigated the mechanisms. The research indicates that increases in household
income benefits child outcomes via two mechanisms – increased direct expenditures related to
health and education and through a general improvement in household environment. A number of
studies have used the introduction of the Earned Income Tax Credit as exogenous variation in
household incomes. Evans and Garthwaite (2013) report a reduction in maternal stress and an
overall improvement in health using biometric measures of mothers’ health. Hoynes et al (2015)
find a reduction in low birth weight and attribute it primarily to better pre-natal care and reduction
in maternal smoking. Dahl and Lochner (2008) show that better financial standing leads to an
improvement in achievement test scores for low income children. Similar findings are reported by
Morris et al (2004) who examine changes in several welfare to work programs in the US.
       Studies have also examined how distributing vouchers earmarked for specific family
expenses affect child health and human capital. Kling et al (2007) find in the Moving to
Opportunity data that there are strong mental health benefits of the housing voucher program for
household mothers and for female children. Additionally, the program found improvement for
female children with regard to education and overall health. In a recent paper Jacob et al (2014)
examine outcomes for poor households that receive a randomly provided housing voucher in
Chicago in the late 1990s. The Chicago housing voucher program may have a large effect on actual
household income by serving as a true unearned income shock, which amounted to approximately
$12,000 per year. The study fails to find any significant effects of this income intervention on child
outcomes. However, the authors note that most households do not relocate and the fact that the
neighborhood characteristics do not improve would still be reflected in the quality of schools
attended and social environments.
       A related literature looks at the effect of educational interventions on cognitive and
personality skills and overall health outcomes. Gertler et al (2014) examine the long run results of a
health program conducted in Jamaica specifically aimed to improve child cognitive abilities and
personality skills. Twenty years later, the treated individuals earned 42 percent more. Heckman,
Pinto and Sveleyev (2013) use data on cognitive and personality traits for participants in the Perry



                                                  7
Preschool randomized intervention to analyze the long-run effects of treatment. They find that the
treated children have higher levels of education, employment, earnings and health than their
untreated counterparts. They attribute this primarily to the large improvements in child personality
traits such as a reduction in aggressive and antisocial behaviors. Increasingly researchers are finding
evidence that personality traits and social skills matter for labor market outcomes (Deming, 2015).
        This study is related to these various literatures, but we examine the effects of an exogenous
unearned income transfer rather than participation in educational and social programs. Prior work
has also focused on vouchers that can be used only for a pre-defined set of expenses. Our income
intervention comes without any conditions on the use of the income. We can also measure the
effects of the intervention on both the parents and the children of the affected household. In prior
work, we have found a reduction in child psychopathologies using a single differencing strategy
(Costello et al, 2003). Our current analysis departs from our previous research by using an
individual fixed-effects regression strategy over multiple survey waves to examine behavioral and
emotional disorders and personality traits. We also explore the potential mechanisms in this
analysis and find that there is strong evidence for changes in parental behavior as well.

    III. Data Description

        The Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth (GSMS) is a longitudinal survey of 1420
children aged 9, 11 and 13 years at the survey intake, who were recruited from 11 counties in
western North Carolina. The children were selected from a population of approximately 20,000
school-aged children using an accelerated cohort design. 2 American Indian children from the
Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians were over sampled for this data collection effort.3 Their federal
reservation is situated in two of the 11 counties within the study. The initial survey contained 350
Indian children and 1070 non-Indian children. Proportional weights were assigned according to the
probability of selection into the study; therefore, the data is representative of the school- aged
population of children in this region. Attrition and non-response rates across different survey waves
were found to be equal across ethnic and income groups. The survey began in 1993 and has

2 See Costello E. Jane, Adrian Angold, and Barbara Burns, and Dalene Stangl, and Dan L. Tweed, and Alaatin Erkanli,
and Carol M. Worthman (1996) for a thorough description of the original survey methodology.
3 We provide data from the 1990 US Census in Appendix Table 12 which indicates that the percent of adults with a
high school degree or more, unemployment rates and per capita incomes are approximately similar for this particular
tribe as compared to other American Indian tribes. A comparison with African Americans indicates close similarities
with regard to educational attainment and unemployment rates, however, African Americans have slightly higher per
capita income.


                                                         8
followed these three cohorts of children annually up to the age of 16 and then re-interviewed them
at ages 19 and 21. Both parents and children were interviewed separately up until the child was 16
years old; interviews after that were only conducted with the child alone. Individuals are
interviewed regardless of where they are living (whether on their own, in college, or still living with
their parents). No child is dropped from the survey simply because they moved out of their parent’s
home. We find no statistically significant difference due to attrition between the treatment and
control groups. American Indians comprise 24% of the sample in the very first survey wave and
comprise approximately 27% of the sample at age 21.The interviewers were residents of the study
area who received one month of training for the study. They were randomly assigned to families
across survey waves. Two of the interviewers were Native Americans and one was Cherokee.
Families received $10 to complete the initial wave of the survey (Costello et al, 1997) and the
compensation has increased over time.
        After the fourth wave of the study, a casino opened on the Eastern Cherokee reservation.
The casino is owned by the Eastern Cherokee tribal government. A portion of the profits is
distributed on a per capita basis to all adult tribal members. Disbursements from the casino
revenues are made on a semi-annual basis to all enrolled tribal citizens.4 There are no means testing
or other requirements other than tribal citizenship in order to receive the payments. Individual tribal
members are eligible for the transfer payments whether they reside on or off of the reservation;
tribal cash transfers are based on tribal enrollment status only. The transfers amount to
approximately $4,000 annually and are disbursed to all adult members of the tribe. This extra
income is subject to federal income taxes. This amount is comparable to established government
cash assistance programs such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (French, 2009). In Figure 1 below, we provide
the proportion of households with incomes above $30,000 by American Indian status. The trend
prior to the opening of the casino was similar across American Indian and non-Indian households.
However, there is a sustained upward movement in the proportion of American Indian households
that earn more than $30,000 per year. No similar change is noted for the non-Indian households
after the introduction of the casino payments.

4 All adult tribal members received these per capita disbursements. The average annual amount per person has been
approximately $4000. If there were any non-compliers (American Indian parents that either did not receive or refused
the additional income) then any estimates found here would be an under estimate of the true effects of additional
income. All enrolled, American Indian children were eligible for the casino disbursements themselves at age 18 if they
completed high school; even if they did not complete high school they would receive the casino transfers at age 21.


                                                          9
Figure 1: Percent of households with annual income greater than $30,000 by ethnicity
                                                 Household Income By American Indian Parents By
                                       0.8
                                                                     Year

                                       0.7
 Percent of Households Above $30,000




                                       0.6

                                       0.5                                                                    Households
                                                                                                              with AI
                                       0.4                                                                    Parents

                                       0.3

                                       0.2
                                                                                                              Households
                                       0.1                                                                    with no AI
                                                                                                              Parents
                                        0
                                               1993     1994    1995     1996     1997      1998     1999   2000
                                                                        Calendar year

                                             As Figure 1 indicates, there was a sharp increase in the proportion of AI households
reporting annual incomes in excess of $30,000 that started in the first year of casino operations. The
steady increase in household income can be attributed to the fact that the casino payment was
increasing over time due to increasing casino revenues. On average, the size of the casino payment
was about $4,000 per year per tribal member. In the table below, we regress the household income
on whether the household receives the casino transfer payment. The coefficient at 0.79 indicates
that the average amount of the change in overall income due to the casino payment over the time
period was approximately $3,965 (note that income is measured in bins which are $5,000 in size).
The size of the per-capita transfer is non-trivial in absolute and relative terms. The average income
of AI households with two adult tribal members in the first four (pre-casino) survey waves was
$22,145, so the casino transfers increased household income by almost 20% for these households.
Note that the cash transfers are disbursed to adult members of the tribes only, children’s cash
transfers are banked for them until age 18 so the family receives no money for the children during
our study period.
Table 1: Casino payments and household income

                                                                    Household Income and Casino Payments




                                                                                    10
                                                                                                  (1)


VARIABLES                                                                          Household Income in $5000 bins

Casino Payment?                                                                                0.793***
                                                                                                (0.275)
                                                                                                 0.103
Number of Children Less than 6 years old in Household                                           (0.107)
Constant                                                                                       5.635***
                                                                                               (0.0940)
Observations                                                                                     2,386
R-squared                                                                                        0.213
Household FEs                                                                                      Y
Number of gsms                                                                                    504


Note: American Indian-specific linear time trend, Survey Wave (calendar year) Fixed Effects and Standard errors
clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

         In the Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth there are a number of questions asked
repeatedly at all survey waves regarding the adolescents’ personality and behaviors. Parents and
children are surveyed separately up until age 16, subsequently the survey subject is interviewed
alone at ages 19 onward. Survey questions were specifically designed to diagnose behavioral
emotional disorders. Questions on the survey align with standard definitions for diagnoses and
disorders from the DSM-IV.
         The GSMS is specifically created to assess mental health and well-being in children.5 The
questions are designed to identify psychiatric, behavioral, and emotional disorders. We use the
count of behavioral and emotional disorders as identified in the survey as outcome variables.
Behavioral disorders are defined as anxiety or depression diagnosis from the “Any Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition) (DSM-IV)”. The emotional disorder
variable is coded as any DSM-IV conduct, oppositional, or antisocial personality disorder. These
variables are constructed based on two sets of survey questions - parents’ reported observed
behavior of their children and children’s responses to direct questions from the interviewers. The
indicators for emotional and behavioral disorders are constructed based on the union of the answers
given by parents and children - i.e. if either respondent’s answer indicates a symptom, that
symptom is considered present. A larger value indicates greater or more frequent instances of the


5 Appendix Table 13 provides initial psychiatric disorders in the first survey wave. The table is replicated from Costello
et al (1997).


                                                           11
outcome variable (higher probability of psychiatric diagnosis, more behavioral problems, more
emotional problems). These variables have been standardized with mean zero and unit standard
deviation across all individuals by age. We provide the summary statistics for the variables for the
first survey wave aggregated across all age cohorts by race in Table 2 below; due to this the mean
and standard deviations are not exactly 0 and 1.
           For comparability with existing studies on personality traits, we take advantage of the rich
information gathered in the interviews. We use several questions contained in the GSMS data that
align with the Big Five Measures of Personality. Three dimensions of the Big Five are well-suited
to the GSMS survey questions. They are: 1) Conscientiousness -- Tendency to be organized,
responsible and hardworking. 2) Agreeableness -- Tendency to act in a cooperative and unselfish
manner. 3) Neuroticism -- Chronic level of emotional instability and prone to psychological
distress.
           Using data from the GSMS survey questionnaires, we found comparable questions which
are similar to those used in the determination of these three personality traits.6 For these sets of
questions we only use answers from the parents. The full set of survey questions that were used to
determine the three sub-parts of the Big 5 Personality traits are listed in Appendix Table A1. We re-
coded the personality trait measures such that a higher score indicates a movement in favor of the
Big 5 personality trait (more conscientious, more agreeable, more neurotic). Thus, an improvement
in personality traits would be reflected in an increase of the measured level of the trait, while a
deterioration in personality traits will be reflected in a decrease in the measured level of the trait.
This holds for conscientiousness and agreeableness; however, excessive increases in neuroticism
can actually be classified as a pathology and a large increase in this trait is not necessarily a
beneficial outcome. Given that there were often multiple variables that could be used to identify
these different personality traits, we used a weighted average of the multiple survey variables to
create a single index variable. Our weighted average is based on principal component analysis. The
variable responsible for the largest amount of variance in the data is given a higher weighting. The
linear combination is then used to provide a predicted value that becomes the index variable.
           The GSMS survey contains a set of questions that help us construct additional variables

6   It was difficult to identify questions which relate to the other two dimensions of personality traits (Extraversion and
Openness).




                                                            12
measuring the quality of parental relationships and parental behaviors. These variables are
measured in categories and increasing values indicate either better outcomes or relationships. Only
one parent (the primary caregiver) is asked about the quality of the relationship between the parents.
The child is asked whether they enjoy time spent with their mothers. The number of arguments with
children question is asked of the primary caregiver only and is a count variable for the past three
months. The data includes information regarding parental supervision and relationships with their
spouses and children. We describe these variables in Table 2 below.


Table 2: Descriptive statistics of important outcome and control variables

                                                                  American Indian                 Non-Indian
Variable                                                         Mean     Std. Dev.            Mean     Std. Dev.

Number of Children Less than 6 years of age                           0.498        0.787       0.287         0.862
Average Household Income in First Three Survey Waves by               4.429        2.857       7.092         5.350
Category*
Biological Parents Married?                                           0.431        0.497       0.570         0.743
Behavioral Disorders**                                               -0.210        0.674      -0.203         0.820
Emotional Disorders**                                                -0.237        0.820      -0.015         1.297
Conscientiousness***                                                  0.215        0.969       0.082         1.390
Agreeableness***                                                      0.038        1.343      -0.165         1.606
Neurotic***                                                           0.156        1.060      -0.118         1.717
Adequate Supervision of Mother****                                    1.971        0.227       1.973         0.271
Enjoyable Activities with mother****                                  1.866        0.541       1.901         0.518
Full Time Employed Mother                                             0.582        0.541       0.586         0.792
Poor relationship between parents?                                    0.344        0.488       0.435         0.791
Arguments with Parents                                                4.691       23.213       6.401        27.506
Note: There are 1029 observations of Non-Indians in the data and 327 of American Indians in the first survey wave.
Means and Standard Deviations are weighted using sample probability weights.
*in $5000 bins
** Standardized by age across all races. We present only the aggregate results for all age
cohorts by race for the first survey wave in this table. *** Predicted values from principal
component analysis.
**** On a scale of 0 to 2, higher values indicates more supervision or enjoyable activities.

A study of baseline characteristics measured in the first wave of the survey found no significant
differences in mental health problems between the American Indian and white children (Costello et
al, 1997). The authors also report that the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in the survey
population at baseline was in line with what was found in other epidemiological studies of
similarly-aged children in the United States.

   IV. Conceptual Framework




                                                        13
       The main question of interest in this study is whether and to what extent the receipt of
exogenous unearned household income affects children’s emotional wellbeing and behavioral
health. While the existing theoretical and empirical literature has studied extensively how policy
interventions such as Head Start, Project STAR or the Perry Preschool experiment affect children’s
short- and long-term outcomes, there is relatively little prior empirical evidence on the effects of
shocks to household financial wellbeing unrelated to changes in parental employment. Our
conceptual framework is most closely related to Becker and Tomes (1979), Heckman and Cunha
(2008) and Aizer and Cunha (2012).
       In these models, even with some distaste for skill inequality the family may invest more in
children with higher levels of human capital. This is because the return on investment in these
children is higher and because parents expect or can otherwise devise mechanisms that induce
higher-endowment children to share at least some of their future resources with their less-endowed
siblings. Families may tolerate some amount of skill inequality if it means that the average payoff
to investments in skill level will be higher due to high returns from more gifted children.
       The predictions from these models are that, all else equal, changes in children’s human
capital endowments brought about by external educational interventions will improve educational
outcomes the most for those with higher initial endowments. Thus, a relative reduction in the cost
of investing in children’s human capital will lead to the reinforcement of inequality within a
household. Further, these models predict that in equilibrium, families that received a better initial
draw of human capital endowment for their children will invest more in these children’s human
capital than families who received a bad initial draw from the distribution of initial children’s
endowments.
       Our framework differs from this setup because we examine the effects of a permanent
increase in household unearned income, rather than exogenous changes in (returns to) child
endowments. The standard models cited above predict that this pure income effect would improve
parental investments in all children regardless of their initial human capital endowments, as long as
children are normal goods. In Appendix Figure 1 we provide the initial distribution of two of our
outcome measures by initial household income. The results indicate that conscientiousness varies
positively with initial household income for both American Indian and non-Indian children.
Emotional disorders vary inversely with initial household income levels prior to the casino
intervention. Both of these results indicate that income has a direct relationship with both types of



                                                  14
measures for American Indians and non-Indians prior to the casino operations. The GSMS surveyed
only one child per family, which precludes us from analyzing within-family responses to the
permanent income shock. However, we can still evaluate how this tribal policy affected inequality
at the community level, among children with different initial endowments. Our results are,
therefore, informative as to how a change in household income may affect the overall inequality
levels of child personality traits and endowments.
       Based on these models it is quite straight forward to predict that emotional and personality-
related human capital production is (weakly) increasing in parental investment and exhibits
decreasing marginal returns to parental inputs. Therefore, similarly-sized changes in household
income would predict largest increases in overall skills for those who are at the initially lowest
levels of skills. Since household income has increased a similar amount for all individuals (it is a
per capita payment), assuming a positive relationship between unearned income and parental
investment, an equal-sized increase in income will result in a larger positive change to human
capital for individuals who start from initially lower levels of skill investment. If in equilibrium
parents rationally invest less in less endowed children, then even among parents with the same
initial income levels we would see lower levels of initial investment and thus stronger treatment
responses to the income intervention among less endowed children. The prediction would be that
the personality trait production function is weakly concave with respect to income. We take these
predictions to the data by using the initial levels of child abilities and personality traits in the years
prior to the casino operations and payments.
       We maintain that the observed effect is being driven primarily via the change in unearned
income due to the payments from the casino revenues. Other possibilities such as change in parental
employment or endogenous marriage do not appear to be important confounding factors. Appendix
Tables A2 and A3 provide information on the change in parental employment and marital status as
a result of the start of casino payments. None of the coefficients in these regressions are large in
magnitude and they never reach statistical significance at any conventional levels. Additionally, as
noted in earlier research, other health or educational programs were likely not driving the observed
results for these cohorts of children (Akee et al, 2010). New programs were developed for the
American Indian reservation and spending increased dramatically for reservation services.
However, the large increases in spending occurred in the early 2000 which is after the youngest age
cohort of children had already turned 16 (Johnson et al, 2011, Table 14).



                                                   15
    V. Econometric Framework

        We compare outcomes for adolescents who resided in households with extra income
(youngest and middle age cohorts of American Indian children) to adolescents who were not
exposed to the extra income by age 16 (the oldest age cohort). The two youngest age cohorts (Age 9
and Age 11 at survey intake; ages 13 and 15 at first treatment) function as the "after-treatment"
cases and the oldest age cohort (Age 13 at survey intake) is the "before-treatment" case. We focus
on the effect of the income transfer on personality traits and mental health at age 16. Therefore, the
older age cohort of American Indians serves as one control group and non-tribal members serve as
an additional control group.
        We examine the effect of changes in unearned income on the outcome variables at all survey
waves using an individual panel fixed-effects regression. We use all available data for each
individual from ages 9 (11 and 13 respectively) onwards, interviewed every year until age 16. The
empirical specification is:
Yit  i  Xit    *Transferit   t   Ageit   Ageit  Racei  it (1)

Where,  i is the individual fixed effect,  t is a survey wave fixed-effect,  it is a set of age fixed

effects, and  is the coefficient on an age by race fixed effect. These fixed effects are necessary to
control for other possible mechanisms that could affect the observed changes in our outcome
variables. We are able to use an interaction between age and wave fixed effects as we have
American Indian and non-Indians from the three different cohorts of children. The age by race fixed
effects capture any time variant differences in the mental health and personality development
between the two groups of children. In order to identify the treatment effect, it is necessary that the
outcome variables follow a common trend prior to the observed intervention. Appendix Figure 2
provides the pre-casino intervention trends for the five outcome variables for American Indian
children and Non-Indian children. In most cases, there is a relatively stable relationship between the
two groups. Importantly, there is no observed differential movement in the trend for one group or
the other in these figures.
        The variable X controls for the presence of children younger than six in the household. The
variable Transfer measures whether the child resides in a household that receives the unearned
income transfers due to the casino revenues. The variable is always zero for households that do not



                                                         16
receive the casino transfers. For households that do receive the casino transfers, the variable is zero
for the first four survey waves and then increases to one for all years thereafter. We cluster standard
errors for the individual fixed-effects panel regressions at the individual level (Stock and Watson,
2008).
         Our analysis examines differences in individual changes between the youngest and oldest
cohorts of children across American Indians and non-Indians in the data set. In the figures below,
we provide some evidence of the change in emotional disorders and agreeableness by American
Indian ethnicity and by age cohort. In Panel A of Figure 2, we difference the level of emotional
disorders for the same individual at ages 12 and 16. Then we plot the distribution of these
individual differences by age cohort and American Indian status. We have demeaned the results by
the average cohort change for each age cohort for both panels. In the first plot the results indicate
that, without controlling for other covariates, the youngest age cohort of American Indian children
experienced a leftward shift of their level of emotional disorders relative to the older cohort of
American Indian children. This represents a decrease in their level of emotional disorders. For non-
Indians, whose distributions are shown in the second plot of the figure, there is leftward shift for a
portion of the distribution of the youngest age cohort relative to the oldest age cohort of non
American Indians. Specifically, this provides some evidence that the biggest gains are made for
those American Indians in the youngest age cohort who start out with the initially highest level of
emotional disorders.
         In Panel B, we provide a look at the effect on agreeableness. The results for American
Indians indicate that the change in agreeableness over time increases for all individuals in the
youngest age cohort. There is little or no change across the two non-American Indian cohorts over
time. The rightward shift of the distribution for the youngest cohort of American Indians relative to
the older cohort indicates that there has been an increase of agreeableness. These results preview
our findings in the regression tables to follow.




                                                   17
Figure 2: Evolution of Emotional Disorders and Agreeableness across ethnicity and age cohorts.

                                            Panel A




                                            Panel B




                                               18
   VI. Results

       In the table below we provide the results from the panel fixed-effects regressions described
by equation 2 above. The five outcome variables are: behavioral disorder symptoms, emotional
disorder symptoms, conscientiousness, agreeableness and neuroticism. The first two columns report
the estimated effects of the casino transfers on the presence and severity of behavioral disorder
symptoms observed in the child. The outcome variables are normalized to mean zero and standard
deviation of one across all individuals by age. If we interpret the coefficients relative only to the
American Indian population (see Table 2), the coefficients imply a reduction in the number of
behavioral disorder symptoms by 26.7 percent of a standard deviation. The coefficient on casino
payment in the second column indicates that the casino payment reduces the incidence of emotional
disorder symptoms for treated children by 35.6 percent of a standard deviation.
       The last three columns provide results using personality traits as outcome variables. These
three personality traits take on both positive and negative values as they have been standardized by
age to mean zero and unit standard deviation. The variables have been coded so that positive values
indicate more of the respective personality traits indicated. The coefficient on casino payment in


                                                 19
columns 3 and 4 indicate that the increase in household income has a positive effect on child
personality traits. The casino payment increases the conscientiousness of treated children by 42.8%
of a standard deviation while it increases agreeableness by 30.6 % of a standard deviation. There is
a positive effect on neuroticism, however, it is not statistically significant.7


Table 3: The effect of casino transfers on children’s emotional and behavioral traits and disorders
                                     (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)
                                  Behavioral     Emotional
                                   Disorder       Disorder
    VARIABLES                     Symptoms       Symptoms      Conscientiousness    Agreeableness     Neuroticism

    Casino Payment?                 -0.180*       -0.292**        0.304**              0.412**           0.267
                                     (0.109)        (0.137)        (0.144)              (0.178)         (0.207)
    Number of Children < 6           0.0554         0.0275         -0.0655             -0.0204          -0.121*
    Years in Household              (0.0338)       (0.0353)       (0.0430)             (0.0404)        (0.0635)
    Constant                         0.0446        0.179**       -0.462***            -0.776***       -0.749***
                                    (0.0657)       (0.0695)       (0.0853)              (0.102)         (0.119)
    Child fixed effects                 Y              Y              Y                    Y               Y
    Observations                      6,050          6,050          5,893                5,695           5,880
    R-squared                         0.019          0.019          0.045                0.077           0.052
    Number of gsms                    1,405          1,405          1,402                1,396           1,400
    Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects. Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided
    in parentheses. ; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


We next test for potential heterogeneities in these effects across children with different initial (pre-
transfer) endowments. The coefficients on the interaction variables of the casino transfer dummy
with initial levels of the measured outcomes indicate whether there were any differential effects of
extra income across different children. The results suggest that the casino payments had the largest
effects for those individuals who start off with the lowest initial endowments. Our empirical results
align with the prediction that the personality traits production function is concave with respect to
family income.

Table 4: Heterogeneous effects of casino transfer by initial conditions of the child
                                            (1)           (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)
                                         Behavioral    Emotional
                                          Disorder      Disorder
    VARIABLES                            Symptoms      Symptoms     Conscientiousness    Agreeableness    Neuroticism

    Casino Payment?                        -0.223*      -0.349**         0.415**           0.517***         0.432**

7 A placebo regression which restricts the observations to the four survey waves prior to the casino operations and
artificially treats the first two cohorts of American Indian children is provided in Appendix Table A4. The results
indicate that there is little to no evidence of the effects found in Table 3 in this placebo test.


                                                             20
                                        (0.131)      (0.152)          (0.163)           (0.199)        (0.215)
 Interaction of Pre-Casino              -0.197
 Behavioral Disorder Symptoms
 Average x Casino Payment               (0.235)
 Interaction of Pre-Casino                           -0.270
 Emotional Disorder Symptoms
 Average x Casino Payment                            (0.172)
 Interaction of Pre-Casino                                           -0.350**
 Conscientiousness Average x
 Casino Payment                                                       (0.149)
 Interaction of Pre-Casino                                                              -0.351**
 Agreeableness Average x Casino
 Payment                                                                                (0.148)
 Interaction of Pre-Casino                                                                            -0.631***
 Neuroticism Average x Casino
 Payment                                                                                                (0.143)
 Number of Children Less than 6          0.0546       0.0261        -0.0619             -0.0218        -0.113*
 years old in Household                 (0.0334)     (0.0352)      (0.0422)             (0.0397)       (0.0636)
 Constant                                0.0421       0.177**     -0.466***            -0.776***      -0.752***
                                        (0.0656)     (0.0695)      (0.0852)              (0.102)        (0.120)
 Child fixed effect                         Y            Y             Y                    Y              Y
 Observations                             6,050        6,050         5,886                5,692          5,879
 R-squared                                0.021        0.021         0.048                0.080          0.054
 Number of gsms                           1,405        1,405         1,399                1,394          1,399
 Note: American Indian Age Trend and Age Fixed Effects. Standard errors clustered at the individual
 level provided in parentheses.; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


In interpreting the interaction coefficients it is important to remember that the standardized
measures of personality traits take both positive and negative values and are standardized with
mean zero. Thus, a negative interaction coefficient coupled with a negative initial value implies a
positive overall effect of the treatment. In columns 1 and 2, individuals with initially higher levels
of behavioral or emotional symptoms are most likely to experience a reduction in their symptoms
after the start of casino payments. The estimated coefficients are negative but not statistically
significant in either column. In comparison, the interaction coefficients of initial levels of
behavioral traits with casino payments are negative and statistically significant in all cases.
        The next three columns provide the corresponding results for the Big 5 Personality Traits.
The measures of personality traits range in value from negative to positive values with higher
values indicating higher levels of that particular personality trait. As a result, individuals with
initially low levels of conscientiousness will have negative values which, combined with a negative
interaction term coefficient, imply a positive overall effect on the outcome measure due to the
casino transfer. For instance, the total effect of casino payments for an individual who starts off
with a level of conscientiousness of -0.10 is an increase of 0.415 + -0.10 x -0.35 = 0.415+0.035=



                                                        21
0.45 in conscientiousness, which is approximately an increase of 46% of a standard deviation. The
same reasoning holds for the last two columns. Another way to interpret these results is that the
extra cash transfers improve emotional and behavioral health for all children, however the
improvements are much more pronounced for those who had pre-treatment values below the mean
of the estimated outcome. In Appendix Table A5 we present the estimates from models comparing
transfer effects across individuals - excluding individual fixed effects and including initial levels of
outcome variables (averages of the outcome variable taken over the first three survey waves) and
their interaction with the casino payment. Unsurprisingly, the initial levels are highly predictive of
the outcomes at age 16. The important take-away from this exercise is that the interaction terms are
similar in magnitude and have the same signs as the estimates in the regressions including person
fixed effects. This reassures us that the observed results can be attributed to the heterogeneous
effect of casino payments; there is no evidence for a “regression to the mean” result.
        Previous research has found that parents invest resources in children with the highest initial
endowments. The reason is that the returns to parental investment are highest in these cases. Our
results do not necessarily contradict those results as the intervention here does not alter child
endowments, but instead relaxes the parent’s budget constraint. Further, we do not observe more
than one child per household so we cannot draw conclusions on the intra-household distribution of
resources as a function of initial child endowments. Our findings are particularly helpful if we are
interested in the effect of transfer payments on community-level inequality in adolescent
personality traits and behaviors.

     VII.        Mechanisms

        The overall effect of an increase in unearned household income is an improvement in child
personality traits by age 16. The results also indicate that there is a reduction in behavioral and
emotional disorders. In this section, we explore several channels through which the increase in
unearned income may affect child outcomes.8
A.      Parental Behaviors



8 Our data do not contain information on consumption or expenditures, therefore it is not possible to examine whether
the unearned income was spent on additional educational inputs. Jones et al (2015) have found some evidence in
Canada that increased incomes affect child outcomes via both increased expenditures and on an improvement in
parental and household behaviors.


                                                         22
We first investigate the effect of changes in household income on parental behaviors and
relationships as a potential mechanism that may contribute to improved child wellbeing.
Increasingly, there is convincing evidence that parents’ mental and physical health are affected by
changes in household income (Milligan and Stabile, 2011; Jones et al, 2015). For example, Evans
and Garthwaite, (2014) find that there is a statistically significant reduction in maternal stress levels
and stress-related hormones in households where mothers qualify for more generous EITC. In
related research, Mani et al (2013) find that individuals with lower stress have better overall
cognitive functioning. Paxson and Walfogel (2002) show that there is a strong relationship between
poverty and child maltreatment. In the psychology literature, there is mounting evidence for the
Family Stress model which posits that economic hardships lead to increased emotional distress and
ultimately marital strife (Conger et al, 1999). In other work, authors have found that the resulting
marital stress (due to economic hardship) has led to poorer parenting and more difficulty in
adolescent boys’ emotional development (Conger et al, 1992). Examining only African-American
families, Conger et al (2002) find that there is a reduction in good parenting behaviors at the onset
of economic hardships which also play a role in measures of child adjustment.
       The change in parental behaviors and relationships triggered by income transfers may be
one of the mechanisms through which increased household income affects children. Table 5
provides results examining four variables that capture parental relationships contained in the GSMS
data set. In column 1, there is evidence that the casino payment increases the level of parental
supervision of their child (as reported by the parent). The magnitude of the coefficient is
approximately 50% of a standard deviation of the observed variable for American Indians (see
Table 2). The effect of the casino payment on whether the child has an enjoyable relationship with
the parent (as reported by the child) is approximately 39.7% of a standard deviation for American
Indians. Overall the effect of having additional household income is that there is an improvement in
parental supervision of their children and relationships with their children (columns 1 and 2). Of
note, these two outcomes are reported by separate respondents so that we can conclude that the
estimated effects are not just a result of improved general outlook on life among parents receiving
the transfers. We have previously noted these findings in earlier research and they are repeated here
for completeness (Akee et al 2010).
       In column 3, we test whether the relationships between parents improve as a result of the
transfers. The increase in income due to the casino payment decreases the likelihood that a parent



                                                   23
characterizes their relationship with their spouse or partner as poor. The coefficient on the casino
payment variable is approximately 25.2% of a standard deviation of the average in the first three
survey waves for American Indians. The fourth column indicates that there has been a reduction in
the number of arguments with parents after the casino payments began. The coefficient on this
variable is 32.7% of a standard deviation of the arguments with parent variable for American
Indians. Overall, we find convincing evidence that the casino transfers resulted in a large
improvement in parental relationships with children and with spouses.

Table 5: Effects of casino transfer on Parental Behaviors and Relationships
                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)

                                            Adequate            Enjoyable
                                             Parental          Relationship     Poor relationship    Arguments with
VARIABLES                                  Supervision?        with Parent?     between parents?         Parent

Casino Payment?                            0.104**              0.158**               -0.120*            -7.591***
                                           (0.0516)            (0.0787)               (0.0676)             (2.819)
Number of Children Less than 6 years       -0.00585             -0.0202              9.61e-05               0.479
old in Household                          (0.00965)            (0.0137)               (0.0159)             (0.803)
Constant                                  1.970***             1.865***              0.548***             10.68***
                                           (0.0225)            (0.0300)               (0.0331)             (1.494)
Individual child FE                            Y                   Y                      Y                   Y
Observations                                 5,015               5,413                  5,584               6,038
R-squared                                    0.013               0.008                  0.035               0.010
Number of gsms                               1,265               1,327                  1,389               1,405
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects. Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in
parentheses..
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



In order to further investigate the channel through which additional household income affects
children we include an additional interaction variable into the regressions. In Table 6 below we
provide the coefficients from separate regressions corresponding to the models in Table 5, where
we include the casino payment variable and an interaction variable with the casino payment and the
initial levels of the child’s conscientiousness, agreeableness, behavioral disorder symptoms or
emotional disorder symptoms.
        In panel A, the coefficient on the interaction variable indicates that parents will increase
their supervision for children with worse pre-transfer behavioral health. The number of parent-child
arguments also decreases more for children with worse initial behavioral symptoms. There appears




                                                          24
to be no statistical relationship between these interactions and the other two outcome variables and
the magnitudes are quite small relative to the coefficient on casino payment alone.
       In panel B, we find again that the quality of the parent-child relationship improves more
among families with children who exhibit worse initial emotional disorder symptoms. Here we also
find that the relationship between the two parents improves more for families with children who
display worse emotional conditions pre-intervention. In panels C, D and E we show similar
differences in effects by initial levels of conscientiousness, agreeableness and neuroticism. Parental
supervision increases more for children who have the lowest initial values of these personality traits
(coded as negative initial endowments); the relationship between parents and these children
improve; and the number of reported parent-child arguments decreases.
       The overall take-away is that parents who receive the extra unearned income due to the
casino transfers provide investments in their children who have lower than average personality
traits and higher than average amounts of behavioral and emotional disorders.

Table 6: Heterogeneous effects of income transfers on parental behaviors by initial level of
children’s endowments
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
                                                                                  Poor
                                                 Adequate       Enjoyable     relationship
                                                  Parental     Relationship     between      Arguments
VARIABLES                                       Supervision?   with Parent?     parents?     with Parent
Panel A
Casino Payment                                   0.122**         0.156*        -0.126*       -8.861***
                                                 (0.0538)       (0.0805)       (0.0693)        (2.868)
Initial Behavioral Diagnosis x Casino Payment    0.0809**       -0.00845       -0.0276        -5.710**
                                                 (0.0360)       (0.0434)       (0.0505)        (2.270)
Panel B
Casino Payment                                    0.108**       0.174**        -0.144**      -7.757***
                                                  (0.0547)      (0.0800)       (0.0682)       (2.836)
Initial Emotional Diagnosis x Casino Payment       0.0188       0.0731**       -0.104**        -0.790
                                                  (0.0510)      (0.0361)       (0.0434)       (1.094)
Panel C
Casino Payment                                    0.125**        0.150*        -0.137**      -8.188***
                                                  (0.0544)      (0.0806)       (0.0697)       (2.923)
Initial Conscientiousness x Casino Payment       -0.0588**       0.0254         0.0549         1.970
                                                  (0.0289)      (0.0347)       (0.0482)       (1.489)
Panel D
Casino Payment                                    0.119**       0.165**        -0.129*       -8.863***
                                                  (0.0537)      (0.0794)       (0.0696)       (2.862)
Initial Agreeableness x Casino Payment           -0.0610**      -0.0239         0.0392       4.663***
                                                  (0.0265)      (0.0220)       (0.0390)       (1.216)
Panel E
Casino Payment                                    0.112**        0.151*        -0.137**      -8.032***



                                                    25
                                                        (0.0545)           (0.0804)        (0.0680)       (2.828)
 Initial Neuroticism x Casino Payment                   -0.0299             0.0287          0.0699         1.756
                                                        (0.0346)           (0.0395)        (0.0498)       (1.169)
 Note: Pairs of coefficients are from separate regressions in each column. All regressions include age fixed effects,
 wave fixed effects, age by race fixed effects and individual fixed effects, number of children less than 6 in the
 household and a constant. Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



B.         Parental Drug and Alcohol Abuse and Own Mental Health Outcomes.

           Parents may also change their behavior with regard to their use of drugs and alcohol.
Reduction in this usage could be taken as a sign of improved decision-making and self-control. In
the following table, we show regression results from linear probability models where regress
whether either of the two parents currently use drug and alcohol in the same individual panel
model. These measures are reported by the respondent parent and the child respectively. In Table 7
below, the coefficient on casino payment is negative for the parent’s own reporting of drug or
alcohol use and slightly positive for the child’s reporting. However, neither estimated coefficient is
statistically significant. The next two regressions provide the drug or alcohol use for parent 2 as
reported by parent 1 or the child. The estimated coefficient on casino payment is negative in both
cases and it is statistically significant for the report by parent 1 in column 3. These reported
reductions in parental drug and alcohol use provide a further indication of an improvement in
parental behaviors. In previous research (Akee et al, 2010), we have also shown that parents are less
likely to be arrested after they start receiving the casino payments.


           Table 7: Individual Fixed Effects Regression for Parental Alcohol and Drug Use on Casino Payments
                                     (1)                       (2)                    (3)                 (4)


                             Parent 1 Currently       Parent 1 Currently        Parent 2 Currently    Parent 2 Currently
                              Uses Alcohol or          Uses Alcohol or           Uses Alcohol or       Uses Alcohol or
VARIABLES                    Drugs by Parent 1         Drugs by Child           Drugs by Parent 1      Drugs by Child

Casino Payment?                   -0.0108                  0.0196                     -0.0918**             -0.0435
                                 (0.0230)                 (0.0272)                     (0.0376)            (0.0341)
Constant                         0.0287**                 0.0363**                     0.163***            0.146***
                                 (0.0117)                 (0.0158)                     (0.0248)            (0.0237)

Observations                       6,047                    5,796                       6,043               5,793
R-squared                          0.006                    0.005                       0.009               0.012
Number of gsms                     1,405                    1,395                       1,405               1,395



                                                           26
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effect and Number of Kids Less than 6 Years old and standard errors
clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

In the next table we examine a proxy for the parent’s own mental health: an indicator of whether the
parent ever sought treatment by a mental health professional. The variable is reported by the
respondent parent which is typically the mother in the household. The results in Table 8 indicate
that receiving casino payments has a negative effect on either parents seeking treatment by a mental
health professional. The coefficient is negative in both cases and statistically significant for the
second parent which is typically the father. Of course, the results here only indicate that after the
casino payments, parents were less likely to report having to seek mental health treatment. This
may mean that parents experienced less mental health problems or that they simply avoided
treatment more systematically. It is not possible to distinguish between the two possibilities.



            Table 8: Individual Fixed Effects Regression for Parental Mental Health on Casino Payments
                                                       (1)                                     (2)

                                         Ever Treated by Mental Health            Ever Treated by Mental Health
            VARIABLES                       Professional, Parent 1?                  Professional, Parent 2?


Casino Payment?                                      -0.109                                 -0.138***
                                                    (0.0793)                                 (0.0527)
Constant                                            0.650***                                0.192***
                                                    (0.0485)                                 (0.0305)

Observations                                          6,045                                   6,044
R-squared                                             0.063                                   0.016
Number of gsms                                        1,405                                   1,405

Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effect and Number of Kids Less than 6 years old; standard errors
clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

C.         Movements across Census Tracts
           As an additional check on potential mechanisms, we examine whether and where individual
households move following the change in household income. In Table 9 we use information on the
census tract location of the individual households at various survey waves to investigate whether
the casino payment increases the likelihood of moving to a different neighborhood. The first


                                                         27
column indicates that there is a positive effect of the casino payment on the probability of moving
of about 7%. In column 2, we include an interaction effect between receiving the casino payment
and living initially on the reservation. The level effect of the casino payment is still positive and
statistically significant, however, the coefficient on the interaction variable is now negative. This
indicates that those residing on the reservation are less likely to leave the reservation after the
casino payments begin. Therefore, the observed increase in moves must be due to those receiving
casino payments who reside off of the reservation.
       We investigate this in the next two columns. Receiving the casino payments in column 3 has
a small and statistically insignificant negative effect on living on the reservation. However, in
column 4 we find that, once we include the interaction variable of casino revenue with initially
living on the reservation, those living on the reservation are more likely to still be living on the
reservation after the casino payments. The residual difference and any actual movements are due to
those residing off of the reservation. There is little evidence that those residing off the reservation
are moving to live on the reservation.


                      Table 9: Census Tract Changes Regressed on Casino Payments
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                     Change         Change
                                  Census Tract Census Tract
                                  of Residence of Residence
                                     (Coded         (Coded        Living on      Living on
              VARIABLES           either 0 or 1) either 0 or 1)  Reservation   Reservation

              Casino Payment?           0.0726*        0.146**        -0.0216        -0.137**
                                        (0.0430)       (0.0592)       (0.0209)       (0.0565)
              Casino x Living                          -0.104**                      0.157***
              Initially on                             (0.0516)                      (0.0576)
              Reservation
              Number of Children         0.0107         0.0116         0.00348        0.00281
              Less than 6 years old     (0.0134)       (0.0134)       (0.00397)      (0.00400)
              in Household
              Constant                -0.0827***      -0.0525***      0.197***       0.198***
                                       (0.0231)        (0.0202)       (0.00711)      (0.00676)

              Observations               5,139         5,101           5,101           5,101
              R-squared                  0.059         0.060           0.010           0.043
              Number of gsms             1,389         1,383           1,383           1,383
              Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Robust Standard errors in
              parentheses.
              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     28
        The next set of regressions in Table 10 investigates the characteristics of the census tracts
that the individual households move to as a result of the casino payments. All characteristics are
measured in the 1990 Census data, measured before the casino transfers commenced, so that
movements across census tracts by transfer recipients are not affecting the tract characteristics. The
first four columns use the entire GSMS population (both American Indian and non-Indian
observations). The final four columns report the results from a similar analysis on the American
Indian population subset alone. In the first set of four regressions, the results suggest that casino
payments do not have a statistically significant effect on where individuals move to as a result of
the casino payments. The coefficients are relatively small in magnitude and are never statistically
significant.
        Restricting analysis to the American Indian subset, however, provides different results. We
are exploiting the differences in the survey waves across the different age cohorts of American
Indian children in these regressions. Results should be interpreted with this caveat in mind. In
column 5, the coefficient on casino payment indicates that among American Indians who move,
they move to census tracts that have higher median household incomes. The coefficient on casino
payment is large and positive for the percent in the labor force but not statistically significant. In the
next column the coefficient on casino payments is large and barely misses statistical significance at
the 10% level. Taken together, these results qualitatively indicate that those American Indians who
are moving as a result of the casino payment are moving to census tracts that have higher levels of
educational attainment than those census tracts that they were initially located in. Column 8
indicates that among American Indians who move as a result of the casino payment they are
moving to census tracts with lower concentration of American Indian heads of households than in
the neighborhoods where they were located previously. Jacob et al (2014) find that few people
move out of their communities as a result of the Chicago housing voucher program; our results
suggest that this holds for the on-reservation population but not for the off-reservation population.
These findings suggest that part of the observed effects may operate through better neighborhoods,
at least for the tribal members initially residing off the reservation. This is in line with results from
other studies investigating the effects of residential mobility on children’s outcomes. The research
on Moving to Opportunity (Kling et al, 2007), found a statistically significant effect of the
relocation to better neighborhoods on maternal mental health outcomes. Black (1999) has shown
that parents are willing to pay a premium to live in school districts which produce higher test



                                                   29
scores. Chetty and Hendren (2015) have found that there is a direct relationship between the
amount of time a child resides in a better county in the US (due to family moves) and
intergenerational mobility of those children as adults.




                                                  30
                       Table 10: Census Tract Changes Regressed on Casino Payments for American Indians Alone

                                 (1)        (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)        (6)            (7)        (8)

                             Median      Percent in                                   Median    Percent in
                             Family        Labor       Percent     Percent AI         Family      Labor       Percent     Percent AI
                           Income by     Force by     with High     Head of         Income by   Force by     with High     Head of
                             Census       Census       School      Household          Census     Census       School      Household
VARIABLES                     Tract        Tract         Plus       by Tract           Tract      Tract         Plus       by Tract



Casino Payment?              -321.6       0.0847        -0.162       -0.901           2,086*      0.625         1.223      -6.587*

                             (682.9)      (0.306)      (0.432)       (1.656)          (1,182)    (0.614)        (0.777)    (3.878)

Number of Children           -51.50      -0.0396       -0.0539       0.688*           -121.4     0.0167         0.0779     1.419*
Less than 6 years old in                 (0.1000)
Household                    (195.2)                   (0.154)       (0.370)          (152.3)    (0.103)        (0.127)    (0.749)

Constant                   49,561***     60.49***     68.52***      13.53***        34,522***   59.19***     63.17***     61.14***

                             (535.7)      (0.224)      (0.361)       (0.559)          (1,812)    (1.277)        (1.524)    (7.551)

American Indians
Alone?                           N           N                           N              Y           Y             Y           Y

Observations                  5,139        5,139        5,139         5,139           1,309       1,309         1,309       1,309

R-squared                     0.006        0.004        0.008         0.022           0.018       0.017         0.017       0.037

Number of gsms                1,389        1,389        1,389         1,389            341         341           341         341

Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Robust Standard errors in parentheses.

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    31
D.     Community Effects by Census Tract
       In this section we investigate the potential role of community and peer effects in
determining improved child outcomes for affected households. Using the geographic location of
households, we merge in US Census data measures for the percent of household heads in a census
tract (in 1990 prior to the casino operations) that are American Indian. The purpose of these
regressions is to investigate an additional mechanism that may explain how the introduction of
higher per capita income in the community affected child emotional and behavioral outcomes.
Specifically, if a particular community has a high proportion of American Indians the resulting
increase in incomes due to casino transfer payments would lift incomes for large proportion of the
community. As a result, there may be community-level positive externalities which affect child
outcomes in addition to any family-specific processes that contribute to child welfare. For example,
as incomes increase, all households and parents may monitor not only their own children but those
in their community at large.
       In Appendix Table A6 we regress the child outcomes on the main set of controls including
casino payments as provided in Table 3, but we also include an interaction variable of casino
payments with the percent of household heads that are American Indian in the census tract. The
interaction coefficient is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, suggesting that the
concentration of individuals receiving the casino transfer in the census tract does not have a strong
additional effect on the child behavioral or personality traits. The coefficients on the main effects of
casino payments are only slightly changed from our original results presented in Table 3.
       The next four sets of regressions in Appendix Table A6 use a different interaction variable.
In these regressions we include the standard set of control variables as well as an interaction
between casino payments and whether the household resides on the American Indian reservation or
not. The results from this analysis are similar to that found in the previous four columns – higher
concentration of American Indian households in the census tract does not lead to disproportionately
strong effects of the casino transfers.
       Finally, in Appendix Table A7 we test the hypothesis that a higher concentration of transfer
recipients in the census tract amplifies that effect of casino transfers on parental and parent-child
relationships. We regress the parental behavior and relationship outcome variables on the same set
of regressors and interaction variables. The results largely mirror the results presented in Table 5




                                                  32
although there is a slight reduction in statistical significance in some regressions for the coefficient
on casino payments.
       Overall, community-wide effects do not appear to be a strong mechanism in explaining the
observed improvement in either child behavior and personality traits or parental behaviors and
relationships. Ultimately, this may indicate that the community-wide effects of the additional
income did not result in positive externalities that can be measured in our data in this relatively
short time period.


   VIII.       Robustness Checks and Specification Checks

       In this section we explore several potential other confounding factors which may be driving
the observed results. In previous research (Akee et al 2010, 2013; and Costello et al 2003) we
examined changes primarily by initial household poverty status. The results indicated in those
studies that there was significant heterogeneity in program effect across initial household poverty
status. Child educational attainment was largest for the initially poor households and reductions in
obesity were largest for the initially wealthier households. Comparing across survey respondents,
there were larger reductions in child psychopathology for the poorer households. In Table A8 we
provide the main analysis from Table 3 by initial household poverty status. The results indicate that
the coefficients are of the expected signs for the first four columns in both panels and attain
statistical significance in five out of the eight regressions. The coefficient on casino payments for
the neuroticism regression has a negative sign for households not initially in poverty, but positive
(as expected) and statistically significant at the 10% level for households initially in poverty.
Overall, the results show some slight differences, but the results are not as stark as previously found
in between-household (child) analysis.
       We also examine whether the effect of having a single American Indian parent or two
American Indian parents have differential effects on the observed outcomes for our main outcome
variables as presented in Table 3. Households with two American Indian parents will receive twice
the amount of the per capita disbursements as payments are made to all tribally-enrolled citizens,
not by household. In Table A9 we separate out whether the household has one American Indian
parent household or two American Indian parents in the household. It appears that observed effects
are driven by having at least one American Indian parent in the household. The coefficients on




                                                  33
having a second American Indian parents are similar to those of the first American Indian parent
but are smaller in magnitude and never achieve statistical significance.
       In Table A10 we separate out the behavioral and emotional disorder reports contained in the
survey as to whether they are by the parent alone, child alone or both combined. In our analysis we
use the combined reports as is standard in the psychology literature. However, separating out the
responses by parent and child indicates that the observed results for a reduction in emotional
disorder symptoms is driven by the child’s reporting.           On the other hand, the reduction in
behavioral disorders is driven primarily by the parent’s reporting of child behaviors.
       Finally, in Table A11 we present our main regression results for households that are headed
by a single parent. One potential confounding factor for our analysis is that there might have been
other changes occurring at the time of the casino operations in 1996. One dramatic change was the
welfare reform that occurred at approximately the same time at the national level. Therefore, in this
analysis we include an interaction variable which indicates whether a household was headed by a
single parent (which is a necessary condition to be eligible for welfare). The coefficient on this
interaction variable is provided in the second row of the table. None of the coefficients attain
statistical significance and the main results are qualitatively similar to our main results in Table 3.
       The validity of our main results rests on the assumption that there were no unobserved, AI-
specific programs or positive economic shocks that commenced at the same time as the casino
transfers. One potential source could be an increase in US federal funding for American Indians in
particular starting in 1996. Examining data from Walke (2000), we find that there has been a sharp
reduction in federal funding for American Indians across the board since the 1980s and a slight drop
in 1996 as well. We also checked the US Senate Documents for Bureau of Indian Affairs
appropriations and found that there were no new funding allocations for the Eastern Band of
Cherokee Indians during this time period.




                                                   34
                       Indian Per Capita Expenditure in Constant 1997 dollars
          $8,000

          $7,000

          $6,000

          $5,000

          $4,000

          $3,000

          $2,000
                     1975
                     1976
                     1977
                     1978
                     1979
                     1980
                     1981
                     1982
                     1983
                     1984
                     1985
                     1986
                     1987
                     1988
                     1989
                     1990
                     1991
                     1992
                     1993
                     1994
                     1995
                     1996
                     1997
                     1998
                     1999
                     2000
       Source: Walke (2000)

    IX.            Discussion of Long-Run Outcomes
       Given the longitudinal nature of our data, we can examine the association between the
improved personality traits and reduction in emotional and behavioral disorders and that of adult
outcomes. In the table below, we identify the association between the levels of age 16 disorders and
personality traits and age 25 outcomes such as employment and educational attainment of non-
Indians. The non-Indians were not affected by changes in unearned income and thus did not have a
subsequent change in disorders or personality traits. We find that measures of emotional and
behavioral wellbeing at age 16 are negatively related to labor market outcomes measured at age 25.
Higher levels of behavioral and emotional disorders are associated with lower levels of educational
attainment and employment probabilities. Conversely, higher levels of the three personality traits
(conscientiousness, agreeableness and neuroticism) at age 16 are associated with higher levels of
these same age 25 outcomes.


Table 11: Association between Long Run Outcomes (Age 25) for Non American Indians using Age 16 Levels
                                    of Disorders and Personality Traits
                                                                      (1)                (2)
                                                                   Years of
                                                                 Educational
VARIABLES                                                        Attainment    Full Time Employed?
Panel A
                                                                  -0.475***         -0.0734***
                Behavioral Disorder Symptoms at Age 16             (0.0815)           (0.0165)


                                                    35
Panel B
                                                                    -0.421***                -0.0421**
                Emotional Disorder Symptoms at Age 16                (0.114)                  (0.0189)
Panel C
                Conscientiousness Score at Age 16                   0.517***                 0.0481***
                                                                    (0.0876)                  (0.0169)
Panel D
                Agreeableness Score at Age 16                       0.263***                 0.0412***
                                                                    (0.0753)                  (0.0147)
Panel E
                Neuroticism Score at Age 16                         0.279***                 0.0504***
                                                                    (0.0683)                  (0.0112)

Note: Pairs of coefficients are from separate regressions in each column. All regressions include age fixed
effects, wave fixed effects, age by race fixed effects and individual fixed effects, number of children less
than 6 in the household and a constant. Robust Standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                 We decompose the changes in age 25 educational attainment and full time
   employment due to the associated changes in observed increases (by age 16) in
   conscientiousness and decreases in emotional disorders in the following table. We use the actual
   changes in child personality traits and emotional wellbeing at age 16 and the respective
   correlation coefficients from Table 11 to account for the observed increase in overall
   educational attainment and employment probability at age 25.
                 In Table 12 below, we present some results for the change in conscientiousness and
   emotional disorders (we do not present the other measures as they are highly correlated with
   one another and provide similar results). The total change in educational attainment and fulltime
   employment (differencing across age cohorts and American Indian status) is given in the first
   row of the table as almost half a year of education (0.487 for education) and an increase of 22%
   in fulltime employment (0.224 for full time probability). We compute these measures using a
   simple difference-in-difference equation with no covariates for the age 25 outcome variables -
   educational attainment and full time employment probability. The equation is the following:


   EducationChange  (EducationY ,AI  EducationO,AI )  (EducationY ,NonAI  EducationO,NonAI )


   In the equation above the subscripts Y and O indicate youngest and oldest age cohorts
   respectively and AI and NonAI represent American Indian and Non-Indian respectively. The
   four different variables labeled “Education” are the average educational attainment at age 25 for



                                                          36
     each of the four subgroups. A similar calculation is conducted for full time employment
     probabilities at age 25.
                  In Panel A, we provide the change in conscientiousness for the youngest age cohort
     of American Indians in our data (the second row). The coefficient on the third line comes from
     Table 11 above and the fourth line provides the product of the value in row 2 and 3. We call
     this the total change in the fourth row. Finally, in the fifth row of Panel A we show the percent
     of the net change this total change represents, which is calculated as the ratio of row four to row
     one. The change in conscientiousness is associated with approximately 28% of the difference in
     educational attainment for this age cohort and about 6% of the difference of fulltime
     employment. Panel B provides a similar calculation for the reduction in emotional disorders and
     it is associated with approximately 21% of the change in educational attainment and about 5%
     of the change in full time employment probability.
                  It is important to note that these measures are not independent (conscientiousness
     and emotional disorders) of one another; these results should not be interpreted as additive here.
     Additionally, it is not possible to fully provide a causal story for these long run (measured at age
     25) outcomes and we stress that the results are meant to illustrate potential long-run effects.


               Table 12: Explaining Raw Differences in Outcomes by Changes in Age 16 Characteristics

                                                                                                           Fulltime
                                                                                              Education   Employed
     (1) Net Change at Age 25 (Difference in Difference Estimate)                              0.487       0.224
Panel A
   (2) Change in Conscientiousness for Age Cohort 1 AI                                          0.260       0.260
   (3) Coefficient on Conscientiousness from Non AI (Table 11)                                  0.517       0.048
   (4) Total Change = row(2) x row(3):                                                          0.134       0.013
   (5) Percent of difference explained by increase in conscientiousness = row (4) / row (1)    0.276       0.056
Panel B
   (2) Change in Emotional for Age Cohort 1 AI                                                 -0.238      -0.238
   (3) Coefficient on Emotional from Non AI (Table 11)                                         -0.421      -0.042
   (4) Total Change = row(2) x row(3):                                                          0.100      0.010
     (5) Percent of difference explained by reduction in Emotional = row (4) / row (1)         0.206       0.045

X.       Conclusion




                                                          37
        Our research investigates the effect of increases in unearned income on personality traits and
behavioral and emotional disorders of children up to the age of 16. To our knowledge, this research
is the first to examine an unearned income intervention and its resulting effect on child personality
traits and behavioral disorders accounting for unobserved fixed individual characteristics in a
longitudinal setting. It is also the first to examine potential mechanisms using data on parents of the
population of interest.
        The results presented here indicate that there are significant positive effects of an increase in
unearned household income on the prevalence of behavioral and emotional disorders and on the
personality traits of affected children. These effects are robust to individual fixed-effects and are not
explained by changes in parental time use, employment, marital status, changes in national welfare
reform or other tribal government programmatic changes. The size of the effects is relatively large;
the effect reduces behavioral disorders by 26.7 % of a standard deviation and increases
conscientiousness by 42.8 % of a standard deviation. We have also shown that the effect is most
significant for children who were initially behind their peers in these traits and those who exhibited
more symptoms of disorders. This suggests that parents may be reacting to the exogenous cash
transfers by compensating for their children who have lower levels of mental health and worse
personality traits.
        Given the longitudinal nature of our data we are able to investigate several potential
mechanisms responsible for the observed change in child outcomes. While there was little to no
evidence for changes in parental employment (a proxy for time spent with children), there was
significant evidence to suggest that parental relationships with children and with their spouses
(partners) improved. Other researchers have shown conclusively that increased incomes have
significantly improved parental outlook, mental health and happiness. Therefore, the results here
suggest that while parental time with child may not have changed an improvement in interactions
alone may have an important impact on child behavior and personality.
        Finally, we can trace household geographic mobility at the census tract level over time. Our
results suggest that households that received the casino payments and were initially located off the
reservation were more likely to move to slightly better (in terms of median household income)
census tracts. These results suggest that at least some of the improvement in the child behavioral
and personality traits may be explained by better community amenities present in these higher
income areas.



                                                   38
       One important caveat regarding our research is worth repeating. The increase in unearned
income is relatively large and has been effectively a permanent change for our study population.
Other income interventions have been shown to be approximately similar in size but not in duration.
Additional research for the effect of shorter-term household income changes with a quasi-
experimental design would help to establish the relevant threshold necessary to establish an effect
on child behavior and personality traits.




                                                39
   XI. References

Aizer, Anna and Flavio Cunha (2012). The Production of Human Capital: Endowments,
     Investments and Fertility. NBER Working Paper 18429, September.

Anna Aizer, Laura Stroud, Stephen Buka. 2012 “Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes: Evidence
      from Siblings.” NBER Working Paper No. 18422.

Aizer, Anna and Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. “The Long Term Impact
     of Cash Transfers to Poor Families.” NBER Working Paper No. 20103.

Akee, Randall and J. Costello, W. Copeland, G. Keeler and A. Angold . “Parent’s Incomes and
       Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment with Casinos on American Indian
       Reservations,” American Economics Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 2, No. 1, January
       2010, pp. 86-115.

Akee, Randall and Emilia Simeonova, E. J. Costello, W. Copeland, G. Keeler and A. Angold .
       “Young Adult Obesity and Household Income: Effects of Unconditional Cash Transfers.”,
       April 2013 in American Economics Journal: Applied Economics.

Banarjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy Watts. 2007. “Long-Run
     Health Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France.” NBER
     Working Paper No. 12895.

Becker, G. and Tomes, N. (1979) 'An equilibrium theory of the distribution of income and
       intergenerational mobility', Journal of Political Economy, 87.6:1153-1189.

Becker, G. and Tomes, N. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal of
       Labor Economics, Volume 4, No 3, pt 2.

Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd. 2005. “Long-Term Impacts of the Oportuni-
    dades Conditional Cash Transfer Program on Rural Youth in Mexico.” Ibero-America
    Institute for Economic Research Discussion Paper 122.

Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V. and C. Hansen. 2014. "Inference on Treatment Effects After
     Selection Amongst High-Dimensional Controls (with an Application to Abortion and
     Crime)," The Review of Economic Studies. Volume 81, No 2. Pp. 608-650.

Black, Sandra E. 1999. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, V. 114 (2): 577-599.

Blau, David M. 1999. The effect of income on child development. Review of Economics and
     Statistics 81, no. 2 (May): 261–76.

Bleidorn, W. (2012). Hitting the road to adulthood: Short-term personality development during a


                                               40
     major life transition. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 1594–1608.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167212456707.

Campbell, Frances and Conti, Gabriella, J.J. Heckman, S. Moon, R. Pinto, E. Pungello and P. Yi.
    2014. “Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health” Science, Vol. 343 no.
    6178, pp. 1478-1485.

Cameron, S. and Heckman, J.J. (1998).Life cycle schooling and dynamic selection bias: models and
       evidence for five cohorts of American males. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp.
       263–333.
Carneiro, P., & Heckman, J. J. (2002). The evidence on credit constraints in post -secondary
     schooling. Economic Journal, 112(482), 705–734.

Case, Anne. 2004. “Does Money Protect Health Status? Evidence from South African Pensions.” In
     Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise, Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, 287- 311.

Chase‐Lansdale, P.L., and J. Brooks‐Gunn. 2014. Helping parents, helping children: Two‐
    generation mechanisms. The Future of Children 24(1): 13–39.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2015. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on
     Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County‐Level Estimates”.
     Unpublished Manuscript.

Conger, Rand and Katherine Conger, Glen Elder and Frederick Lorenz, Ronald Simons and Les
    Whitbeck. 1992. “A Family Process Model of Economic Hardship and Adjustment of Early
    Adolescent Boys.” Child Development. Volume 63, No. 3, pp. 526-541.

Conger, Rand and Martha Rueter and Glen Elder. 1999. “Couple Resilience to Economic
    Pressure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Volume 76, No. 1, pp. 54‐71.

Conger, Rand and Lora Ebert Wallace, Yumei Sun, and Ronald L. Simons, Vonnie C. McLoyd,
    Gene H. Brody. 2002. “Economic Pressure in African American Families: A Replication and
    Extension of the Family Stress Model.” Developmental Psychology. Volume 38, No. 2, pp.
    179-193.

Costello, E. Jane, Adrian Angold, Barbara J. Burns, Dalene K. Stangl, Dan L. Tweed, Alaattin
     Erkanli, and Carol M. Worthman. 1996. “The Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth:
     Goals, Design, Methods, and the Prevalence of DSM-III-R Disorders.” Archives of General
     Psychiatry, 53(12): 1129–36.

Costello, E. Jane, Elizabeth Farmer, Adrian Angold, Barbara Burns and Alaattin Erkanli. 1997.
     "Psychiatric Disorders among American Indian and White Youth in Appalachia: The Great
     Smoky Mountains Study." American Journal of Public Health. Volume 87, No. 5, pp. 827-
     832.

Costello, E. Jane, Scott N. Compton, Gordon Keeler, and Adrian Angold. 2003. “Relationships


                                               41
       Between Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment.” Journal of the American
       Medical Association, 290(15): 2023–29.

Costello, E. Jane, Alaattin Erkanli, William Copeland and Adrian Angold. 2010. “Association of
       Family Income Supplements in Adolescence with Development of Psychiatric and
       Substance Use Disorders in Adulthood Among an American Indian Population.” Journal of
       the American Medical Association. Volume 303, No. 19, pp. 1954-1960.

Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. J. (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of
    cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 738–782.

Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach (2010): Estimating the Technology of
    Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skill Formation, Econometrica, 78(3):883-931.

Currie, Janet and Wanchuan Lin. 2007. "Chipping Away at Health: More on the Relationship
     Between Income and Child Health," Health Affairs, 26 #2, Mar/Apr , pp. 331‐344.

Currie, Janet and Douglass Almond. 2011. “Human capital development before age five.”
     Chapter 15 in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, Part B, pp. 1315‐1486.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition) (DSM-IV)”.

Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
     Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review 102:5, 1927-1956.

Deming, David J. 2015. “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market.”
    Unpublished Manuscript.

Denissen, J. J. A., van Aken, M. A. G., & Roberts, B. W. (2011). Personality development across
     the life span. In T. Chamorro‐Premuzic, S. von Stumm, & A. Furnham (Eds.), Handbook of
     Individual Differences. Wiley‐Blackwell; Oxford (pp. 75‐100).

Dooley, Martin, and Jennifer Stewart. 2004. “Family Income and Child Outcomes in Canada.”
     Canadian Journal of Economics, 37(4): 898–917.

Duflo, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold
     Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1): 1–25.

Duncan, Greg J., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Pamela Kato Klebanov, ‘‘Economic Deprivation and
    Early Childhood Development,’’ Child Development 65 (1994), 296–318.

Duncan, Greg J., Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith Smith. 1998. How much does
    childhood poverty affect the life chances of children? American Sociological Review 63
    (June): 406–23.

Duncan, Greg J. and Pamela A. Morris, and Chris Rodrigues. 2011. Does Money Really Matter?
    Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children's Achievement With Data From



                                               42
     Random-Assignment Experiments. Development Psychology. September ; 47(5): 1263–1279.

Duncan, G. J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1997). Income effects across the life span: Integration and
    interpretation. In G. Duncan, & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Consequences of Growing Up Poor.
    New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 596–610.

Duncan, Greg and K. Magnuson and E. Votruba-Drzal. 2014. “Boosting family income to promote
    child development.” Future Child. Spring, Volume, No. 1, pp. 99-120.

Duckworth, Angela and Martin Seligman. (2005). “Self-Discipline Outdoes IQ in Predicting
    Academic Perfornmance of Adolescents.” Psychological Science. Volume 16, No 12.

Evans, William N and Craig L Garthwaite. 2014. Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher
    EITC Payments on Maternal Health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2):
    258–290.

French, Jack. 2009. “TANF: Failing America’s Poorest Children” Athens County Department of
       Job and Family Services report. Athens, GA, October 2009
       (http://jfs.athenscountygovernment.com)

Gertler, Paul and James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan
        Walker, Suan Change , Sally Grantham-McGregor. 2014. “Labor Market Returns To Early
        Childhood Stimulation in Jamaica.” Science, May, Vol. 344 no. 6187 pp. 998-1001.

Heckman, James and Rodrigo Pinto and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms
    through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes,”).
    American Economic Review, 103(6): 2052–2086.

Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., & Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities
    on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3), 411–482.

Heckman, James J. and S.H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz (2010) “A New Cost-
    Benefit and Rate of Return Analysis for the Perry Preschool Program: A Summary,” In Arthur
    Reynolds, Arthur Rolnick, Michelle Englund, and Judy A. Temple, (eds.) Cost-Effective
    Programs in Children’s First Decade: A Human Capital Integration. New York: Cambridge
    University Press. pp. 366-380.

Hill, Martha, and Greg Duncan. 1987. Parental family income and the socioeconomic attainment of
      children. Social Science Research 16:37–73.

Hoynes, Hillary and Doug Miller and David Simon. 2015. “Income, The Earned Income Tax
    Credit, and Infant Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. Volume 7, No. 1,
    pp. 172-211.

Israel, Salomon and Terrie E. Moffitt, Daniel W. Belsky, Robert J. Hancox, Richie Poulton, Brent
      Roberts, W. Murray Thomson, Avshalom Caspi . 2014. “Translating Personality Psychology
      to Help Personalize Preventive Medicine for Young Adult Patients.” Journal of Personality


                                                 43
     and Social Psychology. Volume 106, No. 3, pp. 484-498.

Jacob, Brian A. and Max Kapustin and Jens Ludwig. 2014. Human capital effects of anti-poverty
     programs: evidence from a randomized housing voucher lottery. NBER WP 20164.

Johnson, James H. Jr and John D. Kasarda and Stephen J. Appold. 2011. “Assessing the Economic
     and Non-Economic Impacts of Harrah’s Cherokee Casino, North Carolina”. Frank Hawkins
     Kenan Institute of Private Enterprise, Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North
     Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Jones, Lauren E. and Kevin S. Milligan and Mark Stabile. 2015. “Child Cash Benefits and Family
     Expenditures: Evidence from the National Child Benefit.” NBER Working Paper 21101.

Kawamoto, Tetsuya and Toshihiko Endo. 2015. “Personality Changes in Adolescence: Results from
    a Japanese Sample.” Journal of Research in Personality. Volume 57, pp 32-42.

Kling JR, Liebman JB, Katz LF. Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects. Econometrica.
     2007; 75:83–119. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0262.2007.00733.x.

Klimstra, T. A., Bleidorn, W., Asendorpf, J. B., van Aken, M. A. G., & Denissen, J. J. A. (2013).
     Correlated change of Big Five personality traits across the lifespan: A search for determinants.
     Journal of Research in Personality, 47, 768–777.

Levy, Dan Maurice, and Greg Duncan. 2000. Northwestern University/University of Chicago Joint
     Center for Poverty Research Working Papers no. 168.

Lundberg, Olle. “Childhood Conditions, Sense of Coherence, Social Class and Adult Ill Health:
    Exploring Their Theoretical and Empirical Relations,” Social Science and Medicine, 44,
    1997: 821-831

McLeod, Jane and Michael Shanahan. 1993. “ Poverty, Parenting, and Children’s Mental Health.”
    American Sociological Review, Volume 58, June, Pp. 351-366.

Mani, Anandi, and Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir and Jiaying Zhao. (2013) “Poverty Impedes
     Cognitive Function.” Science. Number 341, August.

Milligan, Kevin, and Mark Stabile. 2011. “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-Being of
     Children? Evidence from Canadian Child Benefits Expansion.” American Economic Journal:
     Economic Policy 3 (3): 175–205.

Moffitt, Terrie E. and Louise Arseneault, Daniel Belsky, Nigel Dickson, Robert J. Hancox,
       HonaLee Harrington, Renate Houts, Richie Poulton, Brent W. Roberts, Stephen Ross,
       Malcolm R. Sears, W. Murray Thomson, and Avshalom Caspi. 2011. “A gradient of
       childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety.” Proceedings of the
       National Academies of Science, Volume 108, No. 7, pp. 2693–2698.

Morris, Pamela, Greg J. Duncan, and Christopher Rodrigues. 2004. Does money really matter?
     Estimating impacts of family income on children’s achievement with data from random-


                                                 44
      assignment experiments. Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University.

 Murnane, R. J., Willett, J. B., & Levy, F. (1995). The growing importance of cognitive skills in
     wage determination. Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2), 251–266.

 Oreopoulos, Philip, and Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational Effects of
      Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 455 –484.

 Paxson, Christina and Jane Waldfogel. (2002). “Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment.” Journal
      of Labor Economics. Volume 20, No. 3.

 Plug, Erik, and Wim Vijverberg. 2003. “Schooling, Family Background, and Adoption: Is It Nature
       or Is It Nurture?” Journal of Political Economy, 111(3): 611–41.

 Shea, John. 2000. Does parents’ money matter? Journal of Public Economics 77, no. 2 (August):
      155–84.

Stock, James and M. Watson. 2008. “Heteroscedasticity Robust Standard Errors for Fixed Effects
       Panel Data Regression.” Econometrica. Vol 76, Issue 1, p. 155-174.

 Terracciano, A., McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. Jr., (2006). Longitudinal trajectories in Guilford-
      Zimmerman Temperament Survey data: Results from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of
      Aging. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 61B, P108–P116.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geronb/61.2.P108.

 Thompson, Ross (2014) “Stress and Child Development” The Future of Children Volume 24,
     Number 1, Spring 2014

 Tibshirani, Robert. 1996. “Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso.” Journal of the Royal
      Statistical Society. Volume 58, No. 1, pp. 267-288.

 Van den Akker, A. L., Dekovic ,́ M., Asscher, J., & Prinzie, P. (2014). Mean-level personality
      development across childhood and adolescence: A temporary defiance of the maturity
      principle and bidirectional associations with parenting. Journal of Personality and Social
      Psychology, 107, 736–750. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037248.

 Walke, Roger. (2000). Indian-Related Federal Spending Trends, FY 1975-2001, US Congressional
        Research Service memorandum, March 1, 2000. In Report of the Committee On The
        Budget, United States Senate to Accompany S. Con. Res. 101 Together with Additional and
        Minority Views, Senate Report 106-251, March 31, 2000, pp. 199-250.

 Wolfe, Barbara, Jessica Jakubowski, Robert Haveman, and Marissa Courey. 2012. “The Income
     and Health Effects of Tribal Casino Gaming on American Indians.” Demography 49 (2): 499–
     524. doi:10.1007/s13524-012-0098-8.




                                                  45
46
Appendix Figure 1
A
              Conscientiousness at First Survey Wave by Race and Initial
                                     Income Bin

    0.8

    0.6

    0.4                                                             American
                                                                    Indian
    0.2
                                                                    Non American
     0                                                              Indians
          0                 5               10               15
 ‐0.2                                                               Poly.
                                                                    (American
 ‐0.4                                                               Indian)
                                                                    Poly. (Non
 ‐0.6                                                               American
                                                                    Indians)
 ‐0.8

    ‐1



B
              Emotional Disorder Symptoms at First Survey Wave by Race
                               and Initial Income Bin


    0.6

    0.4
                                                                     Non American
    0.2                                                              Indian
                                                                     American
     0
                                                                     Indian
          0      2      4       6      8         10   12     14
 ‐0.2                                                                Poly. (Non
                                                                     American
 ‐0.4                                                                Indian)
                                                                     Poly.
 ‐0.6                                                                (American
                                                                     Indian)
 ‐0.8




                                       47
Appendix Figure 2

Panel A




                    48
Panel B




Panel C




          49
Panel D




          50
Panel E




          51
Appendix Tables




    52
      Table A1: Variables from GSMS Used To Create Big 5 Personality Traits: Agreeableness, Conscientiousness and Neuroticism and Behavioral and Emotional

Agreeableness                            Emotional                                          Behavioral
    Number of Arguments with Parent1
                                            Sep.distress from home or att.figure               Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others
    (PAD1F01)
    Number of Arguments with Other
                                            Worry about possible harm                          Often initiates physical fights
    Adults (PAL1F01)
    Number of Arguments with Peers at
                                            Worry about calamitous separation                  Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others
    School (PBC0F01)
    Irritability Intensity (PDA8I01)        Persistent reluctance/refusal to go to school      Has been physically cruel to people
    Bullies / Extortion (PGF7I01)           Avoidance of being alone                           Has been physically cruel to animals
                                                                                               Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion, armed
     Cruelty to Animals (PGH3V01)           Reluctance to sleep away
                                                                                               robbery)
     Rumors (PGH4I01)                       Separation nightmares                              Has forced someone into sexual activity
     Spiteful or Vindictive (PGA3I01)       Physical symptoms                                  Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage
     Loses Temper (PGE0I01)                 Diagnosed panic attacks                            Has deliberately destroyed others' property (other than by fire setting)
                                            Meeting criteria for obsessive
     Angry or Resentful (PDA7I01)                                                              Has broken into someone else's house, building, or car
                                            compulsive disorder
                                            Social anxiety                                     Often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e., "cons" others)
                                            Fear public performance                            Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim
Conscientiousness                           Social phobia,animal type                          Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning before age 13 years
                                                                                               Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in parental or parental surrog
     Lying Intensity (PGC3I01)              Social phobia,natural,other
                                                                                               home
     Impulsive Intensity (PRC3I01)          Social phobia,blood,injection,injury               Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years
     Rule Breaking Intensity (PGA0I01)      Agoraphobia                                        Often loses temper
     Concentration / Difficulty Paying      Post Traumatic Stress Painful recall
                                                                                               Often argues with adults
     Attention (PCC3I01)                    screen positive
                                            Post Traumatic Stress hyperarousal
                                                                                               Often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults' requests or rules
                                            screen positive
                                            Post Traumatic Stress avoidance screen
                                                                                               Often deliberately annoys people
                                            positive
Neuroticism                                 Restlessness,Keyed up,on edge                      Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior
    Feels unloved (PDC0I01)                 Easy fatigability                                  Is often touchy or easily annoyed by others
    Feeling of Inferiority to others
                                            Difficulty concentrating, mind blank               Is often angry and resentful
    (PDC1I01)
    Subject feels sorry for himself         Irritability                                       Is often spiteful or vindictive




                                                                                   53
(PDC2I01)
Feels helpless in general (PDC6I01)   Muscle soreness                             Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes
Depressed Mood (PDA0I01)              Trouble falling or staying asleep           Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities
                                      Excessive worry (a symptoms of
                                                                                  Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly
                                      generalized anxiety disorder)
                                      Frequent somatic complaints for
                                      which no physical basis could be            Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish school work, chores
                                      found
                                      Excessive need for reassurance              Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities
                                      Marked feelings of tension or
                                                                                  Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained mental effort
                                      inability to relax
                                      Depressed/irritable mood                    Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities
                                      Anhedonia or lose interest                  Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli
                                      Weight loss or gain/dysthymia               Is often forgetful in daily activities
                                      Insomnia or hypersomnia                     Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat
                                      Psychomotor agitation/retardation           Often leaves seat in classroom or in other situations in which remaining seated is expected
                                      Fatigue or loss of energy                   Often runs about or climbs excessively in situations in which it is inappropriate
                                      Low self-esteem/worthlessness/guilt         Often has difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities quietly
                                      Diff concentrating/thinking/deciding        Is often "on the go" or often acts as if "driven by a motor"
                                      Think about, plan or attempt suicide        Often talks excessively
                                      Hopelessness                                Often blurts out answers before questions have been completed
                                                                                  Often has difficulty awaiting turn
                                                                                  Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations or games)




                                                                             54
Table A2: Effects of casino transfers on parental marital arrangements
                     Parental Marital Status Fixed-Effects Regression

                                                                                 (1)
                                                                               Parents
                                                                              currently
VARIABLES                                                                     married?

Casino Payment?                                                                -0.0290
                                                                               (0.0323)
                                                                               0.00366
Number of Children Less than 6 years old in Household                         (0.00792)
Constant                                                                      0.533***
                                                                               (0.0163)

Observations                                                                    6,004
Number of gsms                                                                  1,405
R-squared                                                                       0.047
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the
individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table A3: Casino transfers and parental employment
                            Parental Employment Fixed Effects

                                                                   (1)              (2)
                                                                Mother Full     Father Full
                                                                  Time             Time
VARIABLES                                                       Employed?       Employed?

Casino Payment?                                                   -0.0182         0.0493
                                                                 (0.0521)        (0.0400)
                                                                 -0.0274*        -0.00953
Number of Children Less than 6 years old in Household            (0.0155)        (0.0106)
Constant                                                         0.532***        0.924***
                                                                 (0.0302)        (0.0223)

Observations                                                      5,007            3,105
R-squared                                                         0.022            0.010
Number of gsms                                                    1,265             814
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the
individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   55
Table A4: Placebo Test of Casino Payment Prior to Casino Operations (First Four Survey Waves) and
                                     Cohorts 1 and 2 Treated
                      (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)           (5)
                  Behavioral       Emotional
                   Disorder         Disorder
VARIABLES         Symptoms         Symptoms       Conscientiousness Agreeableness Neuroticism

Casino
Payment?            0.00892          0.219              -0.281*          -0.131         -0.252
                     (0.106)        (0.138)             (0.163)         (0.163)        (0.174)
Constant            0.147**        0.169**            -0.245***        -0.557***      -0.604***
                    (0.0630)       (0.0719)            (0.0704)         (0.102)        (0.120)

Observations           4,607             4,607              4,521          4,335        4,497
R-squared              0.030             0.024              0.046          0.091        0.062
Number of
gsms                   1,401             1,401              1,398          1,392        1,396
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effect and Number of Kids Less than 6 Years old and
Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 56
  Table A5: Regression Analysis without Individual Fixed Effects and Interaction and Level Variables of Initial Child
                                              Personality Endowment
                                          (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)
                                     Behavioral       Emotional
                                      Disorder         Disorder
VARIABLES                            Symptoms        Symptoms       Conscientiousness Agreeableness Neuroticism

Casino Payment?                           -0.139          -0.0729            0.155              0.0874       0.0437
                                          (0.105)         (0.120)           (0.107)             (0.128)      (0.137)
Interaction of Pre-Casino Behavioral       -0.241
Disorder Symptoms x Casino                (0.199)
Initial Level Behavioral Disorder        0.841***
Symptoms*                                (0.0239)
Interaction of Pre-Casino Emotional                       -0.175
Disorder Symptoms x Casino                                (0.208)
Initial Level Emotional Disorder                         0.817***
Symptoms *                                               (0.0193)
Interaction of Pre-Casino                                                  -0.255**
Conscientiousness x Casino                                                  (0.123)
                                                                           0.798***
Initial Level Conscientiousness*                                           (0.0191)
Interaction of Pre-Casino                                                                       -0.246*
Agreeableness x Casino                                                                          (0.135)
                                                                                               0.771***
Initial Level Agreeableness *                                                                  (0.0202)
Interaction of Pre-Casino                                                                                   -0.595***
Neuroticism x Casino                                                                                          (0.140)
                                                                                                             0.728***
Initial Level Neuroticism*                                                                                   (0.0229)
Constant                                  0.0638*        0.0912**          -0.278***          -0.299***     -0.391***
                                          (0.0338)       (0.0407)           (0.0505)           (0.0600)      (0.0806)

Observations                                6,050           6,050               5,886              5,692      5,879
Number of gsms                              1,405           1,405               1,399              1,394      1,399
Note: American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the individual level
provided in parentheses. *calculated as the average in the initial 3 (pre-casino) survey waves by subject
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          57
                                  Table A6: Child Outcomes regressed on Casino and Percent American Indian Household by Census Tract
                              (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)              (6)            (7)           (8)        (9)         (10)
                           Behavioral    Emotional                                                Behavioral     Emotional
                            Disorder      Disorder     Conscientio Agreeable Neurotici             Disorder       Disorder     Conscient   Agreeable
VARIABLES                  Symptoms      Symptoms        usness         ness         sm           Symptoms       Symptoms       iousness     ness      Neuroticism

Casino Payment?              -0.172          -0.315*          0.284          0.393*       0.471**    -0.234*      -0.302*      0.366**     0.464**       0.391*
                             (0.132)         (0.162)         (0.184)         (0.227)      (0.195)    (0.122)      (0.161)      (0.171)     (0.209)       (0.201)
Casino x Perecent AI        -0.00111        0.000704         0.00217         0.00183     -0.00364*
Head of Household in
Census Tract               (0.00137)        (0.00164)       (0.00202)        (0.00239)   (0.00208)
Casino x Residing on                                                                                 0.00429      0.0403        0.0276       0.0166       -0.153
Reservation                                                                                          (0.0902)     (0.103)       (0.126)     (0.147)      (0.126)
Number of Children          0.0623*           0.0277         -0.0792*         -0.0349     -0.130*    0.0621*      0.0273       -0.0754*     -0.0311      -0.131*
Less than 6 years old
in Household                (0.0331)         (0.0374)        (0.0442)        (0.0412)    (0.0678)    (0.0331)     (0.0373)     (0.0442)    (0.0414)     (0.0679)
                                                                                                                                   -
Constant                     0.0698           0.140*        -0.466***        -0.776***   -0.756***    0.0770        0.129      0.485***    -0.769***   -0.750***
                            (0.0770)         (0.0817)        (0.0865)         (0.102)     (0.121)    (0.0774)     (0.0819)     (0.0860)     (0.102)     (0.122)

Observations                  5,650            5,650           5,510           5,333       5,497      5,601        5,601        5,464        5,288       5,449
R-squared                     0.022            0.018           0.049           0.078       0.054      0.022        0.017        0.051        0.076       0.053
Number of gsms                1,289            1,289           1,286           1,281       1,285      1,276        1,276        1,273        1,268       1,272
Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                 58
                                      Table A7: Parental Behaviors on Casino and Percent Indian Household by Census Tract
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)                (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                               Poor
                            Adequate        Enjoyable      relationship                         Adequate      Enjoyable
                             Parental      Relationship      between       Arguments            Parental     Relationship   Poor relationship   Arguments
VARIABLES                  Supervision?    with Parent?      parents?      with Parent        Supervision?   with Parent?   between parents?    with Parent

Casino Payment?               0.0785           0.170**           -0.114      -7.836**           0.0727          0.162*           -0.100         -10.11***
                             (0.0613)          (0.0832)         (0.0947)      (3.934)          (0.0617)        (0.0833)         (0.0930)          (3.110)
Casino x Perecent AI         0.000486         -0.000110        -0.000218      -0.0204
Head of Household in
Census Tract                (0.000662)        (0.000542)       (0.00121)     (0.0385)
Casino x Residing on                                                                            0.0377        0.000971           -0.0344          1.766
Reservation                                                                                    (0.0433)       (0.0342)          (0.0805)         (1.602)
Number of Children           -0.00957          -0.0180          -0.00109      0.0863           -0.00971        -0.0182         -7.59e-05         -0.0199
Less than 6 years old in
Household                    (0.00990)        (0.0142)         (0.0167)       (0.636)         (0.00995)       (0.0142)         (0.0167)           (0.643)
Constant                     1.972***         1.862***         0.557***      11.98***         1.972***        1.862***         0.557***          11.77***
                              (0.0227)        (0.0307)         (0.0337)       (1.768)          (0.0230)       (0.0310)         (0.0339)           (1.767)

Observations                    4,722             5,078           5,215       5,639             4,679           5,030            5,169            5,590
R-squared                       0.013             0.008           0.035       0.011             0.013           0.008            0.036            0.011
Number of gsms                  1,168             1,219           1,276       1,289             1,156           1,206            1,263            1,276
Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                             59
                  Table A8: Individual Fixed Effects Regression by Initial Household Poverty Status
Panel A: Not in Poverty                  (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)            (5)
                                    Behavioral       Emotional
                                     Disorder         Disorder
VARIABLES                           Symptoms        Symptoms      Conscientiousness Agreeableness       Neuroticism

Casino Payment?                       -0.242*        -0.0661             0.348*            0.442*         -0.0798
                                      (0.141)        (0.176)             (0.211)           (0.246)        (0.313)

Initially in Poverty?                      N            N                N                   N                 N
Observations                             3,579        3,579            3,492               3,402            3,485
R-squared                                0.020        0.021            0.055               0.086            0.056
Number of gsms                            806          806              806                 802               805
Note: Individual Fixed Effects, American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the
individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Panel B: Initially in Poverty          (1)            (2)                  (3)               (4)            (5)
                                    Behavioral     Emotional
                                     Disorder       Disorder
VARIABLES                           Symptoms       Symptoms         Conscientiousness   Agreeableness   Neuroticism

Casino Payment?                       -0.182        -0.478**              0.271           0.539**         0.482*
                                      (0.173)        (0.201)             (0.221)          (0.267)         (0.273)

Initially in Poverty?                      Y            Y                Y                   Y                 Y
Observations                             2,471        2,471            2,401               2,293            2,395
R-squared                                0.023        0.028            0.039               0.075            0.057
Number of gsms                            599          599              596                 594               595
Note: Individual Fixed Effects, American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the
individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               60
                  Table A9: Individual Fixed Effects Regression by Number of American Indian Parents
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)                     (5)
                                        Behavioral     Emotional
                                         Disorder       Disorder
VARIABLES                               Symptoms       Symptoms Conscientiousness Agreeableness                Neuroticism

Casino Payment: First American           -0.233**        -0.327**          0.330**              0.454***           0.372**
Indian Parent?                            (0.108)         (0.129)           (0.144)              (0.175)           (0.187)
Casino Payment: Second American           -0.0443          -0.116            0.130                0.172            0.0431
Indian Parent?                           (0.0685)        (0.0877)          (0.0869)              (0.108)           (0.136)

Observations                              6,050          6,050            5,893              5,695             5,880
R-squared                                 0.020          0.019            0.045              0.077             0.052
Number of gsms                            1,405          1,405            1,402              1,396             1,400
Note: Individual Fixed Effects, American Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the
individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




 Table A10: Individual Fixed Effects Regressions on Behavior and Emotional Disorders by Source of Reporting
                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                  Behavioral      Emotional      Behavioral      Emotional
                  Behavioral      Emotional        Disorder        Disorder       Disorder        Disorder
                   Disorder        Disorder       Symptoms:      Symptoms:       Symptoms:       Symptoms:
                  Symptoms:       Symptoms:      Parent Report Parent Report Child Report Child Report
VARIABLES        Both Reports Both Reports          Alone           Alone          Alone           Alone

Casino
Payment?             -0.180*         -0.292**        -0.237**          0.0503          -0.138          -0.293**
                      -0.109          -0.137          -0.103           -0.147          -0.136           -0.139

Observations          6050            6050             6050            5809             6050               6050
R-squared             0.019           0.019            0.013           0.027            0.008              0.014
Number of
gsms                  1405             1405            1405             1396            1405               1405
Note: Includes number of children less than 6 years of age, a constant and Individual Fixed Effects, American
Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    61
     Table A11: Effects of Welfare Reform on Observed Outcomes by Single Parent Status
                            (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)                      (5)
                         Behavioral     Emotional
                          Disorder       Disorder
VARIABLES                Symptoms       Symptoms Conscientiousness Agreeableness                 Neuroticism

Casino Payment?               -0.149          -0.271*          0.324**            0.398**            0.215
                              (0.118)         (0.144)          (0.152)            (0.191)           (0.217)
Single Parent x Casino
Payment                       -0.111          -0.0743           -0.0688             0.0524             0.185
                              (0.111)          (0.103)           (0.129)            (0.115)           (0.115)
Observations                   6,050            6,050             5,893              5,695             5,880
R-squared                      0.020            0.019             0.045              0.077             0.052
Number of gsms                 1,405            1,405             1,402              1,396             1,400
Note: Includes number of children less than 6 years of age, a constant and Individual Fixed Effects, American
Indian Trend and Age Fixed Effects and Standard errors clustered at the individual level provided in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




 Table A12: Comparison of Economic Characteristics with other American Indian Tribes
                                     Eastern            Other     African
                                    Cherokee            Tribes    Americans
 Percent of Age 25+ with a high
 school degree                        0.63               0.61             0.63
 Unemployment Rate                    0.108             0.104            0.129
 Per Capita Income                    6944              6611             8859

 Note: Data from 1990 US Census for American Indian Reservations. Dollar figures are
 reported in 1989$. Source: Social Explorer and 1990 Characteristics of the Black
 Population, 1990 CP-3-6.


           Table A13: Three-Month Prevalence Rates of Psychiatric Disorders, by Sex and Ethnic Group
                                                                    American Indian               White
                                                                      %           SE          %               SE
 Separation Anxiety                                                   4.6         1.2         3.3             0.8
 Any Anxiety Disorder                                                5.3          1.3        5.6               1
 Any Depressive Disorder                                             0.3          0.3        1.5              0.5
 Conduct or Oppositional Disorder                                    6.5          1.4        5.3              0.8
 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder                            1.2          0.6        1.9              0.4
 Substance abuse or dependence                                        1.2         0.6         0.1             0.1
 Any tic disorder                                                    1.9          0.8        4.2               1
 Enuresis or Ecopresis                                                 4          1.1         4.8             0.9
 Core Disorders                                                      13.3         1.9        12.2             1.3
 More than one disorder                                               3.1          1          3.1             0.6
 Any disorder                                                        16.7         2.1        19.2             1.7

 Source: Costell, E. Jane, Elizabeth Farmer, Adrian Angold, Barbara Burns and Alaattin Erkanli. 1997.
 "Psychiatric Disorders among American Indian and White Youth in Appalachia: The Great Smoky Mountains
 Study." American Journal of Public Health. Volume 87, No. 5, pp. 827-832.




                                                     62
