                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT PUZZLE:
                A FIELD EXPERIMENT ON EMPLOYER HIRING BEHAVIOR

                                            Mason Ameri
                                              Lisa Schur
                                             Meera Adya
                                             Scott Bentley
                                            Patrick McKay
                                            Douglas Kruse

                                        Working Paper 21560
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21560


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015


Presented at the NBER Summer Institute, Law and Economics, Cambridge, MA, July 24, 2015; the
Labor and Employment Relations Association conference, Boston, MA, January 5, 2015; and the Academy
of Management conference, Vancouver, Canada, August 11, 2015. This paper benefited from useful
comments by Paul Oyer, David Neumark, Christine Jolls, Hank Farber, Patrick Button, Ingrid Fulmer,
Barbara Lee, Bill Rodgers, and other session participants. Marianne Bertrand provided useful advice on
the IRB application. Elena Koufos and Kristen Sullivan provided excellent research assistance. Initial
work on developing this project was funded by the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation
Research, Demand-side Employment Placement Models Projects, Grant No. H133A060033. This
RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials
under Trial number AEARCTR-0000830. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mason Ameri, Lisa Schur, Meera Adya, Scott Bentley, Patrick McKay, and Douglas Kruse.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Disability Employment Puzzle: A Field Experiment on Employer Hiring Behavior
Mason Ameri, Lisa Schur, Meera Adya, Scott Bentley, Patrick McKay, and Douglas Kruse
NBER Working Paper No. 21560
September 2015
JEL No. J14,J24,J71,J78,K39

                                               ABSTRACT
People with disabilities have low employment and wage levels, and some studies suggest employer
discrimination is a contributing factor. Following the method of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003),
new evidence is presented from a field experiment that sent applications in response to 6,016 advertised
accounting positions from well-qualified fictional applicants, with one-third of cover letters disclosing
that the applicant has a spinal cord injury, one-third disclosing the presence of Asperger’s Syndrome,
and one-third not mentioning disability. These specific disabilities were chosen because they would
not be expected to limit productivity in accounting, helping rule out productivity-based explanations
for any differences in employer responses. Half of the resumes portrayed a novice accountant, and
half portrayed an experienced one. The fictional applicants with disabilities received 26% fewer expressions
of employer interest than those without disabilities, with little difference between the two types of
disability. The disability gap was concentrated among more experienced applicants, and among private
companies with fewer than 15 employees that are not covered by the ADA, although comparable state
statutes cover about half of them. Comparisons above and below disability law coverage thresholds
point to a possible positive effect of the ADA on employer responses to applicants with disabilities,
but no clear effects of state laws. The overall pattern of findings is consistent with the idea that disability
discrimination continues to impede employment prospects of people with disabilities, and more attention
needs to be paid to employer behavior and the demand side of the labor market for people with disabilities.

Mason Ameri                                            Scott Bentley
School of Management and Labor Relations               School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University                                     Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road                                    94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854                                   Piscataway, NJ 08854
mason.ameri@rutgers.edu                                fbentley@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Lisa Schur                                             Patrick McKay
School of Management and Labor Relations               School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University                                     Rutgers University
50 Labor Center Way                                    94 Rockafeller Road
New Brunswick, NJ 08854                                Piscataway, NJ 08854
schur@work.rutgers.edu                                 pmckay@smlr.rutgers.edu

Meera Adya                                             Douglas Kruse
Burton Blatt Institute                                 School of Management and Labor Relations
Syracuse University                                    Rutgers University
900 Crouse Avenue                                      94 Rockafeller Road
Syracuse, New York 13244-2130                          Piscataway, NJ 08854
madya@law.syr.edu                                      and NBER
                                                       kruse@smlr.rutgers.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
AEARCTR-0000830
                                         Introduction

       People with disabilities continue to experience low employment rates 25 years after the

Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was passed. This disparity presents a puzzle and

challenge to scholars and policy-makers. Among working-age people with disabilities, only 34%

were employed in 2013, compared to 74% of those without disabilities (Houtenville et al. 2014).

The employment gap has not narrowed since the ADA was passed in 1990 (Stapleton and

Burkhauser 2003). Among labor force participants, the unemployment rate of people with

disabilities (12.5% in 2014) is twice that of people without disabilities (5.9%), indicating that

their low employment is not simply due to lack of interest in finding a job (U.S. Bureau of Labor

Statistics 2015). In addition, a wide range of studies find that employed people with disabilities

receive lower pay levels (Baldwin & Johnson, 2006) and face a variety of disparities in job

training, security, and other important employment outcomes (reviewed in Schur et al. 2013: 64-

72).

       Non-discriminatory factors may contribute to these disparities, including lower education

and skill levels that would lead to lower market wages for people with disabilities, along with

work disincentives from disability income and higher employment-related costs (e.g., for

transportation) that lead to higher reservation wages and lower employment levels. Employer

discrimination may also play a role, as suggested by statistical evidence that pay rates are lower

among people with more stigmatized disabilities (Baldwin and Johnson 2006), psychological

experiments on the attitudes of employers and co-workers (Run Ren, Paetzold and Colella 2008),

and survey evidence from employers (Domzal et al. 2008, Dixon et al 2003, Bruyere 2000).

Non-experimental field evidence, however, is subject to selection and other biases, and the

psychological laboratory experiments may not generalize to real-world settings.

                                                1
       This study presents the first field experiment on disability and hiring in the United States,

eliminating selection biases while generating evidence in a real-world setting. This study fits

into the growing literature on field experiments in economics (Harrison and List 2004, Levitt and

List 2009). Our design is similar to that used by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) in their study

of the effects of race and gender differences. This experimental design helps eliminate not only

selection biases but also other non-discriminatory factors that may lead to differences in

outcomes between people with and without disabilities (e.g., job mismatch). In this experiment,

6,016 job applications were submitted to advertised openings for accounting positions using

fictional resumes and cover letters, split evenly among applications that did not mention

disability, ones that disclosed the applicant has a spinal cord injury, and ones that disclosed the

applicant has Asperger’s Syndrome. These disabilities were chosen because they would not be

expected to limit productivity in an accounting position (and in fact Asperger’s may sometimes

help enhance productivity in occupations like accounting, as suggested by Cowen, 2011). The

resumes were designed to show that applicants were highly qualified, and were randomly split

between those representing novice applicants (just out of college) and experienced applicants

(with CPA certification and 6 years of work experience).

       To preview the key findings, job applicants with disabilities received fewer expressions

of employer interest than did applicants without disabilities, with particularly low interest in the

disability applications where the applicant was experienced (rather than a novice) and the

employer was small (fewer than 15 employees). The gaps did not vary by type of disability.

Comparisons by firm size within and across states suggest that the ADA may have a positive

effect on employer responses, but do not paint a clear picture regarding the effects of state

disability discrimination laws.



                                                 2
         After a review of the literature, the methodology and data are presented in section 3,

followed by the results in section 4. Section 5 contains a discussion of the results and limitations

of the study, and conclusions are presented in section 6.

                                              Literature Review

         All data sources show that people with disabilities have low employment rates both in the

United States and internationally (e.g., Stapleton and Burkhauser 2003, OECD 2010, Kaye 2010,

Houtenville 2013, Schur et al. 2013). This is a major contributor to their low income levels and

high poverty rates relative to people without disabilities (OECD 2010, WHO/World Bank 2011).

         From an economic perspective, low employment can be viewed as the result of both

supply-side and demand-side factors in the labor market. On the supply side, reservation wages

may be high among people with disabilities due to availability of disability income. A number

of studies have shown that the work disincentives associated with disability income affect the

employment decisions of many people with disabilities, helping to account for their stagnant

employment over the past three decades (e.g., Mashaw et al. 1996, Bound and Burkhauser 1999,

Chen and der Klaauw 2006, French and Song 2009, Maestas, Mullen and Strand 2013).

Employment rates remain low, however, among people with disabilities who do not receive

disability income.1 Reservation wages are also high for some people with disabilities due to extra

costs of working, such as the expense of modified transportation or adaptive technologies needed

for employment (Berkowitz et al. 1998), and difficulties with accessible public transportation.

Reservation wages may also be increased by therapy schedules or other medical concerns that

raise the time and energy costs of employment, particularly for standard work schedules (Schur

2003).
1
 Analysis of the 2013 American Community Survey shows that among working-age people who did not receive any
disability income in the past 12 months, 48.0% of people with disabilities were employed compared to 76.6% of
people without disabilities (calculations available on request).

                                                     3
         On the demand side, market wages may be lower for people with disabilities in part

because they tend to have lower levels of education (Schur et al. 2013). Their wages remain

lower after controlling for education, however, which may be due to otherwise-unobserved

limitations in skills and abilities. A need for accommodations may cause some employers to

offer lower wages to people with disabilities to offset accommodation costs (Gunderson and

Hyatt 1996), although this is prohibited by the ADA. Because the ADA requires employers to

absorb the costs of reasonable accommodations, some studies have blamed the ADA’s

accommodations mandate for a decline in employment of people with disabilities at the time the

law was enacted or took effect (Acemoglu and Angrist 2001, DeLeire 2000). Subsequent studies

have found no decline when other measures and techniques were used (Beegle and Stock 2003,

Houtenville and Burkhauser 2004, Hotchkiss 2003, 2004, Kruse and Schur 2003, Donahue et al.

2011) and that any ADA-related decline in employment was temporary (Jolls and Prescott

2004).2 A recent study of state disability discrimination laws found that they do not appear to

decrease the hiring of disabled older workers or of non-disabled older workers who may be

likely to develop disabilities (Neumark, Song, and Button 2015). There are more positive results

from a closer look at one state—California—that expanded state law coverage through a broader

definition of disability in 2001; this study finds that employment improved for people with

disabilities in California relative to the trend in other states following the policy change (Button

2015).



2
  While a majority of employers report that not knowing the cost of accommodations is a challenge in hiring people
with disabilities (Domzal et al. 2008), most accommodations cost less than $500 while many do not have a monetary
cost (Dixon et al. 2003, Schartz et al. 2006, Solovieva et al. 2011). Research also finds that employer-reported
benefits of accommodations (e.g., improved employee retention, productivity, and morale) generally outweigh the
costs (Schartz et al. 2006, Solovieva et al. 2011), and accommodations tend to have positive effects on co-worker
attitudes toward the job and company (Schur et al. 2014). Also, accommodations increase expected job tenure and
reduce the speed of application for SSDI following the onset of a work-limiting disability (Burkhauser et al. 1995,
Burkhauser 1999).

                                                        4
       Employer discrimination is another important potential demand-side factor. Becker’s

model of taste-based discrimination may apply given the well-documented history of stigma and

prejudice against people with disabilities (see overviews in Yuker 1988, Nowicki and Sandiesen

2002, Muzzatti 2008, Scior 2011, Thompson et al. 2011, Westerholm et al. 2006a, 2006b).

Some support for this model comes from studies finding lower wages for people who have

disabilities with lower social acceptability rankings after controlling for productive

characteristics (Baldwin and Johnson 2006). There is also support from psychological studies

showing that stereotypical attitudes of supervisors and co-workers can affect the workplace

experiences of employees with disabilities (Stone and Colella 1996, Colella 2001, Colella et al.

1998, Marti and Blanck 2000, Run Ren et al. 2008). For example, subjects had more negative

views about the future employment prospects and job growth of individuals with disabilities

(Colella et al. 1998), and a meta-analysis of experiments revealed negative effects of disability

on performance expectations and hiring decisions (Run Ren et al. 2008).

       The statistical discrimination model may also apply to people with disabilities:

employers may believe, rightly or wrongly, that people with disabilities are less productive on

average and make individual employment decisions based on this belief. The uncertainty that

many employers express about the future performance of people with disabilities and potential

costs of accommodations make statistical discrimination more likely. In addition, the employer

power or monopsony model of discrimination may apply when there is limited job mobility for

people with disabilities: they may, for example, face higher costs in switching jobs due to

transportation problems or difficulties attaining accommodations from a new employer, which

would allow their current employers to underpay them without substantial risk of turnover. The




                                               5
employer power model is more applicable to explaining wage disparities than employment level

disparities.

        While there is no direct evidence on the statistical and employer power models of

discrimination in the context of disability, studies conducted in France and Belgium provide

experimental evidence that supports either the prejudice or statistical discrimination models. In

the French study a representative sample of employers were sent job applications that varied by

whether the (fictitious) applicant reported having paraplegia, and was highly or modestly

qualified for the position (Ravaud et al. 1992). The positions were all compatible with having

paraplegia. The highly qualified, able-bodied applicants were 1.78 times more likely than those

with paraplegia to receive positive responses from the employers, while the equivalent ratio was

3.2 among moderately-qualified applicants. In the study in Belgium, two applications with

fictitious resumes were sent to each of 768 positions in which a disability should not lower

productivity, with one application not indicating a disability and the other indicating either

blindness, deafness, or autism (Baert 2014). Consistent with the earlier French evidence, the

employer response rate was 47% lower for applicants with disabilities. While these articles

provide valuable evidence on employer reluctance to hire people with disabilities, they did not

examine the effects of anti-discrimination laws on hiring decisions as done in this study.

        Recent evidence analyzing wage differences controlling for job demands also points to

the potential role of discrimination. An examination of job demands interacting with sensory

limitations indicates that about one-third of the disability pay gap among males, and one-tenth of

the disability pay gap among females, is “potentially attributable to discrimination” (Baldwin

and Choe 2014a).      In another study, a selection-corrected decomposition of the pay gap

associated with long-lasting physical disabilities found that about 10% of the observed pay gap



                                                 6
for men, and 20% of the pay gap for women, is potentially attributable to discrimination

(Baldwin and Choe 2014b).

       The statistical evidence on discrimination is complemented by survey evidence from

employers finding that one-third (32%) reported that “discomfort and unfamiliarity” are

challenges in hiring people with disabilities (Domzal et al. 2008: 13); almost half (47%) said that

co-worker attitudes are a reason employers do not hire people with disabilities (Kaye et al.

2011); one-fifth (20%) said that the greatest barrier to people with disabilities is discrimination,

prejudice, or employer reluctance to hire them (Dixon et al 2003); and about one-fifth (22%) said

that attitudes and stereotypes are a barrier to employment of people with disabilities in their own

firms (Bruyere 2000). These figures are likely understated due to “social desirability” bias and

the discrepancy often found between the attitudes employers express about people with

disabilities on surveys and their actual hiring practices (Wilgosh and Skaret 1987). Interviews

with corporate executives also found that “most employers hold stereotypical beliefs not

consistent with research evidence” (Lengnick-Hall et al. 2008: 55).

       Apart from direct discrimination, people with disabilities may face indirect

discrimination through inhospitable corporate cultures. The policies, procedures, and workplace

norms in a company may be built on assumptions about the “normal” employee (Robert and

Harlan 2006, Schur et al. 2005). A company with a bureaucratic culture, for instance, may be

less welcoming to people with disabilities by having strict regulations and procedures that can pit

the fairness of treatment for all employees against personalized consideration for employees with

disabilities and others with individualized needs (Stone and Colella 1996).            In such an

environment, accommodations for employees with disabilities are more likely to be seen as

“special treatment” that may generate co-worker jealousy and resentment. Support for the



                                                 7
importance of corporate culture comes from a study of 30,000 workers that found “workers with

disabilities fare better in companies viewed as fair and responsive to the needs of all employees,

in part because workplace accommodations are less likely to be viewed as special treatment,

while employees with disabilities are likely to fare worse in unresponsive and more rigid

organizations” (Schur et al. 2009).

       Employment and earnings gaps may be reduced by higher levels of education and

training. One study found the wage returns to education were larger for males who experienced

disability onset after reaching adulthood than for men without disabilities, although a pay gap

remained between college-educated men with and without disabilities (Hollenbeck and Kimmel

2008). Another study found that a college degree was associated with faster earnings recovery

following onset of a spinal cord injury (Krueger and Kruse 1995). These results suggest that

higher levels of education and qualifications may help overcome skill deficits associated with

disability and provide signals that applicants are well qualified, reducing employer reluctance to

hire people with disabilities.

       In sum, there are several mechanisms through which employer attitudes can affect the

hiring and workplace experiences of people with disabilities. While some studies suggest that

discrimination may play a role, little of the evidence is based on field experiments that control

for potential selection biases reflecting unobservable differences. It is the purpose of this study

to produce experimental evidence that provides a stronger test of employer behavior in

employment decisions.




                                                8
                                                     Method

         This study is based on evaluating employer responses to fictional job applicants for actual

job openings, using methods similar to those of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003).3 While they

tested for race discrimination by manipulating the names at the top of otherwise-identical

resumes, this study tests for disability discrimination by manipulating information on disability

in the cover letter. Another difference is that their fictitious resumes were sent in response to job

openings in a broad range of industries, while our resumes were designed for, and sent in

response to, job openings for accounting positions. Applications were restricted to accounting

positions in order to ensure that the two disabilities being examined—spinal cord injury (SCI)

and Asperger’s Syndrome—would not inherently limit productivity in the applied-for position.

         An SCI results from damage to spinal cord nerves that impairs functioning and sensation

below the level of the injury. The injury may be in the back, resulting in paraplegia that restricts

lower body use, or in the neck, resulting in quadriplegia that may also restrict use of hands and

arms. Almost all people with SCI use a wheelchair (DeVivo et al. 1995). The employment rate

falls sharply among people who experience an SCI, and earnings and weekly hours are generally

lower among those who have post-injury employment (DeVivo et al. 1995, Krueger and Kruse

1995, Berkowitz et al. 1998). Their employment rate of 27-30% is close to that of other people

with severe disabilities, and lower than that of all people with disabilities (Krueger and Kruse

1995, Berkowitz et al. 1998, McNeil 2001: 15). A key factor for the purpose of this study is that

an SCI does not limit productivity in all jobs, given that employed computer users with SCI’s




3
  All study procedures were approved in advance by the Rutgers IRB, protocol #E13-606. The potential value of
this research for identifying discrimination and contributing to scholarly and policy debates about the inequities and
inefficiencies of discrimination—along with the case that this is the only way to identify certain types of
discrimination—was judged to outweigh the costs of employers processing fictitious resumes.

                                                          9
have similar hourly and weekly earnings as computer users without SCI’s (Krueger and Kruse

1995).

         Asperger’s Syndrome falls within the Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and is defined as

an impairment in social interaction (Gillberg, 1991). According to the Diagnostic and Statistical

Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth edition) (DSM-V), Asperger’s can impair social, professional,

and other leisure activities (APA, 2012).                Individuals with Asperger’s disorder may have

difficulties in expressing compassion and social and emotional reciprocity (Mawhood and

Howlin 1999). A review of six studies found that the proportion employed among “more able

adults within the autism spectrum” ranged from 5% to 44% (Howlin 2000). Studies also find

that people on the autism spectrum are generally better than others at visual-attentional tasks that

require focusing (Blaser et al. 2014, Milne et al. 2013, Kaldy et al. 2013), and some possess

heightened abilities in mathematics (Howlin and Mawhood 1996). Being more focused with less

susceptibility to distraction, and having better math skills, may give people with autism a

productivity advantage in some jobs and work settings (Cowen 2011, Cook 2012). This may

include professions where they mostly work alone, such as accounting. The Bureau of Labor

Statistics O*Net data shows that three of the four core tasks for accountants are technical ones

involving preparing and analyzing accounting records and systems, while the fourth (“report to

management regarding the finances of establishments”) may involve face-to-face social

interaction but may also be done in writing in many cases.4 The six most important work




4
  The other three core tasks are: 1) Prepare, examine, or analyze accounting records, financial statements, or other
financial reports to assess accuracy, completeness, and conformance to reporting and procedural standards; 2)
Establish tables of accounts and assign entries to proper accounts, and 3) Develop, implement, modify, and
document recordkeeping and accounting systems, making use of current computer technology
(http://www.onetonline.org/link/details/13-2011.01, accessed 8-20-15).

                                                          10
activities are technical ones.5             Some level of social interaction is of course necessary

(“communicating with supervisors, peers, or subordinates” is the seventh most important work

activity), but the bulk of accountants’ work can be done independently, and the social interaction

may primarily involve exchanging technical information where not much social and emotional

reciprocity is required. In short, accounting may be particularly suitable for many people with

Asperger’s. As will be seen, the results differ little between applicants with SCI—which does not

impair either technical or social interaction skills—and those with Asperger’s. This points to

employers’ general reluctance to hire people with disabilities rather than specific concerns over

how potential social interaction deficits will affect the productivity of people with Asperger’s.

         People with SCI or Asperger’s are clearly covered by the ADA.6 State laws generally

mirror the ADA or apply broader standards, and a review of the state disability definitions

indicates that all of the state laws (summarized in Table 7 and Neumark, Song, and Button 2015)

prohibit discrimination against people with SCI or Asperger’s.

         To test the effect of qualifications on the relative demand for applicants with disabilities,

this study constructed two resume templates—one for a novice applicant just out of college, and

the other for an experienced applicant who is a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) with six years

of experience and an exemplary record following college graduation. We chose to use both

novice and experienced applicants to examine whether greater experience and credentials help


5
  The six activities are: interacting with computers; processing information; getting information; evaluating
information to determine compliance with standards; organizing, planning, and prioritizing work; and analyzing data
or information (http://www.onetonline.org/link/details/13-2011.01, accessed 8-20-15).
6
  This is particularly clear given the more stringent standards of the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, which includes
a “major bodily function” as a “major life activity” for purposes of determining whether an individual qualifies for
ADA coverage based on being substantially limited in a major life activity
(http://www.eeoc.gov/laws/statutes/adaaa.cfm, accessed 8-20-15). The percentage of EEOC-reported cases
involving paralysis or autism is small, but this is largely because there is no question that these conditions are clearly
covered by the ADA (unlike conditions such as “orthopedic and structural impairments of the back” that constitute a
larger share of ADA charges in part because there is a question of whether they qualify for coverage)
(http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/enforcement/ada-merit.cfm, accessed 8-20-15).

                                                           11
overcome labor market disadvantages faced by people with disabilities, as suggested by the

results of Hollenbeck and Kimmel (2008). The resumes were evaluated by university career

counselors, agency recruiters, and hiring managers who work in financial services to ensure they

appeared legitimate, and included specific skills needed for accountant positions. The resumes

were designed to make both the novice and experienced candidates appear well qualified to

maximize the likelihood that employers would be interested in hiring them.

        The study design created six cells, representing the permutations of disability status

portrayed in the cover letter (no disability, SCI, or Asperger’s syndrome) and experience level

(novice or experienced). The cover letters and resumes are in Appendix A. Twelve male names

were used in the applications—six were always associated with novice resumes and six were

always associated with experienced resumes, and disability status was randomly rotated through

each of the names (to eliminate any bias associated with particular names).7 Disability status

was revealed in the cover letter in the context of the applicant’s volunteer work. Cover letters for

all applicants (including those without a disability) mentioned the applicant’s volunteer work for

a disability organization (the fictitious “New Jersey Paraplegia Foundation” or the “Life

Development Institute’s Aspergers Syndrome Program”), noting that such work had helped build

the applicant’s ability to “work effectively with others in a supervisory capacity.” The letters

from the applicants with disabilities added the wording “As an individual with [a spinal cord

injury/Asperger’s Syndrome], I am committed to providing my time and energy to those similar

to myself.” To increase the likelihood that the disability status would be noticed, these letters

went on to say “Please be advised that my disability does not interfere with my ability to perform



7
 The names used for novice applicants were Adam Lewis, Jack Anderson, Jayden Johnson, Josiah Washington,
Kayden Jones, and Luke Mathews, and the names used for experienced applicants were Connor Ericson, Easton
Carter, Hunter Richardson, Isaiah Booker, Jacob Rubinstein, and Jaxon Jones.

                                                     12
the skills needed in a finance environment. I would be happy to answer any questions that you

may have concerning this matter.”8

         The study team used Indeed.com, an online advertising job portal, to submit the

application materials. The website aggregates job solicitations from job boards, newspaper

advertisements, and company career websites throughout the Internet. Between June 1 and

August 31, 2013, applications were submitted to employers who advertised a U.S.-based

accounting position, totaling 6,016 applications. Job openings that did not allow cover letters to

be submitted were excluded. Employers who advertised more than one position received only

one set of application materials, for the first position advertised.                  Each advertisement was

assessed to determine whether a novice or expert application would be more appropriate, based

on desired experience or credentials. Disability status was randomly rotated through the names

and was not a factor in deciding where to submit an application.                          Email accounts were

constructed for each of the twelve applicant names, and pre-paid telephones were purchased for

each name in order to record voice messages, so that employers could respond to the applications

either by email or telephone.           Employers were given up to four months to respond after an

application was submitted.

         For purposes of analysis, employer responses were divided into three categories: 1) those

expressing desire for an interview; 2) those expressing another form of active employer interest

(asking the applicant for further documents or credentials, inviting the applicant to apply for

another position in the company, checking that the applicant is aware that the job is in another

state, or requesting the applicant to also apply through the company website); and 3) those not


8
 The 1989 study in France used a similar approach by identifying disability in the cover letter, using the sentence
“As the result of an accident in 1982, I am confined to a wheelchair” (Ravaud et al. 1992). Given that job applicants
are not required to reveal a disability, and most would not do so in an application, we chose to use the context of
volunteer work for a disability organization as a plausible rationale for revealing the disability.

                                                         13
expressing any interest (including no response and explicit rejections). In the results presented

here, categories 1 and 2 are combined to represent “any employer interest” while category 1

represents the more restrictive measure of “callback for interview.”

        Employer characteristics were coded using information on RefUSA, plus the Manta.com

website or company websites when RefUSA information was not available.                                The coded

characteristics include: state of operation; number of employees; whether the employer is either

closely-held (not traded on a stock exchange), publicly-traded or a government agency; industry

(NAICS code); and federal contractor status.9 This final variable is potentially important since

the federal government requires contractors to take affirmative action to hire individuals with

disabilities.10

        The methods used are likely to provide a conservative test of the effects of disability on

expressions of employer interest, principally because the information on disability status in the

cover letter may not be noticed in the decision-making process. Furthermore, many applications

are processed by computers that search for keywords indicating relevant training and experience,

which could result in some not passing the first round of evaluation (though the resumes were

designed to reflect highly-qualified applicants). Even among applications read by human beings,

the cover letter may not have been read. To the extent that disability status is not incorporated in

the decision process, the disability gaps estimated here are likely to represent lower bounds for

the true gaps.

                                                    Results

        The applicants with disabilities were less likely to receive any expressions of employer

interest, as shown in Table 1 and illustrated in Figures 1a and 1b. The disability applications
9
  The establishment address was used to identify state of operation for multi-establishment companies, while
employment was coded for the overall company since that determines ADA and state law coverage.
10
   http://www.dol.gov/odep/topics/FederalContractorRequirements.htm, accessed 3-13-15.

                                                        14
received expressions of interest from 4.87% of employers compared to 6.58% for the non-

disability applications (columns 1 and 2). The 1.71 percentage point gap represents a 26% lower

chance of employer interest for the applicants with disabilities, and the null hypothesis of a zero

gap is strongly rejected at the 99% level. There is also a gap using the more restrictive measure

of a callback for an interview (0.28, representing an 11% lower callback rate, in column 7), but it

is not large enough to statistically reject a zero gap.

        Perhaps surprisingly, employers were especially unlikely to express interest in the more

experienced applicants with disabilities. The 2.57 percentage point gap (column 3) represents a

34% lower chance of employer interest for experienced applicants with disabilities compared to

those without disabilities, which is three times the size of the 0.86 point gap between novice

applicants with and without disabilities. This goes against the idea that increased training,

qualifications, and successful labor market experience will help to erase the disadvantages faced

by people with disabilities.11

        The specific type of disability made little difference in relative employer interest. The

disability gaps are 1.78 percentage points for people with SCI’s, and 1.64 points for people with

Asperger’s Syndrome, both strong enough to reject a zero gap at the 95% level. For both

disability types the lower employer interest is concentrated among the more experienced

applicants.

        Employer characteristics. Table 2 provides breakdowns by employment size, ownership,

federal contractor status, and broad industry, with some results illustrated in Figures 2a and 2b.

11
   Greater unobserved variance in the perceived productivity of applicants with disabilities could lead to a lower
perceived likelihood that applicants with disabilities will meet the standards for the position. Neumark (2012) has
shown how this issue can be addressed and tested in an audit study if there is variation in the tested qualification
levels, and the returns to the qualifications are assumed to be equal between the two groups. In our data the returns
to qualifications (based on comparing experienced versus novice applicants) do not appear to be equal for applicants
with and without disabilities, so that we are not able to test for this mechanism in explaining the lower employer
interest in applicants with disabilities.


                                                         15
The employment size breakdown creates four groups of roughly equal size among the private

sector employers. In Table 2 and the two figures it can be seen that the disability gap in any

expressions of employer interest (cols. 1-4) is largest among the smallest private-sector

employers (fewer than 15 employees), and this result carries over to the more restrictive measure

of a callback for an interview (cols. 5-8).                  Private-sector employers with fewer than 15

employees are not covered by the ADA, although many are subject to state disability

discrimination laws (as will be explored).

         A breakdown by ownership shows that the disability gap is concentrated among closely-

held employers (-2.3 points), while the gap is smaller among government employers (-1.3 points,

although the sample is small and a zero gap cannot be rejected). Publicly-held employers were

slightly more likely to express interest in the applicants with disabilities compared to those

without disabilities (0.9 points, although a zero gap cannot be rejected).                           In addition, the

disability gap is largest among employers who are not federal contractors, where a zero effect

can be rejected both for any employer interest and for the more restrictive measure of a callback

for interview. The disability gap does not, however, vary in a noteworthy way by industry.

         To explore which employment characteristics are the key drivers of the differences in

Table 2, probit regressions are presented in Table 3 using “any employer interest” and “callback

for interview” as the dependent variables. This table presents the results of interactions between

disability status and employer characteristics, using employer characteristics and applicant name

dummies as controls to adjust for any differences not captured by randomization.12                                     In

regressions on the full sample (column 1), it can be seen that the disability gap in any employer

interest remains largest among small firms, but there are also noteworthy disability gaps for the

12
   Descriptive statistics for all variables are in Table A1. In further regressions not reported here, we controlled for
firm size with linear and squared terms in addition to the size category dummies, with no noteworthy difference in
results.

                                                           16
other firm sizes. In addition, column 1 shows that there appears to be more interest in applicants

with disabilities among publicly-held firms relative to closely-held firms, and federal contractors

relative to non-contractors. To probe the results, a regression using only closely-held firms (col.

2) shows the largest disability gap among small firms, although the coefficients remain sizeable

for the other firm sizes, and a zero gap can be rejected for firms in the 15-99 and 100-499 size

categories. A regression using only publicly-held firms (col. 3) does not show any disability

interactions strong enough to reject a zero gap. Focusing on federal contractor status, column 4

shows that non-contractors have disability gaps where a zero gap can be rejected for three of the

size categories (all except 15-99 employees), while the disability gaps for federal contractors in

column 5 are smaller and within the margin of sampling error. Looking just within the closely-

held sample, the disability gaps for non-contractors are large and a zero gap can be rejected for

three of the size categories (column 6), while there are no strong disability gaps for closely-held

federal contractors (column 7).

       The pattern changes somewhat when the dependent variable is callbacks for interviews in

columns 8 to 14: there is a negative effect of disability on callbacks by small employers in all

the columns, and a positive effect of disability on callbacks by employers with 15 to 99

employees in three of the columns. This latter result occurs among non-contractors (columns 11

and 13), indicating that it is not a result of the affirmative action mandate for federal contractors.

       In sum, both measures of employer responses show that small closely-held firms that are

not federal contractors are less likely to express interest in disability applicants relative to non-

disability applicants. The results differ for the two measures in that larger closely-held firms that

are not federal contractors are also less likely to express any interest in disability applications,




                                                  17
while small federal contractors are also less likely to respond to disability applications with

callbacks for interviews.

       Experience Level and Disability Type. As shown in Table 1, the disability gap in

employer interest is largest among experienced applicants, but the gaps are similar by type of

disability. Tables 4 and 5 explore these results by relating them to employer characteristics. The

results of Table 4 are summarized very simply: the disability gaps large enough to reject zero

effects are among experienced applicants applying to small, closely-held, and non-federal-

contractor employers (although the disability gap for novice applicants is also outside the margin

of error for non-Federal-contractor employers).

       Comparing by disability type in Table 5, the gaps in employer interest are generally

concentrated among small private-sector employers for both SCI and Asperger’s Syndrome.

There is an interesting exception, however, in that the largest gap in any employer interest for

people with Asperger’s Syndrome is among employers with 500 or more employees, although

the gap in employer callbacks is largest among small employers.

       These results are explored in Table 6 with probit regressions using employer

characteristics and applicant names as controls. Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 confirm that disability

gaps are concentrated among experienced applicants applying to small private-sector employers,

with no strong disability gaps for novice applicants. Columns 3 and 7 show that small private-

sector employers were the least likely to express interest in applicants with SCI, and column 8

shows the same result for callbacks to applicants with Asperger’s Syndrome, although column 4

shows that the largest private sector employers (with 500 or more employees) were the least

likely to express any type of interest in applicants with Asperger’s Syndrome. Applicants with




                                                  18
Asperger’s Syndrome were likely to do relatively well when applying to a publicly-held

company (column 4).

       Disability Discrimination Laws.     The results so far indicate that disability gaps in

employer interest are concentrated among closely-held firms that are not federal contractors, and

may be especially large among small employers who have fewer than 15 employees and are

therefore not covered by the ADA.         Does coverage by the ADA or a state disability

discrimination law (DDL) make a difference? As shown in Table 7, 48 states and the District of

Columbia have a DDL that prohibits discrimination by private employers against employees and

job applicants with disabilities, with variation in the minimum size threshold for employer

coverage. Also, the DDLs in 43 states require employers to make reasonable accommodations

for workers with disabilities (either explicitly or by state court interpretation). Table 7 also

reports that among the 5,880 employers with necessary employment information, our sample

contains 4,891 (83.2%) subject to a state DDL requiring reasonable accommodations, 266 (4.5%)

subject to a state DDL not requiring accommodations, and the remaining 723 (12.3%) not subject

to a state DDL. Focusing on the 1,333 small employers that are not subject to the ADA, 657

(49.3%) are subject to a state DDL requiring accommodations, only 6 (0.5%) are subject to a

state DDL not requiring reasonable accommodations, and the remaining 670 (50.3%) are not

subject to a state DDL.

       We estimate the possible effects of the ADA and state DDL’s using three approaches:

       1) probit regressions across the entire sample to examine variation both within and

           between states in ADA and state DDL coverage;




                                               19
         2) a within-state difference-in-difference (DD) design that compares the disability/non-

             disability difference in employer interest among employers that are and are not

             covered by the ADA or a state DDL; and

         3) regression discontinuity (RD) designs that examine how the disability/non-disability

             difference in employer interest changes as employment size grows and a firm

             becomes covered by a state DDL or the ADA.

Because the disability gap is concentrated among experienced applicants, we estimate the DD

and RD designs both for the full sample and just for experienced applicants.

         Results from the first approach are presented in Table 8, using the full sample with

separate variables for ADA and state DDL coverage (allowing state DDL’s to have an effect on

top of the ADA when employers are covered by both).13 Column 1 shows an overall disability

coefficient of -.015, while column 2 shows that ADA coverage is linked to a positive effect on

employer interest in applicants with disabilities, and the interaction effect of state DDL coverage

with disability status is negative but not strong enough to reject a zero effect. In column 3, the

disability interactions with DDL’s not requiring accommodations, and with DDL’s requiring

accommodations, are also negative but neither is strong enough to reject a zero effect.

         The estimate of most interest is in column 4, which is restricted to small employers who

are not covered by the ADA. There it can be seen that the disability interaction with state DDL

coverage is negative, but again not strong enough to reject a zero effect.

         The estimated effects of ADA coverage are stronger when predicting a callback for an

interview in columns 5 to 8. Column 6 shows that the interaction effect of disability and ADA

coverage is positive and strong enough to reject a zero effect at the 99% level, with a magnitude


13
  In further regressions not reported here, we controlled for firm size with linear and squared terms in addition to
the size category dummies, with little difference in results.

                                                          20
(.026) that largely counteracts the negative main effect of disability (-.036). Unlike the results

for “any employer interest” (cols. 2 and 3), the disability interaction with state DDL coverage is

positive in column 6, and positive for state DDL coverage requiring accommodations in column

7, but both are within the bounds of sampling error. When focusing on small firms in column 8,

the effect of state DDL coverage interacted with disability is positive (in contrast to the column 4

estimate predicting any employer interest) but not strong enough to reject a zero effect.

       Whether the ADA and state DDL’s have an effect on employer behavior can be tested

more rigorously with DD and RD designs (Angrist and Pischke 2009, Lee and Lemieux 2009).

To compare the responses of covered and uncovered employers that are otherwise as similar as

possible, these regressions are restricted to private employers with no more than 100 employees,

or alternatively no more than 30 employees. The DD design is based on the following equation:



   1) Responseis = a + b1*Disab*ADAcovi + b2*StateDDLcovis + b3*Disab*StateDDLcovis +

       b4*Empdumi + b5*States + b6*Disab*States + b7*Controls + eis

               Where:
               Responseis = Any employer response, or callback for interview, by employer i in state s
               Disab = dummy for disability noted in cover letter
               ADAcovi = employer i is covered by ADA (having 15 or more employees)
               StateDDLcovis = employer i in state s is covered by state DDL, not by ADA
               Empdumi = Dummies for number of employees
               States = State dummies
               Controls = Dummies for publicly held, federal contractor, 7 industries, and 11
                       applicant names
               i subscripts denote employer
               s subscripts denote state

The key coefficients of interest are b1 and b3. The b1 coefficient measures the difference

between ADA-covered employers, and those not covered by the ADA or a state DDL, in the


                                                 21
relative likelihood of responding to disability and non-disability applications. The b3 coefficient

makes a similar comparison between employers covered by a state DDL and those not covered

by the ADA or a state DDL. The comparisons are made within-state by the inclusion of state

dummies and interactions between disability and state dummies.14 The main effect of the ADA

is subsumed by the full set of dummies for number of employees (since all employers with 15 or

more employees are covered).

         The DD results in Table 9 show an apparent positive effect of the ADA on callbacks for

disability applicants, as indicated by the b1 coefficients on the interaction between disability and

ADA coverage for all applicants (columns 3 and 4) and just for experienced applicants (columns

7 and 8).      In contrast, coverage by a state DDL only (not by the ADA) is not linked to

significantly higher or lower employer responses to applicants with disabilities, as shown by

coefficients on the interaction of disability with “employer covered by state DDL, not by ADA.”

         The RD design provides a closer comparison of responses between employers just above

and just below the disability law threshold, testing whether there is any change in responses as

employer size exceeds the threshold. In examining the ADA threshold we restrict the sample to

employers with 30 or fewer employees, and in examining state DDL thresholds we restrict the

sample to employers with no more than 15 employees above the threshold and to states that have

at least 5 disability and 5 non-disability observations both above and below the threshold

(eliminating states where the DDL covers all private employers).

         We test three RD models, the first of which is based on a polynomial design run

separately for disability and non-disability applicants:



14
  The state dummies fully capture the effects of state DDL’s in states that cover all employers, so the b2 and b3
coefficients reflect estimated effects of state DDL’s in states with observations both above and below the coverage
threshold.

                                                         22
   2) Responsei = a + b1*Coveragei + b2*Empi + b3*Empi2 + b4*Empi3 + b5*Empsplinei +

          b6*Empsplinei2 + b7*Empsplinei3 + ei

                 Where:
                 Response = Any employer response, or callback for interview
                 Coverage = Coverage by ADA, or alternatively by state DDL
                 Emp = Number of employees
                 Empspline = Spline for number of employees above threshold (0 if below)


          The estimates for coefficient b1, representing the change in employer response at the

point of the threshold, are presented in columns 1 and 5 of Table 10 for all applicants and just for

experienced applicants. Almost all of these estimates are exceeded by their standard error,

providing no clear indication that employer responses change at the ADA or state DDL coverage

thresholds.

          The second RD model estimates local linear regressions on each side of the threshold,

using Stata’s “rd” program which bases optimal bandwidth choice on Imbens and Kalyanaraman

(2009).     Table 10 presents results using alternative bandwidths in columns 2 to 4 and 6 to 8.

While there are significant increases in employer interest at the ADA threshold when doubling

the optimal bandwidth (column 4), the change is similar for disability and non-disability

applicants, and no other changes indicate noteworthy effects of either the ADA or state DDL’s at

the coverage thresholds.

          A third RD model was run that includes both the ADA and state thresholds with

employment splines at each threshold, plus disability interactions with the law and employment

variables, and controls for employer characteristics. The disability interaction with ADA or state

DDL coverage directly tests whether the change in employer response at the coverage threshold

is different between disability and non-disability applicants. The results for this specification


                                                 23
(not presented but available) show that the coefficients on interactions of disability with ADA or

DDL coverage are small and none are strong effect to reject a zero effect, indicating no clear

change in employer behavior with respect to disability applicants at the point of the coverage

threshold.

        Therefore the RD results do not show a change in employer responses at the point of the

coverage thresholds, while the DD results indicate more callbacks for disability applicants

among ADA-covered employers. These results can be visualized in Figures 3a to 6b that show

the patterns of response by number of employees, based on specification (2) above with the

addition of observed means at each level of employment. As shown in Figures 3a and 3b for all

applicants, and Figures 4a and 4b for experienced applicants, the fitted lines indicate high

response to non-disability applicants among very small employers, but the response declines

approaching the ADA threshold of 15 employees. In contrast, the fitted lines for disability

applicants are fairly flat below the threshold. Taken together, these results indicate that very

small employers are especially likely to respond to non-disability applicants, but the likelihood

of a response converges for disability and non-disability applicants approaching the coverage

threshold. This is consistent with the DD and RD results: Figures 3b and 4b illustrate the DD

result from Table 9 that the general disability/non-disability difference is smaller above the ADA

threshold (eliminating the disability gap below the threshold), and also illustrate the Table 10

result of only small or no changes at the point of the threshold. It is possible that employers just

under the threshold anticipate ADA coverage with further growth, which would obscure the

effects of the ADA under the RD design.15


15
   The RD tests will be biased if some employers decide to remain under the ADA threshold to avoid coverage,
resulting in an uneven density of firms around the threshold (McCrary 2008). The density pattern in these data goes
against that possibility, as there are fewer firms just under the ADA threshold (n=65 with 13 or 14 employees) than
right at the ADA threshold (n=135 with 15 employees).

                                                        24
       The patterns of response around the state DDL thresholds in Figures 5a to 6b do not point

to any effects of the state DDL’s on employer response for either disability or non-disability

applicants, consistent with the results on state DDL’s in Tables 8 to 10.

       Overall the results from analysis of the laws point to a possible positive effect of ADA

coverage on the relative likelihood of callbacks for applicants with disabilities, but no clear

effects of state DDL’s.

                                           Discussion

       Applicants with disabilities—both those with SCI and those with Asperger’s Syndrome—

received fewer expressions of employer interest than applicants without disabilities. Since the

resumes indicated that the applicants were highly qualified and the applications were identical in

every way except for disability status, this strongly indicates that disability status affects the

hiring process.

       The disability gap was concentrated among experienced applicants.            One possible

explanation is that employers paid closer attention to applications indicating more experience,

since these applicants would receive higher pay and more responsibilities, and employers may

expect or envision longer-term commitments. In this case the employers may have been more

likely to read the cover letters of the experienced applicants and consequently be aware of the

disability status. The much smaller disability gap among novice applicants may simply result

from fewer employers being aware of the disability.

       It is also possible, however, that employers were equally aware of the disability status of

novice and experienced applicants, and disability played a stronger role in employer decisions

regarding experienced applicants. Employers may have viewed experienced applicants with

disabilities as “riskier” due to concerns over potential absences, productivity, health problems,


                                                25
insurance costs, or customer or co-worker reactions; such employer concerns could also exist for

novice applicants, but be magnified for experienced applicants due to their expected higher pay

along with greater job responsibilities and job tenure expectations. More generally, this result

casts doubt on the idea that higher qualifications help erase the disadvantages of disability (in

contrast to the findings of Hollenbeck and Kimmel, 2008, on the stronger effects of education on

earnings for men with disabilities).

        The finding that small employers (with fewer than 15 employees) are less likely than

larger employers to express interest in applicants with disabilities raises interesting questions

about disability accommodations and anti-discrimination laws. Given that small employers are

not subject to the ADA, this result suggests that small employers are engaging in discrimination

while the ADA is constraining discriminatory behavior of medium and large employers. The

story is complicated, however, by the lack of clear changes in employer responses at the ADA

employment threshold (although the ADA may be affecting behavior of those just under the

threshold), and by consideration of state DDL’s since there is little difference in employer

responses between small employers that are and are not covered by state laws. This latter result

may be due to a lack of knowledge of state laws among small employers, while the federal ADA

is much better known.16 Large employers are more likely to have formal HR departments that

will be aware of both the ADA and state requirements, and may be more likely to have prior

experience in hiring people with disabilities so they are more comfortable in considering

applicants with disabilities.

        Concern over accommodation costs is another possible reason for small employers’ lower

interest in applicants with disabilities. Other survey evidence indicates that small employers are

16
  Lack of knowledge about state DDL thresholds is very plausible given that in searching through state laws, the
authors found several states in which the employment coverage threshold was difficult to ascertain and there was
even conflicting information among websites.

                                                        26
slightly more likely than medium or large employers to cite actual accommodation costs

(although not uncertainty over accommodation costs) as a challenge in employing people with

disabilities (Domzal et al. 2008: 13). It is unlikely, however, that concern over accommodation

costs is an important factor in our results.              Employers would have to make similar

accommodations for novice and experienced employees (e.g., installing a wheelchair ramp for

people with SCI). If accommodation costs were an important factor, lower interest in novice as

well as experienced applicants with disabilities would have been evident. In addition, there was

not a strong difference between small employers in states with DDL’s requiring accommodations

and those in states without such laws. To the extent that concerns over accommodation costs

nonetheless play a role in employer decisions, small employers may be less likely to be aware of

resources on how to make disability accommodations and access available government

subsidies.17

        Several other results deserve discussion. First, it is interesting that the disability gap is

concentrated among closely-held companies, and does not appear to exist among publicly-held

companies. This may reflect heightened visibility of publicly-held companies that makes them

more sensitive to allegations of discrimination and outside pressure, leading them to adopt more

sophisticated HR systems that decrease the likelihood of discrimination.

        Second, it is noteworthy that federal contractor status appears to have a positive effect on

any employer expression of interest—although not callbacks for interviews—for applicants with

disabilities. This may reflect the effect of federal government guidelines on hiring people with

disabilities, stipulating that federal contractors provide affirmative action for workers with




17
  The federal government sponsors an information clearinghouse through the Job Accommodations Network at
askjan.org.

                                                     27
disabilities.18     To the extent that the federal guidelines are having an effect, they appear to be

merely erasing the disability gap in employer interest displayed by other closely-held companies,

rather than causing the contractors to display greater interest in applicants with disabilities than

in those without disabilities.

           A third interesting finding regards government employers. While the disability gap is

smaller among government employers than among private employers—and a zero gap cannot be

statistically rejected—government is often held out as a “model employer” and these results do

not indicate that government is leading the way in encouraging applicants with disabilities.

           Limitations. This study has several limitations. We do not know how many employers

read the cover letters and were aware of the disability status of the applicant. To the extent that

employers did not read the cover letters, this will decrease the estimated effects of disability, so

the estimated gaps may be seen as lower bound estimates. The only way to ensure that disability

is clearly established is to have a face-to-face or voice-to-voice meeting where the disability is

obvious or directly disclosed, or to make it prominent on the resume, although this may look

artificial and attract suspicion since it would not make sense to highlight a disability on most

applications.

           In addition, while we can confidently say that applicants with disabilities are less likely to

attract employer interest, we cannot clearly ascribe this to discrimination. Even though the

applicants are highly qualified and the cover letters stated that the disability does not interfere

with job performance as an accountant, employers may be concerned about the productivity of

the applicants with disabilities, perhaps especially for more senior positions in which accountants

would be expected to meet with clients. This might be due, for example, to concerns about

physical accessibility when people with spinal cord injuries have to travel to client offices, or
18
     http://www.dol.gov/odep/topics/FederalContractorRequirements.htm, accessed 3-13-15.

                                                        28
concerns over the ability of people with Asperger’s to consistently have positive social

interaction with clients.   Apart from the issue of productivity, employers may have been

concerned about accommodation costs and/or difficulty in terminating employees with

disabilities under the ADA and state DDL’s. It may be that many smaller employers were not

already accessible and would have needed to install a ramp and make other renovations for

applicants with spinal cord injuries. The same pattern of lower interest among small employers,

however, exists for applicants with Asperger’s who would not require such accommodations. It

is also noteworthy that legal accommodation mandates and employment protections do not seem

to be a deterrent since employer interest is not clearly affected by state laws and is, if anything,

slightly higher among those covered by the ADA’s accommodation mandate and employment

protections.

       A final caveat is that the sample design was restricted to well-qualified male applicants

for accounting positions, and the results may not be fully generalizable to other groups, including

women, people with other types of disabilities, people without college degrees, and those

applying for other types of jobs (e.g., service and blue collar occupations in which people with

disabilities are overrepresented).

                                          Conclusion

       The main result of this paper is that that employers express less interest in job applicants

with disabilities than in otherwise-similar job applicants without disabilities, even for positions

where the disability should not affect the ability to do the job.         Combined with similar

experimental evidence from France and Belgium (Ravaud et al. 1992, Baert 2014), the pattern of

results points to employer bias in hiring as an important piece of the puzzle helping to explain

the low employment rate of people with disabilities. In particular, the similar findings for


                                                29
applicants with two very different types of disability supports the idea that a general factor such

as disability bias, rather than productivity or accommodation concerns that vary by type of

disability, accounts for the lower employer interest.

         A second key result is that the disability gap in employer interest is concentrated among

experienced applicants, indicating that higher qualifications do not erase the labor market

disadvantages associated with disability.              A third key result is that the disability gap is

concentrated among small private firms who are not covered by the ADA, which points to

positive effects of the ADA on the recruitment of employees with disabilities. While we cannot

be certain that the ADA is responsible for helping close the gap among covered employers (since

there is no relative improvement at the point of the coverage threshold, and there may be other

productivity- or accommodation-related reasons for the reluctance of small employers to pursue

applicants with disabilities), this evidence indicates at a minimum that the ADA does not appear

to be discouraging employer hiring of people with disabilities.

         These results suggest there is potential for public policies and private initiatives to reduce

employer reluctance to hire people with disabilities.19 The lack of strong effects for state DDL’s

may reflect lack of employer awareness of state laws, particularly among small employers

without HR departments, so that stronger efforts to publicize these laws and educate employers

and the public may make a difference.

         These results also point to the value of further research into employer behavior regarding

employees and job applicants with disabilities. Such research should include additional field

experiments that help to draw stronger causal links between disability and employment

outcomes. While this study is focused on the accounting profession, it is likely that the results

19
   Examples include the Department of Labor’s Employer Assistance Resource Network
(http://www.dol.gov/odep/resources/EARN.htm) and the non-profit Business Leadership Network
(http://www.usbln.org/). For overviews of public and private initiatives, see National Council on Disability (2007).

                                                         30
apply broadly to many other types of jobs.        It would be valuable to extend this research,

particularly because unlike the profiles constructed here, most people with disabilities do not

have college degrees, and they are overrepresented in service and blue-collar jobs. Further

research could also assess types of social information processing in hiring behavior, which can

shed light on the reasons for lower interest in applicants with disabilities along with specific

policies or practices that can reduce this problem. For example, how do employers react when

they are confronted with an application from a person with a disability, what are the steps in their

reaction, and what are the relationships among their beliefs, attitudes, and hiring behaviors?

What is the role of written disability policies, training, and support from top management? Such

research can not only help us understand the barriers faced by people with disabilities, but also

help identify the most effective policies and practices to increase their employment

opportunities.




                                                31
                                           References


Acemoglu, D., & Angrist, J. D. (2001). Consequences of employment protection? The case of

       the Americans with Disabilities Act. Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 915-957.

Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's

       companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

APA (2012). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-V. Washington, DC:

       American Psychiatric Association.

Baert, S. (2014). Wage subsidies and hiring chances for the disabled: Some causal evidence. IZA

       Discussion Paper No. 8318.

Baldwin, M. L., & Choe, C. (2014a). Wage discrimination against workers with sensory

       disabilities. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 53(1), 101-124.

Baldwin, M. L., & Choe, C. (2014b). Re-examining the models used to estimate disability-

       related wage discrimination. Applied Economics, 46(12), 1393-1408.

Baldwin, M. L., & Johnson, W. G. (2006). A critical review of studies of discrimination against

       workers with disabilities. In W. M. Rodgers (Ed.), Handbook on the economics of

       discrimination (pp. 119). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Beegle, K., & Stock, W. A. (2003). The labor market effects of disability discrimination laws.

       Journal of Human Resources, 38(4), 806-859.

Bell, B. S., & Klein, K. J. (2001). Effects of disability, gender, and job level on ratings of job

       applicants. Rehabilitation Psychology, 46, 229-246.

Berkowitz, M., O'Leary, P. K., Kruse, D. L., & Harvey, C. (1998). Spinal cord injury: An

       analysis of medical and social costs. New York: Demos Medical.

Bertrand, M. & Mullainathan, S. (2003). Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and

                                               32
       Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. The American Economic

       Review, 94 (1), 991-1013.

Blaser, E., Eglington, L., Carter, A. S., & Kaldy, Z. (2014). Pupillometry reveals a mechanism

       for the Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) advantage in visual tasks. Scientific reports, 4.

Block, P., Balcazar, F., & Keys, C. (2002). Race, poverty and disability: Three strikes and you're

       out! Or are you? Social Policy, 33(1), 34-38.

Bound, J., & Burkhauser, R. V. (1999). Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted on

       people with disabilities. In O. Ashenfelter, & D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of labor

       economics. volume 3C (pp. 3417-3528). Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier

       Science, North-Holland.

Bruyere, S. (2000). Disability employment policies and practices in private and federal sector

       organizations. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, Program on Employment and Disability.

Burkhauser, R. V. (1999). The importance of accommodation on the timing of disability

       insurance applications: Results from the survey of disability and work and the health and

       retirement study. Journal of Human Resources, 34(3), 589-611.

Burkhauser, R. V., Butler, J. S., & Kim, Y. W. (1995). The importance of employer

       accommodation on the job duration of workers with disabilities: A hazard model

       approach. Labour Economics, 2(2), 109-130.

Button, P. (2015). Expanding Disability Discrimination Protections to Those with Less Severe

       Impairments: Evidence from California's Prudence Kay Poppink Act. Working paper,

       Department of Economics, Tulane University.




                                               33
Chen, S., & der Klaauw, W. v. (2006). The work disincentive effects of the disability insurance

       program in the 1990s. Washington, D.C.: Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census

       Bureau.

Colella, Adrienne (2001). Coworker distributive fairness judgments of the workplace

       accommodation of employees with disabilities. Academy of Management Review, 26,

       100–116.

Colella, A., DeNisi, A. S., & Varma, A. (1998). The impact of ratee's disability on performance

       judgments and choice as partner: The role of disability–job fit stereotypes and

       interdependence of rewards. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83(1), 102.

Colella, Adrienne, Patrick McKay, Shanna Daniels, and Sloane Signal (2012). “Employment

       discrimination,” in Steve W. J. Kozlowski (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Organizational

       Psychology, Volume 1. Oxford University Press, pp. 1034-1102.

Cook, Gareth (2012). The Autism Advantage. New York Times Magazine, November 29th.

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis issues for

       field studies. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Cowen, Tyler (2011). An Economic and Rational Choice Approach to the Autism Spectrum and

       Human Neurodiversity. George Mason University, Working Paper in Economics No. 11-

       58.

DeLeire, T. (2000). The wage and employment effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

       Journal of Human Resources, 35(4), 693-715.

DeVivo, Michael J., Gale G. Whiteneck, and E. D. Charles (1995). The economic impact of

       spinal cord injury. In Samuel L. Stover, Joel A. DeLisa, and Gale G. Whiteneck, eds.,

       Spinal cord injury: Clinical outcomes from the model systems (Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen



                                               34
       Publishers, pp 234-271).

Dixon, K. A., Kruse, D., & Van Horn, C. E. (2003). Restricted access: A survey of employers

       about people with disabilities and lowering barriers to work. New Brunswick, NJ:

       Rutgers University, John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development.

Donohue III, J. J., Stein, M. A., Griffin Jr, C. L., & Becker, S. (2011). Assessing Post‐ADA

       Employment: Some Econometric Evidence and Policy Considerations. Journal of

       Empirical Legal Studies, 8(3), 477-503.

Dovidio, John F., Samuel E. Gaertner, Kerry Kawakami, and Gordon Hodson. Why Can't We

       Just Get Along? Interpersonal Biases and Interracial Distrust. Cultural Diversity & Ethnic

       Minority Psychology 8.2 (2002): 88--102.

Domzal, C. Houtenville, A. & Sharma, R. (2008). Survey of employer perspectives on the

       employment of people with disabilities: technical report. McLean VA: CESSI.

Drehmer, D. E., & Bordieri, J. E. (1985). Hiring decisions for disabled workers: The hidden bias.

       Rehabilitation Psychology, 30, 157-165.

Fiske, Susan T., Amy J. C. Cuddy, Peter Glick, and Jun Xu (2002). A Model of (often Mixed)

       Stereotype Content: Competence and Warmth Respectively Follow from Perceived

       Status and Competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 82.6: 878-902.

French, Eric and Jae Song (2009). The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.

       Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Working Paper 2009-05.

Fritzsche, B. A., & Brannick, M. T. (2002). The importance of representative design in judgment

       tasks: The case of resume screening. Journal of Occupational and Organizational

       Psychology, 75, 163-169.

Gillberg, Christopher (1991). The Treatment of Epilepsy in Autism. Journal of Autism and



                                                 35
       Developmental Disorders 21.1: 61-77.

Gouvier, W. D., Steiner, D. D., Jackson, W. T., Schlater, D., & Rain, J. S. (1991). Employment

       discrimination against handicapped job candidates: An analog study of the effects of

       neurological causation, visibility of handicap, and public contact. Rehabilitation

       Psychology, 36, 121-129.

Gunderson, Morley, and Douglas Hyatt (1996). Do Injured Workers Pay for Reasonable

       Accommodation? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 50, No. 1, October, pp. 92-

       104.

Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List (2004).           Field experiments. Journal of Economic

       Literature: 1009-1055.

Hollenbeck, K., & Kimmel, J. (2008). Differences in the returns to education for males by

       disability status and age of disability onset. Southern Economic Journal, 74(3), 707-724.

Hotchkiss, J. L. (2003). The labor market experience of workers with disabilities: The ADA and

       beyond. Kalamazoo, Mich.: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Hotchkiss, J. L. (2004). A closer look at the employment impact of the americans with

       disabilities act. Journal of Human Resources, 39(4), 887-911.

Houtenville, A. J., & Burkhauser, R. V. (2004). Did the employment of people with disabilities

       decline in the 1990s, and was the ADA responsible? A replication and robustness check

       of Acemoglu and Angrist (2001)-research brief. Ithaca, NY: Employment and Disability

       Institute, Cornell University.

Houtenville, A.J., Brucker, D., & Lauer, E (2014). Annual Compendium of Disability Statistics:

       2014. Durham, NH: University of New Hampshire, Institute on Disability.

Howlin, Patricia (2000). Outcome in adult life for more able individuals with autism or Asperger

       syndrome. Autism 4.1: 63-83.

                                                36
Howlin, P, and L. Mawhood (1996). An evaluation of a pilot two-year supported employment

       service for people with autism, London: The National Autistic Society.

Imbens, G., & Kalyanaraman, K. (2009). Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression

       Discontinuity Estimator." Working Paper No. 14726, National Bureau of Economic

       Research, Cambridge, MA.

Jolls, C., & Prescott, J. J. (2004). Disaggregating employment protection: The case of disability

       discrimination. Working Paper No. 10740, National Bureau of Economic Research,

       Cambridge, MA.

Jost, J. T., & Hamilton, D. L. (2005). Stereotypes in our culture. In J. Dovidio, P. Glick, & L.

       Rudman (Eds.), On the nature of prejudice. Oxford, England: Blackwell.

Kaldy, Z., Giserman, I., Carter, A., & Blaser, E. (2013). The Mechanisms Underlying the ASD

       Advantage in Visual Search. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, published

       on-line October 4, 2013.

Kaye, S. H. (2010). The impact of the 2007-2009 recession on workers with disabilities. Monthly

       Labor Review, October 2010, 19-30.

Kaye, H. S., Jans, L. H., & Jones, E. C. (2011). Why don’t employers hire and retain workers

       with disabilities?. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 21(4), 526-536.

Krueger, A., & Kruse, D. (1995). Labor market effects of spinal cord injuries in the dawn of the

       computer age No. 5302). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Papers.

Kruse, D., & Schur, L. (2003). Employment of people with disabilities following the ADA.

       Industrial Relations, 42(1), 31-66.

Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2009). Field experiments in economics: The past, the present, and the



                                                37
       future. European Economic Review, 53(1), 1-18.

Lee, D. S., & Lemieux, T. (2009). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Working

       Paper No. 14723). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lengnick-Hall, M. L. (2007). Hidden talent: How leading companies hire, retain, and benefit

       from people with disabilities. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander J. Strand (2013). Does Disability Insurance

       Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of

       SSDI Receipt. American Economic Review 103(5): 1797-1829.

Marti, M. W., & Blanck, P. (2000). Attitudes, behavior, and the ADA. In P. Blanck (Ed.),

       Employment, disability, and the Americans with Disabilities Act: Issues in law, public

       policy, and research (pp. 356-384). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Mashaw, J. L., Reno, V. P., Burkhauser, R. V., & Berkowitz, R. (Eds.). (1996). Disability, work

       and cash benefits. Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Mawhood, L. & Howlin, P. (1999) The Outcome of a Supported Employment Scheme for High-

       Functioning Adults with Autism or Asperger Syndrome. Autism 3 (3): 229–54.

McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity

       Design: A Density Test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698-714.

McNeil, J. (2001). Americans with Disabilities, 1997. Current Population Reports P70-73,

       Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce.

Milne, E., Dunn, S. A., Freeth, M., & Rosas-Martinez, L. (2013). Visual search performance is

       predicted by the degree to which selective attention to features modulates the ERP

       between 350 and 600ms. Neuropsychologia, 51(6), 1109-1118.




                                               38
Muzzatti, B. (2008). Attitudes towards disability: Beliefs, emotive reactions, and behaviors by

       non disabled persons. Giornale Italiano Di Psicologia, 35(2), 313-333.

National Council on Disability. (2007). Empowerment for Americans with disabilities: Breaking

       barriers to careers and full employment. http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2007/Oct2007

Neumark, D. (2012). Detecting discrimination in audit and correspondence studies. Journal of

       Human Resources, 47(4), 1128-1157.

Neumark, D., Song, J., & Button, P. (2015). Does Protecting Older Workers from

       Discrimination Make It Harder to Get Hired? Evidence from Disability Discrimination

       Laws. NBER Working Paper No. 21379.

Nowicki, E. A., & Sandieson, R. (2002). A meta-analysis of school-age children's attitudes

       towards persons with physical or intellectual disabilities. International Journal of

       Disability, Development and Education, 49(3), 243-265.

OECD (2010). Sickness, disability, and work: Breaking the barriers. Paris: Organisation for

       Economic Co-operation and Development.

Ravaud, J., Madiot, B, & Ville, I. (1992). Discrimination towards disabled people seeking

       employment. Social Science and Medicine, 35, 951-958.

Robert, P. M., & Harlan, S. L. (2006). Mechanisms of disability discrimination in large

       bureaucratic organizations: Ascriptive inequalities in the workplace. The Sociological

       Quarterly, 47(4), 599-630.

Rose, G. L., & Brief, A. P. (1979). Effects of handicap and job characteristics on selection

       evaluations. Personnel Psychology, 32, 385-392.

Run Ren, L., Paetzold, R. L., & Colella, A. (2008). A meta-analysis of experimental studies on

       the effects of disability on human resource judgments. Human Resource Management



                                                39
       Review, 18, 191–203.

Sandler, L. A., & Blanck, P. (2005). The quest to make accessibility a corporate article of faith at

       microsoft: Case study of corporate culture and human resource dimensions. Behavioral

       Sciences & the Law, 23(1), 39-64.

Schartz, H., Hendricks, D.J., & Blanck, P. (2006). Workplace Accommodations: Evidence-

       Based Outcomes, Work, 27, 345–354.

Schur, L. A. (2003). Barriers or opportunities? The causes of contingent and part-time work

       among people with disabilities. Industrial Relations, 42(4), 589-622.

Schur, L., Kruse, D., & Blanck, P. (2005). Corporate culture and the employment of persons with

       disabilities. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 23(1), 3-20.

Schur, L., Kruse, D., Blasi, J., & Blanck, P. (2009). Is disability disabling in all workplaces?

       Workplace disparities and corporate culture. Industrial Relations, 48(3), 381-410.

Schur, L., Kruse, D., and Blanck, P. (2013).             People with Disabilities: Sidelined or

       Mainstreamed? Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Schur, L., Nishii, L., Adya, M., Kruse, D., Bruyère, S. M., & Blanck, P. (2014). Accommodating

       employees with and without disabilities. Human Resource Management, 53(4), 593-621.

Scior, K. (2011). Public awareness, attitudes and beliefs regarding intellectual disability: A

       systematic review. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 32(6), 2164-2182.

Solovieva, T., Dowler, D., & Walls, R. (2011). Employer benefits from making workplace

       accommodations. Disability and Health Journal, 4(1), 39-45.

Stapleton, D.C., and R. V. Burkhauser (Eds.)(2003). The decline in employment of people with

       disabilities: A policy puzzle. Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment

       Research.



                                                 40
Stone, D. L. & Colella, A. (1996). A model of factors affecting the treatment of disabled

       individuals in organizations. The Academy of Management Review, 21, 352-401.

Stone, D. L., & Sawatzki, B. (1980). Hiring bias and the disabled interviewee: Effects of

       manipulating work history and disability information of the disabled job applicant.

       Journal of Vocational Behavior, 16, 96-104.

Thomas, L. T., & Thomas, J. E. (1984). The effects of handicap, sex, and competence on

       expected performance: Hiring and salary recommendations. Journal of Applied

       Rehabilitation Counseling, 16, 19-23.

Thompson, D., Fisher, K., Purcal, C., Deeming, C., & Sawrikar, P. (2011). Community attitudes

       to people with disability: Scoping project No. 39). Australia: Disability Studies and

       Research Centre, University of New South Wales.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015). Persons with a Disability: Labor Force Characteristics—

       2014. News Release USDL-15-1162, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, June 16.

Westerholm, R., Radak, L., Keys, C., & Henry, D. (2006a). Stigma. In G. Albrecht, J.

       Bickenbach, D. Mitchell, W. Schalick & S. Snyder (Eds.), Encyclopedia of disability (pp.

       1502-1507). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Westerholm, R., Radak, L., Keys, C., & Henry, D. (2006b). Stigma, international. In G.

       Albrecht, J. Bickenbach, D. Mitchell, W. Schalick & S. Snyder (Eds.), Encyclopedia of

       disability (pp. 1507-1510). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

WHO/World Bank (2011 ). World report on disability. Geneva: World Health Organization and

       World Bank.

Yuker, H. (Ed.). (1988). Attitudes toward persons with disabilities. New York: Springer.




                                               41
                                              Appendix

RESUME FOR EXPERIENCED CANDIDATE
CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE


OBJECTIVE:
Seeking a position in the Accounting field.

EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
   Bachelor of Science in Accounting from the Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ:
    September 2003—May 2007
      o Certified Public Accountant (CPA) certified

EXPERIENCE:
GENE LLC, New York, NY
05/2010 – Present
Accounting Manager
Presently preparing monthly, quarterly and annually audited consolidated financial statements
for a public healthcare company with net revenues of $500 million.
     Substantially reduced significant audit adjustments through better financial controls.
     Participated in the successful conversion to the G.T.E. hospital-based general ledger
        system without any interruption of accounting operations.
     Completed three years of delayed reporting for pension plans and kept it and other
        employee benefit plans current for more than 5,000 employees.
     Developed a system to track primary and fully diluted earnings per share calculations
        including common stock equivalents.
     Revised the 10K format in compliance with segment reporting requirements and other
        recent GAAP pronouncements.

Stone Design, New York, NY
01/2010 – 04/2010
Accounting Manager
Performed public accounting for small businesses, professionals and non-profit organizations
with emphasis on financial statements, taxes and audits.
     Opened the way for a 35% growth in services and revenues.
     Provided improved controls for internal operations.
     Upgraded the ten most important clients' financial reports to the latest GAAP
       pronouncements.




                                                 42
Lance Industries, New York, NY
07/2007 – 12/2009
Junior Accountant
Performed audits for large publicly held corporations and medium-sized privately owned
companies in manufacturing and retail industries. Audited pension and profit sharing plans.
During this period, fulfilled professional experience that led to CPA certification in New York.
    Managed small- to medium-sized audits during the second year.
    Managed physical inventory counts for more than 25 clients.
    Improved productivity by eliminating an average of two weeks field time during audits.
    Designed and implemented a department performance evaluation system to replace a
       non-functioning one.
    Trained four college graduates in principles of auditing that became permanent staff.
    Charted internal control systems for non-utility subsidiaries that pointed out system
       weaknesses and reduced loss risks.

COMPUTER SKILLS:
Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, PowerPoint, and Outlook Express.

AFFILIATIONS:
   Volunteer for the Life Development Institute’s Asperger Syndrome program
   Member of the New York Society of Certified Public Accountants
   Member for the Income Tax Support Initiative
   Member of the Accounting Honors Employment Program




                                               43
RESUME FOR NOVICE CANDIDATE

CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE

OBJECTIVE:
Seeking a position in the Accounting field.

EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
  Bachelor of Science in Accounting from the Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ:
   September 2008—May 2012
      o Currently pursuing my Certified Public Accountant (CPA) certification
      o Overall GPA 4.0/4.0; Major GPA 4.0/4.0
      o Course work includes Auditing, Tax, Economics, Computer Science, and Public
         Speaking
      o Dean’s List: Fall 2008; Spring 2009; Fall 2009; Spring 2010; Fall 2011; Spring 2011;
         Fall 2011; Spring 2012

CAREER PROFILE:
  Detail-oriented, efficient and organized with extensive experience in accounting systems.
  Possess strong analytical and problem solving skills, with the ability to make objective
   decisions.
  Excellent written and verbal communication skills.
  Resourceful in the completion of projects, effective at multi-tasking.

EXPERIENCE:
GENE Construction, New York, NY                                                    06/2012 -
Present
Accounting Assistant
   Perform accounts payable functions for construction expenses.
   Manage vendor accounts, generating weekly on-demand checks.
   Manage financial departments with responsibility for Budgets, Forecasting, Payroll,
     Accounts Payable and Receivable.
   Create budgets and forecasts for the management group.
   Ensure compliance with accounting deadlines.
   Prepare company accounts and tax returns for audit.
   Coordinate monthly payroll functions for 200+ employees.
   Liaise with bankers, insurers and solicitors regarding financial transactions.

Stone Design, New York, NY                                                        01/2010 –
05/2012
Accounting Intern
   Managed accounts payable, accounts receivable, and payroll departments.

                                              44
     Generated budgets and forecasts on a quarterly basis and presented data to the management
      team.
     Reported on variances in quarterly costing reports.
     Prepared annual company accounts and reports.
     Administered online banking functions.
     Managed payroll function for 140 employees.
     Monitored and recorded company expenses.

Lance Industries, New York, NY                                                     09/2008 –
12/2009
Administrative Assistant
   Performed general office duties and administrative tasks.
   Prepared weekly confidential sales reports for presentation to management.
   Managed the internal and external mail functions.
   Provided telephone support.
   Scheduled client appointments and maintained up-to-date confidential client files.

COMPUTER SKILLS:
Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, PowerPoint, and Outlook Express.

AFFILIATIONS:
  Volunteer for the Life Development Institute’s Asperger Syndrome program
  Member for the Income Tax Support Initiative
  Member of the Accounting Honors Employment Program




                                              45
COVER LETTER FOR EXPERT CANDIDATE WITH SPINAL CORD INJURY
CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised position in your finance department. I am a licensed public
accountant with a B.S. in Accounting from Rutgers University. Presently, I am working as an
Accounting Manager at GENE LLC where I prepare monthly, quarterly and annually audited
financial statements for a public healthcare company with net revenues of $500 million.

In addition to my professional experience at GENE LLC, I volunteer for the New Jersey
Paraplegia Foundation, where I organize conferences for people to meet, share stories and help
one another. As an individual with a spinal cord injury, I am committed to providing my time
and energy to those similar to myself. I believe that my volunteer experience has allowed me to
learn how to effectively work with others in a supervisory capacity.

Please be advised that my disability does not interfere with my ability to perform the skills
needed in a finance environment. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have
concerning this matter.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                               46
COVER LETTER FOR NOVICE CANDIDATE WITH SPINAL CORD INJURY

CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised position in your finance department. I am a graduate from
Rutgers University with a B.S. in Accounting. Presently, I am an Accounting Assistant at GENE
Construction where I perform accounts payable functions for construction expenses.

In addition to my experience at GENE Construction, I volunteer for the Income Tax Support
Initiative. I also volunteer for the New Jersey Paraplegia Association, where I organize events for
people to meet, share stories and help one another. As an individual with a spinal cord injury, I
am committed to providing my time and energy to those similar to myself. I believe that my
volunteer experiences have allowed me to learn how to effectively work with others in a
supervisory capacity.

Please be advised that my disability does not interfere with my ability to perform the skills
needed in a finance environment. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have
concerning this matter.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                                47
COVER LETTER FOR EXPERT CANDIDATE WITH ASPERGER’S
CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised position in your finance department. I am a licensed public
accountant with a B.S. in Accounting from Rutgers University. Presently, I am an Accounting
Manager at GENE LLC where I prepare monthly, quarterly and annually audited financial
statements for a public healthcare company with net revenues of $500 million.

In addition to my professional experience at GENE LLC, I volunteer for the Life Development
Institute’s Asperger Syndrome program where I participate in enhancing the quality of life for
individuals with AS. As an individual diagnosed with AS, I am committed to providing my time
and energy to those similar to myself. Further, I feel that my volunteer experience has helped me
learn how to effectively work with others in a supervisory capacity.

Please be advised that my disability does not interfere with my capability to perform the skills
needed in a finance environment. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have
concerning this matter.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                                48
COVER LETTER FOR NOVICE CANDIDATE WITH ASPERGER’S
CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised accountant position in your finance department. I am a Rutgers
University graduate with a B.S. in Accounting. Presently, I am an Accountant Assistant at GENE
Construction where I manage vendor accounts, and monthly payroll functions.

Alongside my professional experience at GENE Construction, I volunteer for the Income Tax
Assistance Program. I also volunteer for the Life Development Institute’s Asperger Syndrome
program where I participate in enhancing the quality of life for individuals with AS. As an
individual diagnosed with AS, I am committed to providing my time and energy to those similar
to myself. Further, I believe that these experiences have helped me learn how to work effectively
with others in a supervisory capacity.

Please be advised that my disability does not interfere in any way with my ability to perform the
skills needed in a finance environment. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may
have concerning this matter.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                               49
COVER LETTER FOR EXPERT CANDIDATE WITH NO DISABILITY

CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised position in your finance department. I am a licensed public
accountant with a B.S. in Accounting from Rutgers University. Presently, I am an Accounting
Manager at GENE LLC where I prepare monthly, quarterly and annually audited financial
statements for a public healthcare company with net revenues of $500 million.

In addition to my professional experience at GENE LLC, I volunteer for the Life Development
Institute’s Asperger Syndrome program where I participate in enhancing the quality of life for
individuals with AS. I believe that these experiences have helped me learn how to work
effectively with others in a supervisory capacity.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                               50
COVER LETTER FOR NOVICE CANDIDATE WITH NO DISABILITY
CANDIDATES NAME HERE
ADDRESS HERE
TELEPHONE HERE
EMAIL HERE



To Whom It May Concern:

I am responding to the advertised accountant position in your finance department. I am a Rutgers
University graduate with a B.S. in Accounting. Presently, I am an Accountant Assistant at GENE
Construction where I manage vendor accounts, and monthly payroll functions.

Alongside my professional experience at GENE Construction, I volunteer for the Income Tax
Assistance Program. I also volunteer for the Life Development Institute’s Asperger Syndrome
program where I participate in enhancing the quality of life for individuals with AS. I believe
that these experiences have helped me learn how to work effectively with others in a supervisory
capacity.

I look forward to hearing from you so that we can discuss my qualifications in more detail.

Sincerely,

CANDIDATES NAME HERE




                                               51
       Figure 1a: Any Employer Interest in Applicant
8.0%                                                           7.6%

7.0%   6.6%

6.0%                               5.6%                                      5.4%
               4.8% 4.9%                  5.0%
5.0%                                             4.4%                 4.6%

4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
              Overall               Novice resumes           Experienced resumes

                   No disability   Spinal cord injury    Asperger's




                Figure 1b: Callbacks for Interviews
4.0%
                                                               3.5%
3.5%
3.0%                                                                         2.8%
       2.5%
                        2.4%                                          2.3%
2.5%           2.1%
                                          2.0% 2.0%
2.0%
                                   1.6%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
              Overall               Novice resumes           Experienced resumes

                   No disability   Spinal cord injury    Asperger's




                                                        52
       Figure 2a: Any Employer Interest in Applicant, by
           Employment Size and Government Status
9.0%    8.5%
8.0%                                                                          7.5%
                       6.7%               6.5%
7.0%                                                                                 6.3%
6.0%           5.0%           5.2%               5.0%          5.3%
5.0%                                                                  4.1%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
       Private, <15   Private, 15-99 Private, 100-499      Private, 500+     Government
       employees       employees        employees           employees

                                No disability     Disability




         Figure 2b: Callbacks for Interview by Employment
                    Size and Government Status
6.0%
        5.2%
5.0%
4.0%                                                                                 3.6%
                              3.0%        2.8%2.6%
3.0%
               1.8%    1.6%
2.0%                                                           1.4%1.6%
1.0%
                                                                              0.0%
0.0%
       Private, <15   Private, 15-99 Private, 100-499      Private, 500+     Government
       employees       employees        employees           employees

                                No disability     Disability




                                                          53
                               Figure 3a: Rate of employer interest relative to ADA threshold
                                                                Non-disability                                                                     Disability
                         .3




                                                                                                                             .3
                                          Rate of any employer interest
                         .2




                                                                                                                             .2
                         .1




                                                                                                                             .1
                           0




                                                                                                                               0
                     -.1




                               0    5                                     10    15     20                   25   30      -.1       0    5        10    15     20   25   30
                                                                            Employment                                                             Employment

                                        Fitted line                                                          95% CI                         Fitted line             95% CI

                                        Observed means                                                                                      Observed means




                                        Figure 3b: Callback rate relative to ADA threshold
                                                                Non-disability                                                                     Disability
                  .15




                                                                                                                      .15
                         .1




                                                                                                                             .1
Callback rate




                                                                                            Callback rate
                  .05




                                                                                                                      .05
                           0




                                                                                                                               0
                  -.05




                                                                                                                      -.05
                     -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1




                               0    5                                     10    15     20                   25   30                0    5        10    15     20   25   30
                                                                            Employment                                                             Employment

                                        Fitted line                                                          95% CI                         Fitted line             95% CI

                                        Observed means                                                                                      Observed means




                Based on polynomial models reported in Table 10, columns 1 and 5.




                                                                                                                                   54
                   Figure 4a: Rate of employer interest relative to ADA threshold--Experienced applicants

                                                               Non-disability                                                                        Disability
                    .6




                                                                                                                          .6
                                         Rate of any employer interest
                     .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                    .2




                                                                                                                          .2
                          0




                                                                                                                                0
                    -.2




                                                                                                                          -.2
                              0   5                                      10    15     20                   25       30               0   5         10    15     20   25       30
                                                                           Employment                                                                Employment

                                       Fitted line                                                              95% CI                        Fitted line                 95% CI

                                       Observed means                                                                                         Observed means




                     Figure 4b: Callback rate relative to ADA threshold--Experienced applicants
                                                  Non-disability                                                                                    Disability
                   .2




                                                                                                                         .2
                   .1




                                                                                                                         .1
Callback rate




                                                                                           Callback rate
                         0




                                                                                                                               0
                   -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1
                   -.2




                                                                                                                         -.2




                              0   5                           10    15     20                              25      30               0    5        10    15     20    25      30
                                                                Employment                                                                          Employment

                                      Fitted line                                                           95% CI                           Fitted line              95% CI

                                      Observed means                                                                                         Observed means




                Based on polynomial models reported in Table 10, columns 1 and 5.




                                                                                                                                    55
                         Figure 5a: Rate of employer interest relative to state law threshold
                                                              Non-disability                                                      Disability
                   .6




                                                                                                        .6
                                        Rate of any employer interest
                   .4




                                                                                                        .4
                   .2




                                                                                                        .2
                         0




                                                                                                              0
                   -.2




                             -15   -10   -5      0        5      10                                15   -.2       -15   -10    -5      0        5      10   15
                                   Employment relative to threshold                                                      Employment relative to threshold

                                      Fitted line                                              95% CI                      Fitted line                  95% CI

                                      Observed means                                                                       Observed means




                             Figure 5b: Callback rate relative to state law threshold
                                                              Non-disability                                                      Disability
                   .3




                                                                                                        .3
                   .2




                                                                                                        .2
Callback rate




                                                                               Callback rate
                   .1




                                                                                                        .1
                         0




                                                                                                              0
                   -.1




                                                                                                        -.1




                             -15   -10   -5      0        5      10                                15             -15   -10            0        5      10   15
                                   Employment relative to threshold                                                      Employment relative to threshold

                                      Fitted line                                              95% CI                      Fitted line                  95% CI

                                      Observed means                                                                       Observed means




                Based on polynomial models reported in Table 10, columns 1 and 5.




                                                                                                                  56
                 Figure 6a: Rate of employer interest relative to state threshold--Experienced applicants
                                                              Non-disability                                                      Disability
                    .6




                                                                                                        .6
                                        Rate of any employer interest
                    .4




                                                                                                        .4
                    .2




                                                                                                        .2
                         0




                                                                                                              0
                   -.2




                             -15   -10   -5      0        5      10                                15   -.2       -15   -10    -5      0        5      10   15
                                   Employment relative to threshold                                                      Employment relative to threshold

                                      Fitted line                                              95% CI                      Fitted line                  95% CI

                                      Observed means                                                                       Observed means




                         Figure 6b: Callback rate relative to state threshold--Experienced applicants
                                                              Non-disability                                                      Disability
                    .4




                                                                                                        .4
                    .2




                                                                                                        .2
Callback rate




                                                                               Callback rate
                         0




                                                                                                              0
                   -.2




                                                                                                        -.2




                             -15   -10   -5      0        5      10                                15             -15   -10    -5      0        5      10   15
                                   Employment relative to threshold                                                      Employment relative to threshold

                                      Fitted line                                              95% CI                      Fitted line                  95% CI

                                      Observed means                                                                       Observed means




                Based on polynomial models reported in Table 10, columns 1 and 5.




                                                                                                                  57
       Table 1: Employer Responses to Resumes by Disability Status


                                                 Any employer interest                             Callback for interview                      Sample size

                                   No disability Disability Gap       (p-value)        No disability Disability Gap       (p-value)      No disability Disability
                                        (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)      (7)         (8)            (9)          (10)
Any disability vs. no disability
       Overall                           6.58%      4.87%     -1.71      (0.006) ***         2.53%      2.25%     -0.28      (0.483)             2052        3964
       Novice resumes                    5.56%      4.70%     -0.86      (0.310)             1.56%      1.97%      0.41      (0.423)             1026        1977
       Experienced resumes               7.60%      5.03%     -2.57      (0.005) ***         3.51%      2.52%     -0.99      (0.121)             1026        1987

SCI vs. no disability
        Overall                          6.58%      4.80%     -1.78      (0.015) **          2.53%      2.13%     -0.40      (0.393)             2052        2019
        Novice resumes                   5.56%      4.97%     -0.59      (0.555)             1.56%      1.99%      0.43      (0.464)             1026        1006
        Experienced resumes              7.60%      4.64%     -2.96      (0.005) ***         3.51%      2.27%     -1.24      (0.095) *           1026        1013

Asperger's vs. no disability
       Overall                           6.58%      4.94%     -1.64      (0.026) **          2.53%      2.37%     -0.16      (0.730)             2052        1945
       Novice resumes                    5.56%      4.43%     -1.13      (0.248)             1.56%      1.96%      0.40      (0.499)             1026         971
       Experienced resumes               7.60%      5.44%     -2.16      (0.051) *           3.51%      2.77%     -0.74      (0.346)             1026         974
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01




                                                                            58
     Table 2: Employer Responses by Employer Characteristics

                                                 Any employer interest                               Callback for interview                       Sample size

                                  No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)        No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)        No disability Disability
                                      (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)               (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)               (9)          (10)
Employment size, private sector
     Employment<15                        8.5%       5.0%    -0.035      (0.013) **           5.2%        1.8% -0.034         (0.001) ***            426         906
     Employment 15-99                     6.7%       5.2%    -0.015      (0.231)              1.6%        3.0% 0.013          (0.107)                553         979
     Employment 100-499                   6.5%       5.0%    -0.015      (0.254)              2.8%        2.6% -0.003         (0.782)                461         935
     Employment 500+                      5.3%       4.1%    -0.012      (0.307)              1.4%        1.6% 0.002          (0.749)                510         945
Ownership
     Closely held                         7.1%       4.8%    -0.023      (0.001) ***          2.9%        2.3% -0.006         (0.186)              1,649        3,194
     Publicly held                        4.0%       4.9%     0.009      (0.529)              1.1%        1.8% 0.007          (0.409)                350          657
     Government                           7.5%       6.3%    -0.013      (0.755)              0.0%        3.6% 0.036          (0.164)                 53          112
Federal Contractor
     No                                   7.1%       4.4%    -0.027      (0.000) ***          2.7%        2.3% -0.003         (0.525)              1,355        2,578
     Yes                                  5.6%       5.7%     0.001      (0.928)              2.3%        2.1% -0.002         (0.760)                696        1,386
Industry
     Ag, mining, construction             7.9%       5.0%    -0.029      (0.276)              4.8%        1.8%    -0.029      (0.118)                126          219
     Manufacturing                        5.4%       3.9%    -0.015      (0.409)              2.5%        1.7%    -0.008      (0.521)                204          359
     Trade                                6.4%       4.6%    -0.018      (0.259)              1.3%        2.7%     0.014      (0.190)                298          547
     Finance/insurance                    6.1%       5.6%    -0.006      (0.802)              1.8%        2.5%     0.006      (0.656)                163          323
     Prof. services                       7.5%       5.2%    -0.023      (0.122)              3.3%        2.7%    -0.007      (0.510)                389          754
     Health care                          5.3%       4.4%    -0.009      (0.596)              1.6%        1.5%    -0.002      (0.869)                245          475
     Other                                6.8%       4.9%    -0.019      (0.111)              3.0%        2.1%    -0.008      (0.285)                574        1,175
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01




                                                                              59
    Table 3: Regressions Predicting Employer Response

Based on probit regressions. Figures represent changes in probability.
                                            Dep. Var.:                                              Any employer interest
                                                                                                                                    Closely-held, Closely-held
                                                                                                        Not federal     Federal      not Federal    Federal
                                                          All firms      Closely held   Publicly held   contractor     contractor    contractor    contractor
                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)
Disability interactions with:
    Private sector, employment<15                        -0.029***       -0.030***        -0.007          -0.025**      -0.012       -0.029**       -0.006
                                                           (0.010)         (0.011)        (0.049)           (0.011)     (0.021)       (0.012)       (0.026)
    Private sector, employment 15-99                       -0.019*        -0.022**         0.062            -0.010      -0.011        -0.012        -0.020
                                                           (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.058)           (0.013)     (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.019)
    Private sector, employment 100-499                     -0.023*        -0.027**         0.021           -0.024*       0.020       -0.031**        0.023
                                                           (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.032)           (0.013)     (0.024)       (0.013)       (0.029)
    Private sector, employment 500+                       -0.028**         -0.021         -0.010          -0.032**       0.023       -0.036**        0.027
                                                           (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.023)           (0.014)     (0.021)       (0.016)       (0.026)

    Publicly held company                                  0.035*
                                                           (0.021)
    Government                                             -0.021
                                                           (0.029)
    Federal Contractor                                     0.027*          0.030*          0.011
                                                           (0.014)         (0.016)        (0.027)

P-value for test of disability interactions:
    Joint test of all employment size categories               0.007            0.008           0.709          0.008        0.630          0.002         0.564
    Employment<15 size category                                0.005            0.007           0.882          0.028        0.569          0.013         0.813
    Joint test of all except smallest size category            0.035            0.037           0.549          0.026        0.524          0.010         0.408

Observations                                                6,016        4,842          1,005            3,933       2,082         3,351            1,491
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01 (Std. errors in parentheses)
All regressions include controls for applicant names (11 dummies), employment size (4 dummies, including one for unknown size plus disability interaction),
publicly held, government, multiestablishment, and industry (7 dummies). Descriptive statistics are in Table A1.


                                                                               60
    Table 3 (continued)

Based on probit regressions. Figures represent changes in probability.
                                            Dep. Var.:                                           Callback for interview
                                                                                                                                      Closely-
                                                                                                                                      held, not Closely-held
                                                                                                        Not federal        Federal     Federal    Federal
                                                          All firms      Closely held   Publicly held   contractor        contractor contractor contractor
                                                             (8)             (9)            (10)           (11)              (12)        (13)       (14)
Disability interactions with:
    Private sector, employment<15                        -0.016***       -0.016***           ^            -0.013**         -0.018*    -0.016**    -0.016*
                                                           (0.005)         (0.006)                         (0.006)         (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.009)
    Private sector, employment 15-99                       0.017*           0.015            ^             0.026**          0.002      0.025*      -0.003
                                                           (0.010)         (0.010)                         (0.013)         (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.010)
    Private sector, employment 100-499                     -0.002          -0.001          0.001            -0.006          0.008      -0.009       0.026
                                                           (0.007)         (0.009)        (0.011)          (0.008)         (0.013)     (0.008)     (0.022)
    Private sector, employment 500+                         0.002           0.004          0.005             0.007          0.000       0.009      -0.003
                                                           (0.010)         (0.012)        (0.012)          (0.014)         (0.011)     (0.019)     (0.010)

    Publicly held company                                   0.013
                                                           (0.014)
    Federal Contractor                                     -0.002          -0.005         -0.001
                                                           (0.007)         (0.009)        (0.009)

P-value for test of disability interactions:
    Joint test of all employment size categories           0.009            0.026          0.919           0.039            0.392      0.027       0.322
    Employment<15 size category                            0.002               0.005         ^             0.027            0.054      0.012       0.078
    Joint test of all except smallest size category           0.351            0.507           0.919       0.167            0.942         0.205    0.668

Observations                                                 6,016           4,842       1,005            3,933          2,082   3,351             1,491
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01 (Std. errors in parentheses)
^ Insufficient positive responses in these categories for probit estimation.
All regressions include controls for applicant names (11 dummies), employment size (4 dummies, including one for unknown size plus disability
interaction), publicly held, government, multiestablishment, and industry (7 dummies). Descriptive statistics are in Table A1.
                                                                             61
     Table 4: Employer Responses by Employer Characteristics and Applicant Experience

                                                 Any employer interest                               Callback for interview                      Sample size

                                  No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)        No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)        No disability Disability
                                      (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)               (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)               (9)          (10)
Novice applicants
Employment size, private sector
     Employment<15                        4.1%        4.9%    0.008      (0.653)              2.0%        1.4%    -0.006      (0.553)                197        431
     Employment 15-99                     6.5%        4.8%   -0.017      (0.320)              1.1%        2.4%     0.012      (0.247)                261        461
     Employment 100-499                   6.9%        4.9%   -0.020      (0.282)              2.6%        2.1%    -0.005      (0.708)                231        466
     Employment 500+                      5.1%        4.1%   -0.010      (0.517)              0.7%        1.8%     0.010      (0.241)                275        513
Ownership
     Closely held                         6.0%        4.6%   -0.015      (0.125)              1.7%        1.8%     0.001      (0.834)                813       1,574
     Publicly held                        4.0%        4.8%    0.008      (0.693)              1.1%        2.1%     0.009      (0.443)                174         334
     Government                           2.6%        7.4%    0.048      (0.300)              0.0%        4.4%     0.044      (0.183)                 39          68
Federal Contractor
     No                                   6.4%        4.3%   -0.020      (0.052) *            1.6%        2.0%     0.004      (0.564)                675       1,248
     Yes                                  4.0%        5.4%    0.014      (0.337)              1.4%        1.9%     0.005      (0.565)                350         729
Experienced applicants
Employment size, private sector
     Employment<15                      12.2%         5.1%   -0.072      (0.001) ***          7.9%        2.1%    -0.058      (0.000) ***            229        475
     Employment 15-99                    6.8%         5.6%   -0.013      (0.473)              2.1%        3.5%     0.014      (0.252)                292        518
     Employment 100-499                  6.1%         5.1%   -0.010      (0.595)              3.0%        3.0%    -0.001      (0.966)                230        469
     Employment 500+                     5.5%         4.2%   -0.014      (0.424)              2.1%        1.4%    -0.007      (0.474)                235        432
Ownership
     Closely held                        8.1%         5.1%   -0.031      (0.003) ***          4.1%        2.7%    -0.014      (0.070) *              836       1,620
     Publicly held                       4.0%         5.0%    0.010      (0.619)              1.1%        1.5%     0.004      (0.709)                176         323
     Government                         21.4%         4.5%   -0.169      (0.050) **           0.0%        2.3%     0.023      (0.569)                 14          44
Federal Contractor
     No                                   7.8%        4.5%   -0.033      (0.003) ***          3.7%        2.6%    -0.011      (0.193)                680       1330
     Yes                                  7.2%        6.1%   -0.011      (0.487)              3.2%        2.3%    -0.009      (0.396)                346        657
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01




                                                                            62
     Table 5: Employer Responses by Employer Characteristics and Disability Type

                                                 Any employer interest                              Callback for interview                      Sample size

                                  No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)        No disability Disability   Gap      (p-value)       No disability Disability
                                      (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)               (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)              (9)          (10)
Disability=SCI
Employment size, private sector
      Employment<15                       8.5%        3.2%   -0.052      (0.001) ***           5.2%       1.3%    -0.039     (0.001) ***            426        466
      Employment 15-99                    6.7%        5.3%   -0.014      (0.328)               1.6%       2.8%     0.012     (0.185)                553        495
      Employment 100-499                  6.5%        4.3%   -0.022      (0.142)               2.8%       2.3%    -0.005     (0.597)                461        483
      Employment 500+                     5.3%        6.4%    0.012      (0.441)               1.4%       2.3%     0.009     (0.281)                510        481
Ownership
      Closely held                        7.1%        4.7%   -0.024      (0.004) ***           2.9%       2.1%    -0.008     (0.156)              1,649       1,639
      Publicly held                       4.0%        5.2%    0.012      (0.472)               1.1%       2.1%     0.010     (0.312)                350         330
      Government                          7.5%        6.0%   -0.015      (0.755)               0.0%       2.0%     0.020     (0.301)                 53          50
Federal Contractor
      No                                  7.1%        4.1%   -0.030      (0.000) ***           2.7%       2.2%    -0.005     (0.029) **            1355       1334
      Yes                                 5.6%        6.3%    0.007      (0.688)               2.3%       2.0%    -0.003     (0.535)                696        685
Disability=Asperger's
Employment size, private sector
      Employment<15                       8.5%        6.8%   -0.016      (0.365)               5.2%       2.3%    -0.029     (0.024) **             426        440
      Employment 15-99                    6.7%        5.2%   -0.015      (0.301)               1.6%       3.1%     0.015     (0.116)                553        484
      Employment 100-499                  6.5%        5.8%   -0.008      (0.634)               2.8%       2.9%     0.001     (0.959)                461        452
      Employment 500+                     5.3%        1.7%   -0.036      (0.003) ***           1.4%       0.9%    -0.005     (0.451)                510        464
Ownership
      Closely held                        7.1%        5.0%   -0.021      (0.011) **            2.9%       2.4%    -0.005     (0.414)              1,649       1,555
      Publicly held                       4.0%        4.6%    0.006      (0.706)               1.1%       1.5%     0.004     (0.661)                350         327
      Government                          7.5%        6.5%   -0.011      (0.818)               0.0%       4.8%     0.048     (0.105)                 53          62
Federal Contractor
      No                                  7.1%        4.8%   -0.023      (0.016) **            2.7%       2.5%    -0.002     (0.793)               1355       1244
      Yes                                 5.6%        5.1%   -0.005      (0.698)               2.3%       2.1%    -0.002     (0.840)                696        701
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01
SCI = spinal cord injury



                                                                            63
    Table 6: Predicting Employer Response by Disability Type and Experience Level

Based on probit regressions with "any employer interest" or "callback for interview" as dependent variable. Figures represent changes in probability.
                                           Dep. Var.:                Any employer interest                            Callback for interview
                                                          Experience level           Disability type^         Experience level        Disability type^
                                                        Novice Experienced           SCI       Asperger's   Novice Experienced        SCI      Asperger's
                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)       (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
Disability interactions with:
    Private sector, employment<15                         0.005     -0.043***     -0.042***      -0.016     -0.004    -0.023***    -0.017*** -0.011*
                                                        (0.020)       (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.013)    (0.009)     -0.005       (0.005) (0.006)
    Private sector, employment 15-99                     -0.019       -0.017        -0.018       -0.020      0.020       0.018        0.017  0.020*
                                                        (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.013)      (0.013)    (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.011) (0.011)
    Private sector, employment 100-499                  -0.024*       -0.018       -0.028**      -0.019     -0.001      -0.001       -0.004   0.002
                                                        (0.015)       (0.017)       (0.013)      (0.014)    (0.009)     (0.012)      (0.008) (0.009)
    Private sector, employment 500+                      -0.026       -0.028        -0.009     -0.051***     0.020      -0.008        0.010   -0.006
                                                        (0.016)       (0.018)       (0.016)      (0.014)    (0.018)     (0.013)      (0.012) (0.011)

    Publicly held company                                0.027        0.042         0.024      0.060**       0.006      0.020        0.013       0.015
                                                        (0.028)      (0.031)       (0.024)     (0.029)      (0.016)    (0.025)      (0.015)     (0.017)
    Government                                           0.045      -0.049**       -0.024       -0.020        ^^         ^^            ^^          ^^
                                                        (0.064)      (0.024)       (0.034)     (0.033)
    Federal contractor                                  0.038*        0.020        0.033*        0.023      -0.004     -0.005       -0.005      -0.005
                                                        (0.021)      (0.019)       (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.010)    (0.011)      (0.008)     (0.008)
P-value for test of disability interactions:
    Joint test of all employment size categories            0.246         0.005        0.007        0.009     0.507        0.016       0.006       0.111
    Employment<15 size category                             0.783         0.000        0.001        0.337     0.668        0.002       0.002       0.075
    Joint test of all except smallest size category         0.164         0.280        0.352        0.005     0.396        0.496       0.305       0.273

Observations                                             3003           3,013         4071       3997       2,895       2,955        3968        3882
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01 (Std. errors in parentheses)
^ Regressions by disability type include applicants without disabilities as control group.
^^ Too few callbacks by government employers to estimate probit effects.
All regressions include controls for applicant names (11 dummies), employment size (4 dummies, including one for unknown size plus disability
interaction), publicly held, government, multiestablishment, and industry (7 dummies). Descriptive statistics are in Table A1.

                                                                             64
    Table 7: State Disability Discrimination Laws


                                                    Accommodations Accommodations
                                                    not required   required
DDL covers only public employers                    AL, MS
DDL covers private employers with
    1+ employees                                    SD              AK, CO, DC, HI, IL, ME,
                                                                    MI, MN, MT, ND, NJ,
                                                                    VA, VT, WI
    2 or more employees                                             WY
    3 or more employees                                             CT
    4 or more employees                                             IA, KS, NM, NY, OH, PA,
                                                                    RI
    5 or more employees                                             CA, ID
    6 or more employees                                             MA, MO, NH, OR
    8 or more employees                             TN              WA
    9 or more employees                             AR
    12 or more employees                                            WV
    15 or more employees                            GA, NV          AZ, DE, FL, IN, KY, MD,
                                                                    NC, NE, OK, SC, TX, UT
    20 or more employees                                            LA
                                                                     Small employers (not
Number of job applications to employers:             All employers     covered by ADA)
    Not covered by state DDL                                    723                    670
    Covered by state DDL not requiring accoms.                  266                       6
    Covered by state DDL requiring accoms.                     4891                    657
DDL = disability discrimination law




                                                                    65
    Table 8: Employer Responses and Disability Discrimination Laws

Based on probit regressions with "any employer interest" or "callback for interview" as dependent variable. Figures represent changes in probability.
                            Dep. Var.:              Any employer interest                              Callback for interview                   Means (s.d.)
                                                                              Small firms                                     Small firms
                                                                             (not covered                                    (not covered                Small
                                         All firms   All firms   All firms     by ADA)      All firms All firms All firms       by ADA)     All firms    firms
                                            (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)             (8)         (9)        (10)
Disability                              -0.015**      -0.011      -0.011        -0.021       -0.001 -0.036*** -0.036***        -0.037***         0.659      0.680
                                         (0.006)     (0.018)     (0.018)        (0.020)     (0.004)   (0.018)   (0.018)          (0.018)      (0.474)     (0.466)
Disability interactions with:
    ADA coverage                                     0.032*      0.032*                              0.026***   0.027***                        0.505       0.000
                                                     (0.018)     (0.018)                              (0.010)    (0.010)                      (0.500)      0.000
    State DDL coverage                               -0.034                    -0.020                  0.009                     0.010          0.578       0.347
                                                     (0.024)                   (0.021)                (0.013)                   (0.015)       (0.494)     (0.476)
    State DDL coverage not requiring
    accoms.                                                      -0.022             ^                            -0.003            ^            0.032       0.003
                                                                 (0.026)                                         (0.020)                      (0.176)     (0.055)
    State DDL coverage requiring
    accoms.                                                      -0.033             ^                             0.010            ^            0.546       0.344
                                                                 (0.025)                                         (0.013)                      (0.498)     (0.475)
State DDL coverage                                   0.026*                     0.025                  0.009                     0.010          0.878       0.497
                                                     (0.015)                   (0.018)                (0.008)                   (0.009)       (0.328)     (0.500)
State DDL coverage not requiring
accoms.                                                           0.024                                           0.025                         0.045       0.005
                                                                 -0.042                                          (0.033)                      (0.207)     (0.067)
State DDL coverage requiring accoms.                             0.026*                                           0.009                         0.833       0.493
                                                                 -0.013                                          (0.007)                      (0.373)     (0.500)

Observations                                  6,016      5,880   5,880      1,333         6,016       5,880       5,880        1,333         6,016       1,333
* p<.10 * p<.05 *** p<.01 (Std. errors in parentheses)
SCI = spinal cord injury; DDL = disability discrimination law
All regressions include controls for applicant names (11 dummies), employment size (4 dummies), publicly held, government, Federal contractor, multi-
establishment, and industry (7 dummies)
^ State DDLs could not be broken out by accommodation requirements for small firms due to insufficient observations (n=6).

                                                                               66
    Table 9: Within-state Difference-in-Difference Comparisons on Disability Discrimination Law Thresholds

                                              All applicants                               Experienced applicants                            Means (s.d.)
                  Dep. Var.: Any employer interest    Callback for interview   Any employer interest   Callback for interview          All           Experienced

             Employer size:      <100      <30       <100      <30       <100      <30       <100      <30                      <100         <30    <100    <30
                               employees employees employees employees employees employees employees employees                   ees         ees     ees    ees
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)                      (9)         (10)   (11)    (12)
Disability interaction with:
    Employer covered by
    ADA                          0.0037     0.0100    0.0423***    0.0511**      0.0346      0.0537     0.0556**    0.0646** 0.341 0.180 0.342 0.171
                                (0.0211)   (0.0299)    (0.0149)    (0.0200)     (0.0406)    (0.0510)    (0.0258)    (0.0289) (0.471) (0.384) (0.475) (0.377)

    Employer covered by
    state law, not by ADA       -0.0391    -0.0386     -0.0150     -0.0021      -0.0332     -0.0243     -0.0312     -0.0018      0.161 0.250 0.160 0.248
                                (0.0268)   (0.0325)    (0.0251)    (0.0292)     (0.0436)    (0.0492)    (0.0439)    (0.0488)    (0.368) (0.433) (0.367) (0.432)
Main effect^
    Employer covered by
    state law, not by ADA        0.0347     0.0429      0.0225      0.0333       0.0158      0.0189      0.0251      0.0253      0.232 0.358 0.231 0.357
                                (0.0292)   (0.0353)    (0.0213)    (0.0257)     (0.0404)    (0.0482)    (0.0360)    (0.0445)    (0.422) (0.480) (0.421) (0.479)

N                              2,864        1,850         2,864      1,850         1,514         977       1,514        977    2,864 1,850 1,514            977
R-squared                     0.0921       0.0972        0.0877     0.0836        0.1443       0.1548     0.1638       0.1462
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses, accounting for clustering at state level.
Restricted to private companies. All regressions include state dummies with disability interactions, dummies for each employment size, and controls for
applicant names (11 dummies), publicly held, Federal Contractor, and industry (7 dummies).
^ The main effect of the ADA is subsumed in the employment size dummies, since the 15-employee threshold applies to all employers.




                                                                               67
    Table 10: Regression Discontinuity Designs for Testing Effects of ADA and State Laws

Figures represents estimated changes in employer interest at the ADA or state law thresholds for group at left. Each figure is from
separate model for group at left, limited to employers with no more than 15 employees above the threshold. State threshold estimates
are limited to states with at least 5 disability and 5 non-disability observations above and below the threshold.
                        Dep. var.                  Any employer interest                                        Callback                        n
                                   Polynomial             Local linear models^^            Polynomial          Local linear models^^
                                    models^ Optimal             Half        Double          models^ Optimal         Half         Double
                                                  bandwidth bandwidth bandwidth                        bandwidth bandwidth bandwidth
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)
Change at ADA threshold
     All applicants
          No disability                    0.065         0.000        0.000       0.121 **       0.011       0.000         0.000        0.080    644
                                         (0.116)                                (0.051)        (0.039)                                (0.081)
          Disability                       0.005         0.000        0.000       0.139 **       0.030       0.000         0.000        0.023   1304
                                         (0.058)                                (0.056)        (0.037)                                (0.016)
     Experienced applicants
          No disability                    0.080         0.013        0.000       0.123          0.038      -0.001         0.000        0.066    353
                                         (0.198)       (0.015)                  (0.063)        (0.153)     (0.001)                    (0.049)
          Disability                       0.098         0.000        0.000       0.060          0.051       0.000         0.000        0.084    679
                                         (0.078)                                (0.060)        (0.053)                                (0.065)
Change at state law threshold
     All applicants
          No disability                   -0.056         0.006        0.000       0.021         -0.059       0.006         0.000        0.021    320
                                         (0.085)       (0.013)                  (0.021)        (0.069)     (0.013)                    (0.021)
          Disability                       0.008         0.000        0.000       0.047         -0.022       0.000         0.000        0.041    638
                                         (0.065)                                (0.074)        (0.043)                                (0.025)
     Experienced applicants
          No disability                   -0.140        -0.013        0.000       0.010         -0.135      -0.013         0.000        0.010    180
                                         (0.138)       (0.009)                  (0.016)        (0.112)     (0.009)                    (0.016)
          Disability                      -0.030         0.062        0.000       0.048         -0.088       0.000         0.000        0.045    337
                                         (0.088)       (0.181)                  (0.091)        (0.060)                                (0.038)
** p<.05 Standard errors in parentheses.
^ Polynomial models control for employment, employment squared, and employment cubed, estimated separately on each side of the
threshold. Results are illustrated in Figures 3a to 6b.
^^ Tests using local linear models are done with Stata's "rd" command.
                                                                               68
                                 Table A1: Descriptive Statistics for Regressions in Tables 3 and 6

Figures represent means, with std. deviations in parentheses
                                                                                         Not Federal         Federal            Novice         Experienced                          Asperger's
                                    Full sample      Closely-held  Publicly-held          contractor        contractor        applicant         applicant    SCI disability          disability
Any employer response              0.055 (0.227)     0.056 (0.230) 0.046 (0.209)         0.053 (0.225)     0.057 (0.231)     0.050 (0.218)     0.059 (0.236) 0.048 (0.214)         0.049 (0.217)
Callback for interview             0.023 (0.151)     0.025 (0.156) 0.016 (0.125)         0.024 (0.154)     0.022 (0.145)     0.018 (0.134)     0.029 (0.167) 0.021 (0.144)         0.024 (0.152)

Private, employment<15             0.222   (0.415)   0.261   (0.439)   0.068   (0.251)   0.262   (0.440)   0.145   (0.352)   0.209   (0.407)   0.234   (0.423)   0.231   (0.422)   0.226   (0.418)
  * disability                     0.151   (0.358)   0.177   (0.382)   0.050   (0.217)   0.179   (0.383)   0.098   (0.297)   0.144   (0.351)   0.158   (0.364)   0.231   (0.422)   0.226   (0.418)
Private, employment 15-99          0.254   (0.436)   0.288   (0.453)   0.134   (0.341)   0.269   (0.443)   0.228   (0.419)   0.240   (0.427)   0.269   (0.443)   0.245   (0.430)   0.249   (0.432)
  * disability                     0.163   (0.369)   0.185   (0.388)   0.082   (0.275)   0.172   (0.377)   0.145   (0.352)   0.153   (0.360)   0.172   (0.377)   0.245   (0.430)   0.249   (0.432)
Private, employment 100-499        0.232   (0.422)   0.237   (0.425)   0.247   (0.432)   0.229   (0.420)   0.239   (0.426)   0.232   (0.422)   0.232   (0.422)   0.239   (0.427)   0.232   (0.422)
  * disability                     0.155   (0.362)   0.160   (0.366)   0.161   (0.368)   0.151   (0.358)   0.163   (0.370)   0.155   (0.362)   0.156   (0.363)   0.239   (0.427)   0.232   (0.422)
Private, employment 500+           0.242   (0.428)   0.186   (0.389)   0.549   (0.498)   0.195   (0.396)   0.331   (0.471)   0.262   (0.440)   0.221   (0.415)   0.238   (0.426)   0.239   (0.426)
  * disability                     0.157   (0.364)   0.121   (0.326)   0.357   (0.480)   0.124   (0.329)   0.220   (0.414)   0.171   (0.376)   0.143   (0.351)   0.238   (0.426)   0.239   (0.426)
Private, employment N/A            0.023   (0.149)   0.027   (0.163)   0.002   (0.045)   0.029   (0.168)   0.010   (0.100)   0.020   (0.141)   0.025   (0.156)   0.022   (0.146)   0.022   (0.147)
  * disability                     0.014   (0.119)   0.017   (0.131)   0.002   (0.045)   0.019   (0.136)   0.006   (0.079)   0.013   (0.112)   0.016   (0.127)   0.022   (0.146)   0.022   (0.147)

Publicly-held                      0.167   (0.373)   0.000             1.000             0.131   (0.338)   0.236   (0.425)   0.169   (0.375)   0.166   (0.372)   0.163   (0.370)   0.168   (0.374)
 * disability                      0.109   (0.312)   0.000             0.652 (0.476)     0.084   (0.277)   0.158   (0.364)   0.111   (0.314)   0.107   (0.309)   0.163   (0.370)   0.168   (0.374)
Government                         0.027   (0.163)   0.000             0.000             0.017   (0.128)   0.048   (0.214)   0.036   (0.185)   0.019   (0.137)   0.025   (0.155)   0.032   (0.176)
 * disability                      0.019   (0.135)   0.000             0.000             0.011   (0.103)   0.034   (0.180)   0.023   (0.149)   0.015   (0.120)   0.025   (0.155)   0.032   (0.176)
Federal contractor                 0.346   (0.476)   0.308 (0.462)     0.488 (0.500)     0.000             1.000             0.359   (0.480)   0.333   (0.471)   0.339   (0.474)   0.360   (0.480)
 * disability                      0.230   (0.421)   0.204 (0.403)     0.326 (0.469)     0.000             0.666   (0.472)   0.243   (0.429)   0.218   (0.413)   0.339   (0.474)   0.360   (0.480)

Multi-establishment                0.623   (0.485)   0.601 (0.490)     0.833 (0.373)     0.583 (0.493)     0.701 (0.458)     0.639 (0.480)     0.607 (0.488)     0.608 (0.488)     0.628 (0.483)
Multi-establishment status N/A     0.027   (0.163)   0.000 0.000       0.000             0.017 (0.128)     0.048 (0.214)     0.036 (0.185)     0.019 (0.137)     0.025 (0.155)     0.032 (0.176)
(continued)




                                                                                          69
                           Table A1 (continued)

Figures represent means, with std. deviations in parentheses
                                                                                   Not Federal         Federal            Novice         Experienced                          Asperger's
                              Full sample      Closely-held  Publicly-held          contractor        contractor        applicant         applicant    SCI disability          disability
Ag, mining, construction     0.057 (0.233)     0.053 (0.224) 0.088 (0.284)         0.051 (0.220)     0.069 (0.254)     0.057 (0.231)     0.058 (0.234) 0.054 (0.226)         0.057 (0.231)
Manufacturing                0.094 (0.291)     0.075 (0.263) 0.200 (0.400)         0.072 (0.259)     0.134 (0.340)     0.086 (0.280)     0.102 (0.302) 0.093 (0.290)         0.088 (0.284)
Trade                        0.140 (0.347)     0.136 (0.343) 0.183 (0.387)         0.136 (0.343)     0.148 (0.356)     0.147 (0.354)     0.134 (0.341) 0.134 (0.340)         0.142 (0.350)
Finance/insurance            0.081 (0.273)     0.074 (0.261) 0.129 (0.335)         0.091 (0.288)     0.061 (0.240)     0.085 (0.279)     0.077 (0.266) 0.081 (0.273)         0.082 (0.274)
Prof. services               0.190 (0.392)     0.216 (0.411) 0.097 (0.297)         0.200 (0.400)     0.171 (0.377)     0.178 (0.383)     0.201 (0.401) 0.199 (0.399)         0.181 (0.386)
Health care                  0.120 (0.325)     0.138 (0.345) 0.051 (0.219)         0.131 (0.338)     0.098 (0.297)     0.130 (0.336)     0.110 (0.312) 0.124 (0.329)         0.116 (0.320)
Other industry               0.291 (0.454)     0.308 (0.462) 0.252 (0.435)         0.301 (0.459)     0.271 (0.445)     0.282 (0.450)     0.299 (0.458) 0.291 (0.454)         0.302 (0.459)

Applicant 1                  0.083   (0.276)   0.084   (0.277)   0.078   (0.269)   0.080   (0.272)   0.089   (0.285)   0.167   (0.373)   0.000      --     0.046   (0.209)   0.057   (0.231)
Applicant 2                  0.083   (0.275)   0.085   (0.279)   0.071   (0.256)   0.081   (0.273)   0.086   (0.280)   0.000      --     0.165   (0.371)   0.074   (0.262)   0.098   (0.298)
Applicant 3                  0.085   (0.278)   0.085   (0.280)   0.087   (0.283)   0.090   (0.286)   0.074   (0.263)   0.000      --     0.169   (0.375)   0.069   (0.254)   0.074   (0.262)
Applicant 4                  0.083   (0.277)   0.085   (0.279)   0.078   (0.269)   0.088   (0.283)   0.075   (0.263)   0.000      --     0.167   (0.373)   0.100   (0.299)   0.078   (0.268)
Applicant 5                  0.084   (0.278)   0.082   (0.275)   0.094   (0.292)   0.087   (0.281)   0.079   (0.270)   0.000      --     0.168   (0.374)   0.110   (0.314)   0.073   (0.260)
Applicant 6                  0.083   (0.276)   0.082   (0.275)   0.079   (0.271)   0.081   (0.273)   0.088   (0.283)   0.167   (0.373)   0.000      --     0.131   (0.337)   0.064   (0.244)
Applicant 7                  0.083   (0.276)   0.085   (0.279)   0.080   (0.272)   0.084   (0.278)   0.081   (0.272)   0.000      --     0.166   (0.372)   0.074   (0.262)   0.075   (0.263)
Applicant 8                  0.083   (0.276)   0.084   (0.277)   0.084   (0.278)   0.081   (0.273)   0.086   (0.281)   0.000      --     0.166   (0.372)   0.074   (0.262)   0.103   (0.304)
Applicant 9                  0.084   (0.277)   0.082   (0.275)   0.091   (0.288)   0.083   (0.275)   0.086   (0.280)   0.168   (0.374)   0.000      --     0.133   (0.340)   0.056   (0.230)
Applicant 10                 0.084   (0.277)   0.080   (0.272)   0.101   (0.302)   0.080   (0.271)   0.091   (0.287)   0.168   (0.374)   0.000      --     0.053   (0.225)   0.141   (0.348)
Applicant 11                 0.082   (0.274)   0.083   (0.276)   0.076   (0.266)   0.082   (0.274)   0.082   (0.275)   0.164   (0.370)   0.000      --     0.068   (0.252)   0.058   (0.233)
Applicant 12                 0.083   (0.276)   0.081   (0.273)   0.077   (0.267)   0.083   (0.277)   0.083   (0.275)   0.167   (0.373)   0.000      --     0.067   (0.251)   0.124   (0.330)

Sample size                   6016              4843             1007              3933              2082              3003              3013              2019              1945




                                                                                           70
