NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENTLY INEFFICIENT MARKETS FOR ASSETS AND ASSET MANAGEMENT
Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Lasse H. Pedersen
Working Paper 21563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21563

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

We are grateful for helpful comments from Jules van Binsbergen, Ronen Israel, Stephen Mellas, Jim
Riccobono, Andrei Shleifer, and Morten Sorensen, as well as from seminar participants at Harvard
University, New York University, UC Berkeley-Haas, CEMFI, IESE, Toulouse School of Economics,
MIT Sloan, Copenhagen Business School, and the conferences at Queen Mary University of London,
the Cowles Foundation at Yale University, the European Financial Management Association Conference,
the 7th Erasmus Liquidity Conference, the IF2015 Annual Conference in International Finance, the
FRIC'15 Conference, and the Karl Borch Lecture. Pedersen gratefully acknowledges support from
the European Research Council (ERC grant no. 312417) and the FRIC Center for Financial Frictions
(grant no. DNRF102) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21563.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Nicolae B. Gârleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiently Inefficient Markets for Assets and Asset Management
Nicolae B. Gârleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 21563
September 2015
JEL No. D4,D53,D83,G02,G12,G14,G23,L10
ABSTRACT
We consider a model where investors can invest directly or search for an asset manager, information
about assets is costly, and managers charge an endogenous fee. The efficiency of asset prices is linked
to the efficiency of the asset management market: if investors can find managers more easily, more
money is allocated to active management, fees are lower, and asset prices are more efficient. Informed
managers outperform after fees, uninformed managers underperform after fees, and the net performance
of the average manager depends on the number of "noise allocators." Finally, we show why large investors
should be active and discuss broader implications and welfare considerations.

Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Haas School of Business
F628
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu
Lasse H. Pedersen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
DK-2000 Frederiksberg
DENMARK
and NYU
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

In the real world, asset managers play a central role in making markets efficient as their
size allows them to spend significant resources on acquiring and processing information.
The asset management market is subject to its own frictions, however, since investors must
search for informed asset managers. Indeed, institutional investors — e.g., pension funds
and insurance companies — literally fly around the world to examine asset managers in
person. They seek to assess the manager’s investment process, the number and quality of the
investment professionals, the trading infrastructure, information flow, and risk management,
and perform due diligence on the back office, valuation practices, the custody of the assets,
IT security, disaster recovery plan, and so on. Similarly, individual investors search for asset
managers, some via local branches of financial institutions, others with the aid of investment
advisors, and yet others via the internet or otherwise. How do the search frictions in the
market for asset management affect the efficiency of the underlying security market? Which
types of securities are likely to be priced efficiently? What determines asset management
fees? How large of an outperformance can investors expect from asset managers before and
after fees? Which type of investors should use active, rather than passive, investing?
We seek to address these questions in a model with two levels of frictions: (a) investors’
search frictions of finding and vetting asset managers and (b) asset managers’ cost of collecting information about assets. The levels of inefficiency in the security market and the
market for asset management are closely linked, yielding several new predictions: (1) Informed managers outperform after fees, uninformed managers underperform after fees, and
the net performance of the average manager depends on the number of “noise allocators.”
(2) If investors can find managers more easily, more money is allocated to active management, fees are lower, and security prices are more efficient. (3) As search costs diminish,
asset prices become efficient in the limit, even if information-collection costs remain large.
(4) Managers of complex assets earn larger fees and are fewer, and such assets are less efficiently priced. (5) Allocating to active managers is attractive for large or sophisticated
investors with small search cost, while small or unsophisticated investors should be passive.
(6) Finally, we discuss the economic magnitude of our predictions and welfare considerations.

2

As a way of background, the key benchmark is that security markets are perfectly efficient
(Fama (1970)), but this leads to two paradoxes: First, no one has an incentive to collect
information in an efficient market, so how does the market become efficient (Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980))? Second, if asset markets are efficient, then positive fees to active managers
implies inefficient markets for asset management (Pedersen (2015)).
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) show that the first paradox can be addressed by considering
informed investing in a model with noisy supply, but, when an agent has collected information about securities, she can invest on this information on behalf of others, so professional
asset managers arise naturally as a result of the returns to scale in collecting and trading on
information (Admati and Pfleiderer (1988), Ross (2005), Garcia and Vanden (2009)). Therefore, we introduce professional asset managers into the Grossman-Stiglitz model, allowing
us to study the efficiency of asset markets jointly with the efficiency of the markets for asset
management.
One benchmark for the efficiency of asset management is provided by Berk and Green
(2004), who consider the implications of perfectly efficient asset-management markets (in
the context of exogenous and inefficient asset prices). In contrast, we consider an imperfect
market for asset management due to search frictions, consistent with the empirical evidence
of Sirri and Tufano (1998), Jain and Wu (2000), Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), and Choi,
Laibson, and Madrian (2010). We focus on investors’ incentive to search for informed managers and managers’ incentives to acquire information about assets with endogenous prices,
abstracting from how agency problems and imperfect contracting can distort asset prices
(Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Stein (2005), Cuoco and Kaniel (2011), Buffa, Vayanos, and
Woolley (2014)).
Our equilibrium works as follows. Among a large group of asset managers, an endogenous number decide to acquire information about a security. Investors must decide whether
to expend search costs to find one of the informed asset managers. In an interior equilibrium, investors are indifferent between passive investing (i.e., investing that does not rely
on information collection) and searching for an informed asset manager. Investors do not

3

collect information on their own, since the costs of doing so are higher than the benefits
to an individual due to the relatively high equilibrium efficiency of the asset markets. This
high equilibrium efficiency arises from investors’ ability to essentially “share” information
collection costs by investing through an asset manager.1 When an investor meets an asset
manager, they negotiate a fee, and asset prices are set in a competitive noisy rational expectations market. The economy also features a group of “noise traders” (or “liquidity traders”)
who take random security positions as in Grossman-Stiglitz. Likewise, we introduce a group
of “noise allocators” who allocate capital to a random group of asset managers, e.g., because
they place trust in these managers as modeled by Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015).
We solve for the equilibrium number of investors who invest directly, respectively through
managers, the equilibrium number of asset managers, the equilibrium management fee, and
the equilibrium asset prices. The model features both search and information frictions, but
the solution is surprisingly simple and yields a number of clear new results.
First, we show that informed managers outperform before and after fees, while uninformed managers naturally underperform after fees. Investors who search for asset managers
must be compensated for their search and due diligence costs, and this compensation comes
in the form of expected outperformance after fees. Investors are indifferent between passive
and active investing in an interior equilibrium, so a larger search cost must be associated
with a larger outperformance by active investors. Noise allocators invest mostly with uninformed managers and therefore experience underperformance after fees. The value-weighted
average manager (which equals the average investor) outperforms after fees if the number of
noise allocators is small, and underperforms if many noise allocators exist.
The model helps explain a number of empirical regularities on the performance of asset
managers that are puzzling in light of the existing literature. Indeed, while the “old consensus” in the literature found no evidence of skill in mutual funds (Fama (1970), Carhart
(1997)), a “new consensus” finds significant evidence of cross-sectional variation in manager
1
In our benchmark model with symmetric investors, no one collects information on their own; one could
consider an extension with investors with different abilities, in which case some investors may collect information on their own.

4

skill among mutual funds, hedge funds, private equity, and venture capital.2 For instance,
Kosowski, Timmermann, Wermers, and White (2006) conclude that “a sizable minority of
managers pick stocks well enough to more than cover their costs.” In our model, this outperformance after fees is expected as compensation for investors’ search costs, but it is puzzling
in light of the prediction of Fama (1970) that all managers underperform after fees, and
the prediction of Berk and Green (2004) that all managers deliver zero outperformance after fees. Further, the fact that top hedge funds and private equity managers deliver larger
outperformance than top mutual funds is consistent with our model under the assumption
that investors face larger search costs in these segments. Our model’s new prediction that
searching investors should be able to find, at a cost, an asset manager that delivers a positive
expected net return also implies that funds of funds may be able to add value, as documented
by Ang, Rhodes-Kropf, and Zhao (2008). Lastly, the evidence suggests that the average active U.S. equity mutual fund underperforms after fees (e.g., Carhart (1997), but see Berk and
Binsbergen (2012) for a critique), which is consistent with the presence of noise allocators
who pay fees to uninformed mutual funds.
The model also generates a number of implications of cross-sectional and time-series variation in search costs. The important observation is that, if search costs are lower such that
investors more easily can identify informed managers, then more money is allocated to active management, fees are lower, and security markets are more efficient. If investors’ search
costs go to zero and the pool of potential investors is large, then the asset market becomes
efficient in the limit. Indeed, as search costs diminish, fewer and fewer asset managers with
more and more asset under management collect smaller and smaller fees (both per investor
and in total), and this evolution makes asset prices more and more efficient even though
information-collection costs remain constant (and potentially large). It may appear surprising (and counter to the result of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)) that markets can become
2

Evidence on mutual funds is provided by Grinblatt and Titman (1989), Wermers (2000), Kacperczyk,
Sialm, and Zheng (2008), Fama and French (2010), Berk and Binsbergen (2012), and Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014)), on hedge funds by Kosowski, Naik, and Teo (2007), Fung, Hsieh, Naik, and
Ramadorai (2008), Jagannathan, Malakhov, and Novikov (2010), and on private equity and venture capital
by Kaplan and Schoar (2005).

5

close to efficient despite large information collection costs, but this result is driven by the
fact that the costs are shared by investors through an increasingly consolidated group of
asset managers.
We discuss how these model-implied effects of changing search costs can help explain
cross-sector, cross-country, and time-series evidence on the efficiency, fees, and asset management industry for mutual funds, hedge funds, and private equity and gives rise to new
tests. For instance, if search costs have diminished over time as information technology
has improved, our model predicts that markets should have become more efficient, consistent with the empirical evidence of Wurgler (2000) and Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2013),
and linked to the amount of assets managed by hedge funds and other professional traders
(Rosch, Subrahmanyam, and van Dijk (2015)).
We also consider the effect of the magnitude of information-collection costs. Higher
information-collection costs leads to fewer active investors, fewer asset managers, higher
fees, and lower asset market efficiency. One can interpret a high information-collection cost
as a “complex” asset and, hence, the result can be stated as saying that complex assets have
fewer asset managers, higher asset management fees, and lower efficiency, predictions that
we relate to the empirical literature.
The paper is related to a large body of research in addition to that cited above. We
discuss the empirical literature in detail in the context of our empirical predictions in Section 5. The related theoretical literature includes, beside the papers already cited, noisy
rational expectations models (Grossman (1976), Hellwig (1980), Diamond and Verrecchia
(1981), Admati (1985)) and other models of informed trading (Glosten and Milgrom (1985),
Kyle (1985)), information acquisition (Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010), Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014)), and noise trading (Black (1986)); search
models in finance (Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005), Lagos (2010)); and models of
asset management (Pastor and Stambaugh (2012), Vayanos and Woolley (2013), Stambaugh
(2014)).
The next section lays out the basic model, Section 2 provides the solution, and Section 3

6

derives the key properties of the equilibrium. Section 4 considers further applications of the
framework, including the result that large investors should be active while small investors
should be passive because it is more economic for a large investor to incur search costs to find
an informed manager. This section also illustrates the economic magnitude of the predicted
effects and welfare considerations. Section 5 lays out the empirical predictions of the model
and their relation to the existing evidence, while Section 6 concludes. Appendix A describes
the real-world issues related to search and due diligence of asset managers and Appendix B
contains proofs.

1

Model of Assets and Asset Managers

1.1

Investors and Asset Managers

The economy features two types of agents trading in a financial market: investors and asset
managers. Both investors and managers can obtain a signal about the asset value by paying
a fixed cost k, but while investors can only trade on their own behalf, managers have the
ability to manage funds on behalf of a group of investors.
More specifically, there exist N optimizing investors and each investor can either (i) invest
directly in asset markets without the signal, (ii) invest directly in asset markets after having
acquired the signal, or (iii) invest through an asset manager. Due to economies of scale, a
natural equilibrium outcome is that investors do not acquire the signal, but, rather, invest as
uninformed or through a manager. We highlight below some weak conditions under which
all realistic equilibria with a positive number of informed managers take this form, and we
therefore rule out that investors acquire the signal. Consequently in our equilibria we focus
on the number of investors who make informed investments through a manager I, inferring
the number of uninformed investors as the residual, N − I.
The cost of setting up an asset management firm and accepting inflows is zero, so an
unlimited number of asset managers exist. However, of these asset managers, only M elect
to pay a cost k to acquire the signal and thereby become informed asset managers. The
7

number of informed asset managers is determined as part of the equilibrium, and we think
of the sets of managers and investors as continua (i.e., M is the mass of informed managers).3
All agents act competitively, taking as given the actions of others.
To invest with an informed asset manager, investors must search for, and vet, managers,
which is a costly activity. Specifically, the cost of finding an informed manager and confirming that he has the signal (i.e., performing due diligence) is c(M, I), which depends on
both the number of informed asset managers M and the number of investors I in these asset
management firms. We make the natural assumption that finding an informed manager
is easier when there are more of them (e.g., because more informed managers means that
the fraction of all managers with information is larger, or because the geographical distance
between investors and managers is smaller)4 and fewer investors. Mathematically, this assumption means that the search cost c decreases weakly with M and increases weakly with
I, that is, cM ≤ 0 and cI ≥ 0 using familiar notation for partial derivatives.5 Furthermore,
we require c(0, I) = ∞ for all I — i.e., it is impossible to be matched with a manager if
there aren’t any.6 The search cost c captures the realistic feature that most investors spend
significant resources finding an asset manager they trust with their money as described in
detail in Appendix A.
We assume that all agents have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility over
end-of-period consumption with risk-aversion parameter γ (following Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980)). For convenience, we express the utility as certainty-equivalent wealth — hence, with
end-date wealth W̃ , an agent’s utility is − γ1 log(E(e−γ W̃ )). Each investor is endowed with
an initial wealth W while managers have a zero initial wealth (without loss of generality).
When an investor has found an asset manager and confirmed that the manager has the
3

Treating agents as a continuum keeps the exposition as simple as possible, but the model’s properties
also obtain in a limit of a finite-investor model.
4
Sialm, Sun, and Zheng (2014) find that “funds of hedge funds overweight their investments in hedge
funds located in the same geographical areas” and have an information advantage in doing so, consistent
with the similar results for individual investors’ stock investments due to Coval and Moskowitz (1999).
5
We note that many of our results hold for a broader class of search-cost specifications that need not
satisfy these monotonicity conditions. Our performance results in Proposition 3, in particular, hold for any
c function.
6
We require continuity of c only on [0, ∞)2 r {(0, 0)}.

8

technology to obtain the signal, they negotiate the asset management fee f . The fee is
set through Nash bargaining and, at this bargaining stage, all costs are sunk — both the
manager’s information acquisition cost and the investor’s search cost.
A manager who does not pay the cost k receives no asset inflows from searching investors.
The utility of an informed asset manager is given by


1
I
− log E e−γ(f I/M −k) = f
− k,
γ
M

(1)

where I/M is the number of investors per manager, relying informally on the law of large
numbers.7 Hence, f I/M is the manager’s total fee revenue and k is his cost of operation.
Lastly, the economy features a group of “noise traders” and one of “noise allocators.”
As in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), noise traders buy an exogenous number of shares of the
security, Q − q, as described below. Noise traders create uncertainty about the supply of
shares and are used in the literature to capture that it can be difficult to infer fundamentals
from prices. Noise traders are also called “liquidity traders” in some papers and their demand
can be justified by a liquidity need, hedging demand, or behavioral reasons. They are
characterized by the fact that their trades are not solely motivated by informational issues.
Following the tradition of noise traders, we introduce the concept of “noise allocators,”
of total mass A, who allocate their funds across randomly chosen asset managers, paying the
general fee f . Noise allocators could play a similar role in the market for asset management as
noise traders do in the market for assets — specifically, noise allocators can make it difficult
for searching investors to determine whether a manager is informed by looking at whether he
has other investors, although we don’t model this feature. Further, since noise allocators tend
to invest with uninformed asset managers, they change the performance characteristics in
the distributions of managers and investors. In fact, given the existence of an infinite number
of managers, (virtually) all their investments go to uninformed managers.8 Noise allocators
7

Alternatively, managers can be taken to be risk neutral, with exactly the same outcome.
Our results also apply qualitatively if we consider a finite number of uninformed managers or a small
entry cost for being an uninformed manager. We view our model with an infinite number of uninformed
managers as the limit as the number of uninformed managers tends to infinity (or their entry cost tends to
zero), and noise allocators randomly pick an asset manager from a uniform distribution.
8

9

may allocate based on trust, as proposed by Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015).

1.2

Assets and Information

We adopt the asset-market structure of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), aiming to focus on the
consequences of introducing asset managers into this framework. Specifically, there exists
a risk-free asset normalized to deliver a zero net return, and a risky asset with payoff v
distributed normally with mean m and standard deviation σv .
Agents can obtain a signal s of the payoff, where
s = v + ε.

(2)

The noise ε has mean zero and standard deviation σε , is independent of v, and is normally
distributed.
The risky asset is available in a stochastic supply given by q, which is jointly normally
distributed with, and independent of, the other exogenous random variables. The mean
supply is Q and the standard deviation of the supply is σq . We think of the noisy supply as
the number of shares outstanding Q plus the supply q − Q from the noise traders.
Given this asset market, uninformed investors buy a number of shares xu as a function
of the observed price p, to maximize their utility uu , taking into account that the price p
may reflect information about the value:
 


1
−γ(W +xu (v−p))
uu (W ) = − log E max E e
|p
= W + uu (0) ≡ W + uu .
xu
γ

(3)

We see that, because of the CARA utility function, an investor’s wealth level simply
shifts his utility function and does not affect his optimal behavior. Therefore, we define
the scalar uu as the wealth-independent part of the utility function (a scalar that naturally
depends on the asset-market equilibrium, in particular the price efficiency).
Asset managers observe the signal and invest in the best interest of their investors. This
informed investing gives rise to the gross utility ui of an active investor (i.e., not taking into
10

account his search cost and the asset management fee — we study those, and specify their
impact on the ex-ante utility, later):
 


1
−γ(W +xi (v−p))
|p, s
= W + ui (0) ≡ W + ui .
ui (W ) = − log E max E e
xi
γ

(4)

As above, we define the scalar ui as the wealth-independent part of the utility function. The
gross utility of an active investor differs from that of an uninformed via conditioning on the
signal s.

1.3

Equilibrium Concept

We first consider the (partial) equilibrium in the asset market given the number of active
investors I: An asset-market equilibrium is an asset price p such that the asset market clears,
q = (N − I + A)xu + Ixi ,

(5)

for the uninformed investors’ demand xu that maximizes their utility (3) given p and the
demand from investors using asset managers xi that maximizes their utility (4) given p and
the signal s. The market clearing condition equates the noisy supply q with the total demand
from the N − I uninformed investors and the I informed investors.
Second, we define a general equilibrium for assets and asset management as a number of
asset managers in operation M , a number of active investors I, an asset price p, and an asset
management fee f such that (i) no manager would like to change his decision of whether
to acquire information, (ii) no investor would like to switch status from active (with an
associated utility of W + ui − c − f ) to passive (conferring utility W + uu ) or vice-versa, (iii)
the price is an asset-market equilibrium, and (iv) the asset management fee is the outcome
of Nash bargaining.

11

2

Solving the Model

2.1

Asset-Market Equilibrium

We first derive the asset-market equilibrium. The price p of the risky asset is determined
as in a market in which I investors have the signal (because their portfolios are chosen by
informed managers) and the remaining N − I + A investors are uninformed, i.e., the assetmarket equilibrium is as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). We consider only their linear
asset-market equilibrium and, for completeness, we record the main results in this section.9
In the linear equilibrium, an informed agent’s demand for the asset is a linear function
of prices and signals and the price is a linear function of the signal and the noisy supply:
p = θ0 + θs ((s − m) − θq (q − Q)) ,

(6)

where, as we show in the appendix, the coefficients are given by
θ0 = m −

γQ var(v|s)

(7)

var(v|s)
I + (N − I + A) var(v|p)
2

2

θs =

var(v|s)
σv
v
I σ2σ+σ
2 + (N − I + A) var(v|p) σ 2 +σ 2 +θ 2 σ 2

θq = γ

v

ε

v

I + (N − I +

ε

q q

(8)

var(v|s)
A) var(v|p)

σε2
.
I

(9)

As we see, the equilibrium price depends on the ratio

var(v|s)
,
var(v|p)

which is given explicitly in

Proposition 1 and has an important interpretation. Indeed, following Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980), we define the efficiency (or informativeness) of asset prices based on this ratio. For
9

Our results in this section differ slightly from those of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) because of differences
in notation (not just in the naming of variables, but also in the modeling of the information structure), but
there exists a mapping from our results to theirs. Palvolgyi and Venter (2014) derive interesting non-linear
equilibria in the Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) model.

12

convenience, we concentrate on the quantity

η ≡ log

σv|p
σv|s



1
= log
2



var(v|p)
var(v|s)


,

(10)

which represents the price inefficiency. This quantity records the amount of uncertainty
about the asset value for someone who only knows the price p, relative to the uncertainty
remaining when one knows the signal s. The price inefficiency is a positive number, η ≥ 0,
and a higher η corresponds to a more inefficient asset market. Naturally, a zero inefficiency
corresponds to a price that fully reveals the signal.
The relative utility of investing based on the manager’s information versus investing as
uninformed, ui − uu ≥ 0, also plays a central role in the remainder of the paper. We can also
think of it as a measure of the outperformance of informed investors relative to uninformed
ones. As we shall see, the relative utility is central for our analysis for several reasons: It
affects investors’ incentive to search for managers, the equilibrium asset management fee, and
managers’ incentive to acquire information. Importantly, in equilibrium, investors’ relative
utility is linked to the asset price inefficiency η, and both depend on the number of active
investors as described in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 There exists a unique linear asset-market equilibrium given by (6)–(9). In
the linear asset-market equilibrium, the utility differential between informed and uninformed
investors, ui − uu , is given by the inefficiency of the price, η:
γ(ui − uu ) = η.

(11)

Further, η is decreasing in the number of active investors I and can be written as


γ 2 σq2 σε2
1
σv2
η = − log 1 − 2
∈ (0, ∞).
2
I + γ 2 σq2 σε2 σε2 + σv2

(12)

Naturally, when there are more active investors (i.e., larger I), asset prices become more
efficient (lower η), implying that informed and uninformed investors receive more similar

13

utility (lower ui − uu ). We note that the asset price efficiency does not depend directly on
the the number of asset managers M . What determines the asset price efficiency is the riskbearing capacity of agents investing based on the signal, and this risk-bearing capacity is
ultimately determined by the number of active investors (not the number of managers they
invest through). The number of asset managers does affect asset price efficiency indirectly,
however, since the number of active investors and asset manages are determined jointly in
equilibrium as we shall see.

2.2

Asset Management Fee

The asset-management fee is set through Nash bargaining between an investor and a manager. The bargaining outcome depends on each agent’s utility in the events of agreement vs.
no agreement (the latter is called the “outside option”). For the investor, the utility in an
agreement of a fee of f is W − c − f + ui . If no agreement is reached, the investor’s outside
option is to invest as uninformed with his remaining wealth, yielding a utility of W − c + uu
as the cost c is already sunk. This outside option is equal to the utility of searching again for
another manager in an interior equilibrium. Hence, we can think of the investor’s bargaining
threat as walking away to invest on his own or to find another manager. In other words, in a
search market, managers engage in imperfect competition which determines the fee and the
equilibrium entry.
Similarly, if o is the outside option of the manager, then o + f is the utility achieved
following an agreement (the cost k is sunk and there is no marginal cost to taking on
the investor). The bargaining outcome maximizes the product of the utility gains from
agreement:
(ui − f − uu ) f.

(13)

14

The objective (13) is maximized by the asset management fee f given by
f=

1η
,
2γ

[equilibrium asset management fee]

(14)

using that ui −uu = η/γ based on Equation (11). This equilibrium fee is simple and intuitive:
The fee would naturally have to be zero if asset markets were perfectly efficient, so that no
benefit of information existed (η = 0), and it increases in the size of the market inefficiency.
We next derive the investors’ and managers’ decisions in an equally straightforward manner. Indeed, an attractive feature of this model is that it is very simple to solve, yet provides
powerful results.

2.3

Investors’ Decision to Search for Asset Managers

An investor optimally decides to look for an informed manager as long as
ui − c − f ≥ uu

(15)

or, recalling the equality η = γ(ui − uu ),
η ≥ γ(c + f ).

(16)

This relation must hold with equality in an “interior” equilibrium (i.e., an equilibrium in
which strictly positive amounts of investors decide to invest as uninformed and through
asset managers — as opposed to all investors making the same decision). Inserting the
equilibrium asset management fee (14), we have already derived the investor’s indifference
condition, γc = 12 η.
Using similar straightforward arguments, we see that an investor would prefer using an
asset manager to acquiring the signal singlehandedly provided k ≥ c + f . Using the equilibrium asset management fee derived in Equation (14), the condition that asset management
is preferred to buying the signal can be written as k ≥ 2c. In other words, finding an as-

15

set manager should cost at most half as much as actually being one, which seems to be a
condition that is clearly satisfied in the real world. We can also make use of (17) to express
this condition equivalently as I ≥ 2M , i.e., there must be at least two investors for every
manager, another realistic implication.

2.4

Entry of Asset Managers

A prospective asset manager must pay the cost k to acquire information and then, in equilibrium, manages the capital of I/M investors. Therefore, she chooses to enter and become
an active manager provided that the total fee revenue covers the cost of operations:
f I/M ≥ k.

(17)

This manager condition must hold with equality for an interior equilibrium, and we can
easily insert the equilibrium fee (14) to get M =

2.5

ηI
.
2γk

General Equilibrium for Assets and Asset Management

We have arrived at following two indifference conditions:
η(I)
= c (M, I)
2γ
η(I)I
,
M=
2γk

[investors’ indifference condition]

(18)

[asset managers’ indifference condition]

(19)

where η is a function of I given explicitly by (12). Hence, solving the general equilibrium
comes down to solving these two explicit equations in two unknowns (I, M ). Recall that a
general equilibrium for assets and asset management is a four-tuple (p, f, I, M ), but we have
eliminated p by deriving the market efficiency η(I) in a (partial) asset market equilibrium
and we have eliminated f by expressing it in terms of η. We can solve equations (18)–
(19) explicitly when the search-cost function c is specified appropriately as we show in the
following example, but the remainder of the paper provides general results and intuition for
16

general search-cost functions.

Example: Closed-Form Solution. A cost specification motivated by the search literature
is

c (M, I) = c̄

I
M

α
for M > 0

c(M, I) = ∞ for M = 0,

and

(20)

where the constants α > 0 and c̄ > 0 control the nature and magnitude of search frictions.
With this search cost function, equations (18)–(19) can be combined to yield
1

η = 2γ (c̄k α ) 1+α ,

(21)

which shows how search costs and information costs determine market inefficiency η.
We then derive the equilibrium number if active investors I from (12):
s
I = γσq σε

σv2
1
− 1 = γσq σε
2
2
σε + σv 1 − e−2η

s

σv2
1
− 1,
1
2
2
σε + σv 1 − e−4γ(c̄kα ) 1+α

(22)

as long as the resulting value of I is smaller than the total number of investors N , otherwise
the equilibrium is the corner solution I = N .
When η is small — a reasonable value is η = 6%, as we show in Section 4.3 — we can
approximate the number of active investors more simply as
I∼
=

σq σε σv
γ 1/2
σq σε σv
=
,
1
1/2 (σ 2 + σ 2 )1/2
2
2 1/2
(2η)
ε
v
2(c̄k α ) 2(1+α) (σε + σv )
γ

(23)

illustrating more directly how search costs c̄ and information costs k lower the number of
active investors I, while risk aversion γ and noise trading σq raise I. The number of informed
managers M in equilibrium is:
M=

1
 c̄  1+α

k

I,

(24)

17

so the number of managers per investor M/I depends on the magnitude of the search cost
c̄ relative to the information cost k.
Figure 1 provides a graphical illustration of the determination of equilibrium as the
intersection of the managers’ and investors’ indifference curves. The figure is plotted based
on the parametric example above,10 but it also illustrates the derivation of equilibrium for a
general search function c(M, I).
Specifically, Figure 1 shows various possible combinations of the numbers of active investors, I, and asset managers, M . The solid blue line indicates investors’ indifference
condition (18). When (I, M ) is to the North-West of the solid blue line, investors prefer to
search for asset managers because managers are easy to find and attractive to find due to
the limited efficiency of the asset market. In contrast, when (I, M ) is South-East of the blue
line, investors prefer to be passive as the costs of finding a manager is not outweighed by
the benefits. The indifference condition is naturally increasing as investors are more willing
to be active when there are more asset managers.
Similarly, the dashed red line shows the managers’ indifference condition (19). When
(I, M ) is above the red line, managers prefer not to incur the information cost k since too
many managers are seeking to service the investors. Below the red line, managers want to
become informed asset managers. Interestingly, the manager indifference condition is hump
shaped for the following reason: When the number of active investors increases from zero, the
number of informed managers also increases from zero, since the managers are encouraged
to earn the fees paid by searching investors. However, the total fee revenue is the product
of the number of active investors I and the fee f . The equilibrium asset management fee
decreases with number of active investors because active investment increases the assetmarket efficiency, thus reducing the value of the asset management service. Hence, when
so many investors have become active that this fee-reduction dominates, additional active
investment decreases the number of informed managers.
We use the following parameters: N = A = 108 /2, γ = 3 × 10−5 corresponding to a relative risk aversion
γ = 3 and average invested wealth W = 105 , Q = 1, m = (N + A)W = 1013 , σv = 0.2m, σε = 0.3m,
σq = 0.2, α = 0.8, c̄ = 0.96, and k = 5.9 × 106 .
10

R

18

Number of asset managers, M

4000
3500

Investor indifference condition
Manager indifference condition

3000

investors
search

2500
2000

investors
passive
managers
exit

1500

managers
enter

1000
500
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Number of active investors, I

1.6

1.8

2
7

x 10

Figure 1: Equilibrium for assets and asset management. Illustration of the equilibrium
determination of the number of active investors I (among all investors N ) and the number
of asset managers M . Each investor decides whether to search for an asset manager or be
passive depending on the actions (I, M ) of everyone else, and, similarly, managers decide
whether or not to pay the information cost to enter the asset management industry. The
right-most crossing of the indifference conditions is a stable equilibrium.
The economy in Figure 1 has two equilibria. One equilibrium is that there is no asset
management: (I, M ) = (0, 0). In this equilibrium, no investor searches for asset managers
as there is no one to be found, and no asset manager sets up operation because there are no
investors. We naturally focus on the more interesting equilibrium with I > 0 and M > 0.
Figure 1 also helps illustrate the set of equilibria more generally. As we state more formally below, there are three general classes of equilibria. First, if the search and information
frictions c and k are strong enough, then the blue line is initially steeper than the red line
and the two lines only cross at (I, M ) = (0, 0), meaning that this equilibrium is unique.
Second, if frictions c and k are mild enough, then the blue line ends up below the red line
at the right-hand side of the graph with I = N . In this case, all investors being active is an
equilibrium. Lastly, when frictions are intermediate — as in Figure 1 — the largest equilib-

19

rium is an interior equilibrium. While Figure 1 has only a single interior equilibrium, more
interior equilibria may exist for other specifications of the search cost function (e.g., because
the investor indifference condition starts above the origin, or because it can in principle
“wiggle” enough to create additional crossings of the two lines).
In the interest of being specific, in particular in the comparative statics that follow, we
focus on the largest equilibrium, that is, the equilibrium with the highest levels of I and M .
As seen in Proposition 1, this is the equilibrium in which the asset market is most efficient,
and it is stable.11 The concept of largest equilibrium is well defined due to the results in
Proposition 2.
Proposition 2 (General equilibrium) There always exists a general equilibrium of masses
(I, M ) of active investors and asset managers, a linear asset-market equilibrium p, and fee f .
In case of multiple equilibria, I and M are positively related across equilibria, and the largest
equilibrium can be characterized as follows: (i) If frictions k and c are sufficiently large, the
unique equilibrium features zero asset managers and active investors, M = I = 0. (ii) If frictions are sufficiently low, all investors search for asset managers in the largest equilibrium,
I = N . (iii) Otherwise the largest equilibrium is an interior equilibrium, 0 < I < N .

3

Equilibrium Properties

We now turn to our central results on how the frictions in the market for money management
interact with the efficiency of the asset market. Our results use the fact that the assetmarket efficiency is determined by the number of active investors I in equilibrium, as shown
in Proposition 1. We say that the asset price is fully efficient if η = 0, meaning that the
price fully reflects the signal (which is never the case in equilibrium, but it can happen as a
limit). We say that the asset price is constrained efficient if η is given by (12) with I = N ,
meaning that the price reflects as much information as it can when all investors are active.
11

As is standard, we denote an equilibrium as stable (unstable) if a deviation in I or M from the equilibrium
amounts results in incentives for agents to change their behavior towards (away from) the behavior required
by the equilibrium.

20

Finally, efficiently inefficient simply refers to the equilibrium efficiency given the frictions.
We start by considering some basic properties of performance in efficiently inefficient
markets in the benchmark model. We use the term outperformance to mean that an informed
investor’s performance yields a higher expected utility than that of an uninformed, and vice
versa for underperformance.
Proposition 3 (Performance) In a general equilibrium for assets and asset management:
(i) Informed asset managers outperform passive investing before and after fees, ui −f > uu .
(ii) Uninformed asset managers underperform after fees.
(iii) Searching investors’ outperformance net of fees just compensates their search costs in
an interior equilibrium, ui − f − c = uu .
(iv) Larger equilibrium search frictions means higher net outperformance for informed managers.
(v) The value-weighted average manager (or, equivalently, the value-weighted average investor) outperforms after fees if the number of noise allocators A is smaller than the
number of optimizing active investors I and underperforms if A > I.
These results follow from the fact that investors must have an incentive to incur search
costs to find an asset manager and pay the asset-management fees. Investors who have
incurred a search cost can effectively predict manager performance. Interestingly, this performance predictability is larger in an asset management market with larger search costs.
To the extent the search costs are larger for hedge funds than mutual funds, larger for
international equity funds than domestic ones, larger for insurance products than mutual
funds, and larger for private equity than public equity funds, this result can explain why
the former asset management funds may deliver larger outperformance and why the markets
they invest in are less efficient.
Next, we consider the other effects of investors’ cost c of searching for asset managers.
21

Proposition 4 (Search for asset management)
(i) Consider two search cost functions, c1 and c2 , with c1 > c2 and the corresponding
largest equilibria. In the equilibrium with the lower search costs c2 , the number of
active investors I is larger, the number of managers M may be higher or lower, the
asset price is more efficient, the asset management fee f is lower, and the total fee
revenue f I may be either higher or lower.
(ii) If {cj }j=1,2,3,... is a decreasing series of cost functions that converges to zero at every
point, then I = N when the cost is sufficiently low, that is, the asset price becomes
constrained efficient. If the number of investors {Nj } increases towards infinity as
j goes to infinity, then η goes to zero (full price efficiency in the limit), the asset
management fee f goes to zero, the number of asset managers M goes to zero, the
number of investors per manager goes to infinity, and the total fee revenue of all asset
managers f I goes to zero.
This proposition provides several intuitive results, which we illustrate in Figure 2. As seen
in the figure, a lower search costs means that the investor indifference curve moves down,
leading to a larger number of active investors in equilibrium. This result is natural, since
investors have stronger incentives to enter when their cost of doing so is lower.
The number of asset managers can increase or decrease (as in the figure), depending on
the location of the hump in the manager indifference curve. This ambiguous change in M
is due to two countervailing effects. On the one hand, a larger number of active investors
increases the total management revenue that can be earned given the fee. On the other hand,
more active investors means more efficient asset markets, leading to lower asset management
fees. When the search cost is low enough, the latter effect dominates and the number of
managers starts falling as seen in part (ii ) of Proposition 4.
As search costs continue to fall, the asset-management industry becomes increasingly
concentrated, with fewer and fewer asset managers managing the money of more and more
investors. This leads to an increasingly efficient asset market and market for asset management. Specifically, the asset-management fee and the total fee revenue decrease toward zero,
22

Number of asset managers, M

4000
3500

Investor indifference condition
Investor condition, lower search cost
Manager indifference condition

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Number of active investors, I

2
7

x 10

Figure 2: Equilibrium effect of lower investor search costs. The figure illustrates that
lower costs of finding asset managers implies more active investors in equilibrium and, hence,
increased asset-market efficiency.
and increasingly fewer resources are spent on information collection as only a few managers
incur the cost k, but invest on behalf of an increasing number of investors.
We next consider the effect of changing the cost of acquiring information.
Proposition 5 (Information cost) As the cost of information k decreases, the largest
equilibrium changes as follows: The number of active investors I increases, the number of
asset managers M increases, the asset-price efficiency increases, the asset-management fee
f goes down, while the total fee revenue f I increases for large values of k and decreases
for the other ones. If k is sufficiently small, all investors are active and the asset price is
constrained efficient.
The results of this proposition are illustrated in Figure 3. As seen in the figure, a lower
information cost for asset managers moves their indifference curve out. This leads to a
higher number of asset managers and active investors in equilibrium, which increases the
asset-price efficiency. Naturally, less “complex” assets — assets with lower k — are priced
23

Number of asset managers, M

4000
3500

Investor indifference condition
Manager indifference condition
Manager condition, lower information cost

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Number of active investors, I

1.6

1.8

2
7

x 10

Figure 3: Equilibrium effect of lower information acquisition costs. The figure
illustrates that lower costs of getting information about assets implies more active investors
and more asset managers in equilibrium and, hence, increased asset-market efficiency.
more efficiently than more complex ones, and the more complex ones have fewer managers,
higher fees, and fewer investors.
We also consider the importance of fundamental asset risk and noise trader risk in the
determination of the equilibrium.
Proposition 6 (Risk) An increase in the fundamental volatility σv or in the noise-trading
volatility σq leads to more active investors I, more asset managers M , and higher total fee
revenue f I. The effect on the efficiency of asset prices and the asset-management fee f is
ambiguous. The same results obtain with a proportional increase in (σv , σε ) or in all risks
(σv , σε , σq ).
An increase in risk increases the disadvantage of investing uninformed, which attracts
more investors and more managers to service them. Interestingly, the asset-market efficiency
may increase or decrease. For instance, if the search cost depends only on the number of
investors searching, then new investor entry will mitigate the disadvantage of being unin24

formed only partially — so as to justify the higher search cost. On the other hand, if it
depends only on the number of managers, then the higher number of managers decreases
the search cost and investors enter until the market efficiency exceeds the original level.

4

Further Applications of the Framework

4.1

Small and Large Investors: Equilibrium Fee Structure

So far, we have considered an economy in which all investors are identical ex ante, but,
in the real world, investors differ in their wealth and financial sophistication. Should large
asset owners such as high-net-worth families, pension funds, or insurance companies invest
differently than small retail investors? If so, how does the decision to be active depend on
the amount of capital invested and the financial sophistication, including the access to useful
financial advice? How do fees depend on the size of the investment?
We address these issues in the following subsections by extending the model to allow for
heterogeneous investors. In particular, each investor i ∈ [0, N ] has an investor-specific cost
ci of finding an informed asset manager, where a smaller search cost corresponds to a more
sophisticated investor. Further, we assume that investor i has a wealth Wi and relative risk
aversion γiR , corresponding to an absolute risk aversion of γi = γiR /Wi .
We solve the model as before, but now investors have different portfolio choices, asset
management fees, and optimal search decisions. In terms of portfolio choice, any investor
invests an amount in the risky asset that is proportional to the ratio of the expected excess
return to the variance of the return given the information set (informed or uninformed),12
where the factor of proportionality is 1/γi = Wi /γiR . Hence, an investor with twice the
wealth buys twice the number of shares. Likewise, an investor with twice the relative risk
aversion buys half the number of shares.
We assume (without loss of generality) that each asset manager runs a fund that invests
based on a relative risk aversion of γ̄ R (where we can think of γ̄ R as the typical risk aversion,
12

Said differently, the investment size in terms of risk is the Sharpe ratio multiplied by 1/γi = Wi /γiR .

25

although this is not important). Therefore, investors with relative risk aversion γ̄ R optimally
invest their entire wealth with the manager. For such investors, it is straightforward to define
the percentage fee f % , namely as the fee in dollars divided by the investment, fi% := fi /Wi .
More broadly, an investor with relative risk aversion γiR invests γ̄ R /γiR times his wealth in
the fund so his percentage fee is
fi% :=

fi
.
γ̄ R
W
i
R
γi

(25)

Each investor’s equilibrium asset management fee is determined through the same bargaining
process as before and, in fact, equation (13) continues to hold. We obtain the following result.
Proposition 7 (Fee structure) Each agent i pays an equilibrium dollar fee of
fi =

η Wi
,
2 γiR

(26)

corresponding to a percentage fee that is the same for all investors,
f% =

η
.
2γ̄ R

(27)

We see that all investors pay the same proportional asset management fee. This result
corresponds well to the fee structure observed in mutual funds and the stated fees in most
other forms of investment management. While an endogenously proportional fee is a nice
and realistic result, we note that large institutional investors in managed accounts and hedge
funds may sometimes get discounts relative to the proportional stated fees (according to
practitioners we talked to, although we are not aware of a study of the relation between size
and fees actually paid for large institutions). Such fee differences are not captured by this
version of our model, but could be obtained if investors also differ in their costs of passive
investment (as seen below) or if asset managers have a fixed cost for each investor.

26

4.2

Small and Large Investors: Who Should be Passive vs. Active?

The equilibrium proportional fees derived above imply that large investors do not have a
fee advantage in active investing. Large investors have another advantage in being active,
however: Their cost of finding and vetting an asset manager is a smaller fraction of their
investment. Adapting in a straightforward way the earlier arguments, we see that investor i
optimally searches for an asset manager if
1
γi ci ≤ η.
2

(28)

Hence, we have the following characterization of the optimal allocation policy by investors.
Proposition 8 (Who should be active/passive) An investor i should invest with an active manager if the investor has a large wealth Wi , low relative risk aversion γiR , or low cost
ci of finding and assessing the manager, all relative to the asset-market inefficiency η. Specifically, the investor should allocate to active management if
γiR ci
1
≤ η,
Wi
2

(29)

and otherwise should be passive.
This result appears intuitive and is consistent with the idea that the active investors should
be those who have a comparative advantage in asset allocation.

4.3

Understanding the Economic Magnitude

To illustrate the economic magnitudes of some of the interesting properties of the model in
a simple way, it is helpful to write our predictions is relative terms. Specifically, as seen in
Sections 4.1–4.2, investors’ preferences can be written in terms of the relative risk aversion
γ R and wealth W such that γ = γ R /W . Further, the asset management fee can be viewed as
a fixed proportion of the investment size and we define the proportional fee as f % = f /W .
27

With these definitions, we get the following predictions on the economic magnitude of the
market inefficiency, asset management fee, and improvement in gross Sharpe ratio (i.e., before
fees and search costs) for investors allocating to informed managers relative to uninformed
managers.13
Proposition 9 (Economic magnitude) The market inefficiency η is linked to the proportional asset management fee and relative risk aversion,
η = 2f % γ R ,

(30)

and can be characterized by the difference in squared gross Sharpe ratios attainable by informed (SRi ) vs. uninformed (SRu ) investors using a log-linear approximation:

1
η∼
E(SRi2 ) − E(SRu2 ) .
=
2

(31)

To illustrate these results, suppose that all investors have relative risk aversion of γ R = 3
and that the equilibrium percentage asset management fee is f % = 1%. Then we have the
following relation for the asset market inefficiency η based on (30):
η = 2f % γ R = 2 · 1% · 3 = 6%.

(32)

In other words, the standard deviation of the true asset value from the perspective of a
trader who knows the signal is e−6% ≈ 94% of that of a trader who only observes the price.
Further, we see that the Sharpe ratios must satisfy
E(SRi2 ) − E(SRu2 ) = 4f % γ R = 4 · 1% · 3 = 0.12.
Hence, if uninformed investing yields an expected squared Sharpe ratio of 0.42 (similar to
that of the market portfolio), informed investing must yield an expected Sharpe ratio around
13

Since each type of investor a = i, u chooses a position of x =
|Ea (v)−p|

ratio is SRa = √

Vara (v)

Ea (v)−p
γVara (v) ,

the investor’s conditional Sharpe

(where Ea and Vara are the mean and variance conditional on a’s information).

28

0.532 (i.e., 0.532 − 0.42 = 0.12). Hence, at this realistic fee level, the implied difference in
Sharpe ratios between informed and uninformed managers is relatively small and hard to
detect empirically.

4.4

Welfare and Market Liquidity

It is interesting to consider welfare implications of the model, although many welfare effects
are non-monotonic and ambiguous as is often the case in welfare analysis. We consider a
welfare function that is simply the sum of all agents’ utilities:

welfare = I (ui − c − f ) + (N − I)uu + A(uu − f ) + M


fI
− k + Af + ν,
M

(33)

namely the utilities of the I active investors, the N − I passive investors, the A noise
allocators, the M informed asset managers, the uninformed asset managers who earn the
fees from the noise allocators, and the utility of the noise traders ν. To define the utility of
the noise traders, we proceed in the spirit of Leland (1992) and endow them with risk-neutral
preferences over their proceeds, ν = E [(q − Q)p]. We could also include the utility of the
original securities owners, but for simplicity we set the supply of shares to be Q = 0.
In the real world, the welfare benefits of efficient markets also derive from a better
allocation of resources due to real investment decisions, better labor market allocations,
improved incentives of corporate officers, and many other effects not captured by our model.
A complete study of all such welfare effects is beyond the scope of this paper so we limit
ourself to showing that even this limited welfare function yields complex results.14
We can simplify the welfare function as follows:
welfare = (N + A)uu + I(ui − uu ) − Ic − M k + ν,

(34)

which makes clear that the central welfare costs are the resources spent on search, Ic, and
14

The complexity of the welfare analysis in noisy-REE frameworks is apparent, for instance, in Leland
(1992), who studies the desirability of banning insider trading.

29

the resources spent on information collection, M k. These costs are offset by the investment
benefits (ui , uu , and ν) of resources spent on information and matching.
In an interior equilibrium, investors are indifferent towards being active vs. passive and
managers break even. These two observations allow us to further simplify the welfare function
as
welfare = (N + A)uu + ν,

(35)

that is, the welfare is the same as if all agents receive the utility they would have as uninformed agents in a market characterized exogenously by the equilibrium market efficiency
η. (Achieving this efficiency level endogenously, of course, requires that a certain number of
agents be active.)
Interestingly, the utility of the noise traders, ν, is closely linked to the equilibrium market
liquidity. To see this link, we define market illiquidity as the equivalent of Kyle’s lambda in
our model,
λ≡−

dp
= θs θq .
dq

(36)

where θs and θq are given in Equations (8)–(9). In other words, λ measures the market
impact of trading. Since noise traders move prices against themselves despite their lack of
information, a higher market illiquidity is associated with lower utility:
ν = −λσq2 .

(37)

We see that a higher market illiquidity λ and more noise trading σq2 both lower the utility
of the noise traders.
We are interested in the dependence of welfare on the search cost. While the overall welfare depends on search costs in a complex way, the model yields some nice results regarding
liquidity and noise trader utility. Indeed, as we have seen, noise trader utility depends on the
market liquidity, but λ is not monotonic in the search cost or the number of active investors
30

in general. However, under certain conditions, market liquidity is at its highest when search
costs are low, as the following proposition states.
Proposition 10 (Welfare and liquidity) When the search cost c and A are small enough,
a decrease in c reduces Kyle’s lambda λ, and this improvement in market liquidity increases
the welfare of the noise traders. The total welfare can increase or decrease as a result of the
lower c depending on the parameters.

4.5

The Cost of Passive Investing

In the benchmark model, investors had to choose between incurring a search cost to find
an active manager and using passive investing for free. In the real world, however, passive
investing also comes at a cost. Indeed, buying a diversified portfolio takes time and is
associated with transaction costs. The costs of passive investing has come down over time
due to the introduction and adoption of discount brokers, low-cost index funds, and exchange
traded funds (ETFs), e.g., those run by Vanguard. It is interesting to consider how these
costs of passive investing and their reduction affects the market for active asset management
and the security markets.
We augment the benchmark with the assumption that investors (who are ex ante identical as in the benchmark model) must pay a cost cu for passive investing (i.e., to put on
the portfolio xu (p)). For simplicity, we assume that investors are committed to passive or
active investing (e.g., because leaving the money under the mattress is associated with lower
expected utility).
Solving this generalized model requires only to note that the cost cu modifies the gains
from trade between a matched investor-manager pair from

η
γ

to γη +cu . These gains from trade

feature both in the ex-ante decisions of the investor and manager, and in the determination
of the fee.
Specifically, the Nash bargaining problem becomes to maximize



η
u
− f + c (f ),
γ

(38)

31

with solution
f=

η
cu
+ ,
2
2γ

(39)

while the indifference conditions (18)–(19) are modified to
η
cu
+
= c (M, I)
2γ
2


cu
I η
+
.
M=
k 2γ
2

(40)
(41)

Based on these revised indifference conditions, we can characterize how the general equilibrium for assets and asset management depends on the cost of passive investing.
Proposition 11 (Cost of passive investing) As the cost of passive investing cu decreases,
the largest equilibrium changes as follows. The number of active investors I is lower, the
number of informed active managers M is lower, the asset price is less efficient, and the
total active fee revenue f I is lower. The asset management fee f may increase or decrease.
As seen in the proposition, we would expect that lower costs of passive investing due to
index funds and ETFs should drive down the relative attractiveness of active investing and
therefore reduce the amount of active investing, rendering the asset market less efficient. The
supply of informed managers catering to active investors declines. The search costs, too, react
to the changes in the numbers of investors in managers, to the effect that the relative gains
from investing with an informed manager, as well as the fee, may either increase or decrease.

4.6

Managers with Different Signals

In this section we describe briefly how the model would change if different managers received
different signals. We adopt the formulation of Hellwig (1980), in that manager j receives
signal
s j = v + εj ,

(42)
32

where εj are i.i.d. conditional on v.
When every agent invests with only one manager,15 then the asset-market equilibrium is
characterized by
p = θ̂0 + θ̂v (v − θ̂q (q − Q)),

(43)

where θ̂0 , θ̂v , and θ̂q are constant and computed by matching coefficients in the marketclearing condition.
Proposition 12 An equilibrium exists in which the price takes the form (43). The moneymanagement-market equilibrium continues to be characterized by (18)–(19), with
η = γ(ui − uu )

1
log(var(v|p)) − log(var(v|p, sj )
2


γ 2 σε2 σq2
1
= − log 1 − 2
.
2
I + γ 2 σε2 σq2 + γ 2 σε4 σq2 σv−2
=

(44)

We note that the equilibrium is qualitatively the same as in the base-case model, which
can be seen by comparing equations (12) and (44). The dependence of η on the parameters
(risk aversion and variances), in the two cases, is the same.

5

Empirical Implications

In this section, we lay out some of our model’s testable empirical implications for asset
markets, asset management, and their interaction. The model has implications both for
the cross-section of assets and asset managers — e.g., in cross-country comparisons or across
different asset classes or market segments — and the time series, e.g., studying secular trends
15

Proposition 12 is stated under the assumption that agents may interact with only one manager. This
assumption is, however, not necessary. In the appendix we show that, if investing with a second manager
must be done at the fee negotiated by all the other agents, then the agent would be strictly losing by paying
the meeting cost c and fee f to receive the — smaller — marginal benefits of investing with another manager.

33

as access to information changes. We consider both empirical predictions that correspond
to existing evidence as well as new predictions that are yet to be tested.
A. Search frictions and asset managers. Search frictions in the asset management
fund industry are documented by Sirri and Tufano (1998), Jain and Wu (2000), and
Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) and, consistent with our model, proxies for lower search
costs are associated with more investors. In a cross-country study, Khorana, Servaes,
and Tufano (2008) find that mutual fund “fees are lower in wealthier countries with
more educated populations,” which may be related to lower search frictions for well
educated investors. If search costs have gone down over time due to improvements in
information technology (e.g., the internet), our model predicts an increasing allocation
to managers and a downward trend in fees, somewhat consistent with the result of
French (2008), although the fees may not have come down as much as our model
might predict. Appendix A describes the real-world search and due diligence process
in some detail.
B. Performance of asset managers. Larger search frictions for asset managers should
lead to less efficient asset markets and larger outperformance net of fess, which could
help explain why international equity funds perform better than domestic equity funds
(Dyck, Lins, and Pomorski (2013)) and why hedge funds may add more value than
mutual funds (references cited in the introduction). The unimpressive performance of
the average mutual fund may also be related to a larger number of noise allocators in
that sector.
C. Predicting manager performance. In our model, investors who collect information
about asset managers can achieve some ability to predict their performance, consistent
with the evidence cited in the introduction. Given that noise allocators invest randomly
and searching investors allocate to informed managers, the model implies that informed
managers receive more funds than uninformed managers, on average, as found empirically by Berk and Binsbergen (2012). However, as emphasized by Berk and Green
34

(2004), this effect may be mitigated by decreasing returns to scale in asset management, e.g., due to larger transaction costs for large managers. In our model, individual
managers do not face decreasing returns to scale, but the asset management industry
does because a larger total investment (I) leads to more efficient markets (lower η),
reducing manager performance, consistent with the evidence of Pastor, Stambaugh,
and Taylor (2015).16
D. Asset management fees. We predict that asset-management fees should be larger for
managers of more inefficient assets and in more inefficient asset management markets.
For instance, if search costs for managers are large, this leads to less active investing
and higher management fees. Note that the higher management fee in this example is
not driven by higher information costs for managers, but, rather, by the equilibrium
dynamics between the markets for the asset and asset management. This may help
explain why hedge funds have historically charged higher fees than mutual funds. Also,
markets for more complex assets that are costly to study should be more inefficient
and have higher management fees. This can help explain why equity funds tend to
have higher fees than bond funds and why global equity funds have higher fees than
domestic ones.
E. Efficiently inefficient markets. While the efficient market hypothesis is a powerful
theory, it can nevertheless be difficult to test because of the so-called “joint hypothesis”
problem. However, the existence of deviations from the Law of One Price (securities
with the same cash flows that trade at different prices) is a clear rejection of fully
efficient asset markets. The theory of efficiently inefficient markets is not the entire
complement to fully efficient markets, but, rather, it should be viewed as an equally
well-defined null hypothesis. Efficiently inefficient markets means that the marginal
investor should be indifferent between passive investing and searching for asset man16

While the overall asset management industry clearly has decreasing returns to scale for reasons described
in our model, there might also be effects related to the size of each individual firm in the real world.
Anecdotally, small asset managers face increasing returns to scale (due to fixed costs of trading infrastructure,
worse commissions and other terms from brokers for small managers, etc.) while very large managers face
decreasing returns to scale due to market impact.

35

agers, where the latter should deliver an expected outperformance balanced by asset
management fees and search costs, consistent with the findings of Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Morse (2014) for professional asset managers. The average manager might
not deliver this outperformance due to noise allocators, but investors should be able
to collect sufficient information to achieve an outperformance that compensates their
costs in an efficiently inefficient market.
F. Anomalies. In an efficiently inefficient market, anomalies are more likely to arise
the more resources a manager needs to trade against them (higher k) and the more
difficult it is for investors to build trust in such managers (higher c). For instance, while
convertible bond arbitrage is a relatively straightforward trade for an asset manager
(low k), it might have performed well for a long time because it is difficult for investors
to assess (high c).
G. Fraction of active investors: the size of the asset management industry. Our
model also has several implications for the size of the asset management industry. The
asset management industry grows when investors search cost diminish or when asset
managers’ information costs go down, leading to more efficient asset markets, consistent
with the evidence of Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015). Other important models
that speak to the size of the asset management industry include Berk and Green (2004),
Garcia and Vanden (2009), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2012).
H. Number and size of asset managers: industrial organization of asset management. When investors’ search costs go down, our model predicts that the number
of managers will fall, but the remaining managers will be larger (in fact so much larger
that the total size of the asset management industry grows as mentioned above). Such
consolidation of the asset management industry is discussed in the press, but we are
not aware of a direct test of this model prediction.
I. Private equity and venture capital. We can also think of our model as a description of the markets for private equity and venture capital, where investors search for
36

asset managers who in turn examine private (and public) companies. Our model’s predictions may help explain the puzzling performance persistence documented by Kaplan
and Schoar (2005), given the complications of finding an informed manager (Korteweg
and Sorensen (2014)).
J. Investment consulting firms, investment advisors, and funds of funds. Lastly,
investors’ search frictions in our model are consistent with the demand for investment
consulting services and funds of funds who may essentially help lower these frictions.
Counter to our model’s predictions, Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) find no
evidence that U.S. mutual fund brokers add value and, similarly, Jenkinson, Jones, and
Martinez (2015) find no evidence that consultants add value in selecting U.S. equity
funds (unless they cater to noise allocators), but, consistent with our predictions,
Cain, McKeon, and Solomon (2015) find that top intermediaries have predictive power
of private equity returns and affect flows.

6

Conclusion

We propose a model in which investors search for an informed asset manager who has the
technology to acquire information about securities, just as real-world investors examine an
asset manager’s investment process, the number of employees, their turnover, and their professional pedigree, whether the manager operates a trading desk 24/7, co-location on major
trading venues, costly information sources, risk management, valuation methods, financial
auditors, and so on. This time-consuming vetting process is captured by our search model.
At the same time, managers spend significant resources on making informed investments,
captured by embedding these asset managers in the Grossman-Stiglitz information model.
Our search-plus-information model turns out to be surprisingly tractable, allowing a closedform solution with a specific search function and, for a general class of search functions,
yielding clear results seen from investors’ and managers’ indifference curves.
We find that asset managers can increase asset price efficiency by letting investors essen-

37

tially share information costs, but their ability to do so is limited by the search frictions in
the asset-management industry. Therefore, the efficiency of asset markets is fundamentally
connected to the efficiency of the asset management market. Our model shows how lower
search frictions in asset management leads to improved asset price efficiency, lower asset
management fees, less outperformance by asset managers before and after fees, fewer and
larger asset managers (i.e., a consolidation of the asset management industry), improved
market liquidity, and potential welfare improvements.
To compensate investors for their search cost associated with finding an informed asset
manager, informed managers must outperform passive investing after fees, a new prediction
that helps explain the empirical evidence that the best mutual funds, hedge funds, and
private equity firms do in fact deliver such outperformance. Further, we find that large
sophisticated investors should search for informed active managers, while smaller investors
are better served by passive investing as the search costs outweigh the potential gains from
improved performance of a small portfolio. The model predictions help explain a number of
existing empirical facts that are puzzling in light of existing models and lay the ground for
further tests.

38

A

Real-World Search and Due Diligence of Asset Managers

Here we briefly summarize some of the main real-world issues related to finding and vetting
an asset manager. While the search process involves a lot of details, the main point that we
model theoretically is that the process is time consuming and costly. For instance, there exist
more mutual funds than stocks in the U.S. Many of these mutual funds might be charging
high fees while investing with little or no real information, just like the uninformed funds in
our model (e.g., high-fee index funds, or so-called “closet indexers” who claim to be active,
but in fact track the benchmark, or funds investing more in marketing than their investment
process). Therefore, finding a suitable mutual fund is not easy for investors (just like finding
a cheap stock is not easy for asset managers).
We first consider the search and due diligence process of institutional investors such as
pension funds, insurance companies, endowments, foundations, funds of funds, family offices,
and banks. Such institutional investors invite certain specific asset managers to visit their
offices and also travel to meet asset managers at their premises. If the institutional investor
is sufficiently interested in investing with the manager, the investor often asks the manager
to fill out a so-called due diligence questionnaire (DDQ), which provides a starting point for
the due diligence process. Here we provide a schematic overview of the process to illustrate
the significant time and cost related to the search process of finding an asset manager and
doing due diligence, but a detailed description of each of these items is beyond the scope of
the paper.17
• Finding the asset manager: the initial meeting.
– Search. Institutional investors often have employees in charge of external managers. These employees search for asset managers and often build up knowledge
of a large network of asset managers whom they can contact. Similarly, asset
managers employ business development staff who maintain relationships with investors they know and try to connect with other asset owners, although hedge
funds are subject to non-solicitation regulation preventing them from randomly
contacting potential investors and advertising. This two-way search process involves a significant amount of phone calls, emails, and repeated personal meetings,
often starting with meetings between the staff members dedicated to this search
17

Standard DDQs are available online,
e.g.
from the Managed Funds Association
(http://www.managedfunds.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Due-DilligenceQuestionnaire.pdf) or the Institutional Limited Partner Association (http://ilpa.org/wpcontent/publicmedia/ILPA Due Diligence Questionnaire Tool.docx). See also “Best Practices in Alternative
Investments: Due Diligence,” Greenwich Roundtable, 2010 (www.greenwichroundtable.org/system/files/BP2010.pdf), the CFA Institute’s “Model RFP: A standardized process for selecting money managers”
(http://www.cfainstitute.org/ethics/topics/Pages/model rfp.aspx), and “Best Practices for the Hedge Fund
Industry,” Report of the Asset Managers’ Committee to the President’s working group on financial markets,
2009 (http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/swaps/documents/file/bestpractices.pdf). We are grateful
for helpful discussions with Stephen Mellas and Jim Riccobono at AQR Capital Management.

39

process and later with meetings between the asset manager’s high-level portfolio
managers and the asset owner’s chief investment officer and board.
– Request for Proposal. Another way for an institutional investor to find and
asset managers is to issue a request for proposal (RFP), which is a document that
invites asset managers to “bid” for an asset management mandate. The RFP may
describe the mandate in question (e.g., $100 million of long-only U.S. large-cap
equities) and all the information about the asset manager that is required.
– Capital introduction. Investment banks sometimes have capital introduction
(“cap intro”) teams as part of their prime brokerage. A cap intro team introduces
institutional investors to asset managers (e.g., hedge funds) that use the bank’s
prime brokerage.
– Consultants, investment advisors, and placement agents. Institutional
investors often use consultants and investment advisors to find and vet investment
managers that meet their needs. On the flip side, asset managers (e.g., private
equity funds) sometimes use placement agents to find investors.
– Databases. Institutional investors also get ideas for which asset managers to
meet by looking at databases that may contain performance numbers and overall
characteristics of the covered asset managers.
• Evaluating the asset management firm.
– Assets, funds, and investors. Institutional investors often consider an asset
manager’s overall assets under management, the distribution of assets across fund
types, client types, and location.
– People. Key personnel, overall headcount information, headcount by major departments, stability of senior people.
– Client servicing. Services and information disclosed to investors, ongoing performance attribution, market updates, etc.
– History, culture, and ownership. When was the asset management firm
founded, how has it evolved, general investment culture, ownership of the asset
management firm, and do the portfolio managers invest in their own funds.
• Evaluating the specific fund.
– Terms. Fund structure (e.g., master-feeder), investment minimum, fees, high
water marks, hurdle rate, other fees (e.g., operating expenses, audit fees, administrative fees, fund organizational expenses, legal fees, sales fees, salaries),
transparency of positions and exposures.
– Redemption terms. Any fees payable, lock-ups, gating provisions, can the
investment manager suspend redemptions or pay redemption proceeds in-kind,
and other restrictions.
40

– Asset and investors. Net asset value, number of investors, do any investors
in the fund experience fee or redemption terms that differ materially from the
standard ones?
• Evaluating the investment process.
– Track record. Past performance numbers and possible performance attribution.
– Instruments. The securities traded and geographical regions.
– Team. Investment personnel, experience, education, turnover.
– Investment thesis and economic reasoning. What is the underlying source of
profit, i.e., why should the investment strategy be expected to be profitable? Who
takes the other side of the trade and why? Has the strategy worked historically?
– Investment process. The analysis of the investment thesis and process is naturally one of the most important parts of finding an asset managers. Investors
analyze what drives the asset manager’s decisions to buy and sell, the investment process, what data is used, how is information gathered and analyzed, what
systems are used, etc.
– Portfolio characteristics. Leverage, turnover, liquidity, typical number of positions and position limits.
– Examples of past trades. What motivated these trades, how do they reflect
the general investment process, how were positions adjusted as events evolved.
– Portfolio construction methodology. How is the portfolio constructed, how
are positions adjusted over time, how is risk measured, position limits, etc.
– Trading methodology. Connections to broker/dealers, staffing of trading desk
and is it operating 24/7, possibly co-location on major exchanges, use of internal
or external broker algorithms, etc.
– Financing of trades. Prime brokers relations, leverage.
• Evaluating the risk management.
– Risk management team. Team members, independence, and authority.
– Risk measures. Risk measures calculated, risk reports to investors, stress testing.
– Risk management. How is risk managed, what actions are taken when risk
limits are breached and who makes the decision.
• Due diligence of operational issues and back office.
– Operations overview. Teams, functions, and segregation of duties.

41

– Lifecycle of a trade. The different steps a trade makes as it flows through the
asset manager’s systems.
– Cash management. Who can move cash, how, and controls around this process.
– Valuation. Independent pricing sources, what level of PM input is there, what
controls and policies ensure accurate pricing, who monitors this internally and
externally.
– Reconciliation. How frequency and granularly are cash and positions reconciled.
– Client service. Reporting frequency, transparency levels, and other client services and reporting.
– Service providers. The main service providers used abd any major changes
(recent or planned).
– Systems. What are the major homegrown or vendor systems with possible live
system demos.
– Counterparties. Who are the main ones, how are they selected, how is counterparty risk managed and by whom.
– Asset verification. Some large investors (and/or their consultants) will ask to
speak directly to the asset manager’s administrator in order to independently
verify that assets are valued correctly.
• Due diligence of compliance, corporate governance, and regulatory issues.
– Overview. Teams, functions, independence.
– Regulators and regulatory reporting. Who are the regulators for the fund,
summary of recent visits/interactions, frequency of reporting.
– Corporate governance. Summary of policies and oversight.
– Employee training. Code of ethics and training.
– Personal trading. Policy, frequency, recent violations and the associated penalties for breach.
– Litigation. What litigation the firm has been involved with.
• Due diligence of business continuity plan (BCP) and disaster recovery plan.
– Plan overview. Policy, staffing, and backup facilities.
– Testing. Frequency of tests and intensity.
– Cybersecurity. How IT systems and networks are defended and tested.
The search process for finding an asset manager is very different for retail investors.
Clearly, there is no standard structure for the search process for retail investors, but here
are some considerations:
42

• Retail investors searching for an asset manager.
– Online search. Some retail investors can search for useful information about
investing online and they can make their investment online. However, finding the
right websites may require a significant search effort and, once located, finding
and understanding the right information within the website can be difficult as
discussed further below.
– Walking into a local branch of a financial institution. Retail investors may
prefer to invest in person, e.g., by walking into the local branch of a financial institution such as a bank, insurance provider, or investment firm. Visiting multiple
financial institutions can be time consuming and confusing for retail investors.
– Brokers and intermediaries. Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) report that a large fraction of mutual funds are sold via brokers and study the
characteristics of these fund flows.
– Choosing from pension system menu. Lastly, retail investors get exposure
to asset management through their pension systems. In defined contributions
pension schemes, retail investors must search through a menu of options for their
preferred fund.
• Searching for the relevant information.
– Fees. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010) find experimental evidence that “search
costs for fees matter.” In particular, their study “asked 730 experimental subjects
to allocate $10,000 among four real S&P 500 index funds. All subjects received
the funds prospectuses. To make choices incentive-compatible, subjects expected
payments depended on the actual returns of their portfolios over a specified time
period after the experimental session. ... In one treatment condition, we gave
subjects a one-page ‘cheat sheet’ that summarized the funds front-end loads and
expense ratios. ... We find that eliminating search costs for fees improved portfolio
allocations.”
– Fund objective and skill. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010) also find evidence
that investors face search costs associated with respect to the funds’ objectives
such as the meaning of an index fund. “In a second treatment condition, we
distributed one page of answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) about S&P
500 index funds. ... When we explained what S&P 500 index funds are in the
FAQ treatment, portfolio fees dropped modestly, but the statistical significance
of this drop is marginal.”
– Price and net asset value. In some countries, retail investors buy and sell
a mutual fund shares as listed shares on an exchange. In this case, a central
piece of information is the relation between the share price and mutual fund’s net
asset value, but investors must search for these pieces of information on different
websites and are often they not synchronous.
43

• Understanding the relevant information.
– Financial literacy. In their study on the choice of index funds, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010) find that “fees paid decrease with financial literacy.”
Simply understanding the relevant information and, in particular, the (lack of)
importance of past returns is an important part of the issue.
– Opportunity costs. Even for financially literate investors, the non-trivial amount
of time it takes to search for a good asset manager may be viewed as a significant
opportunity cost given that people have other productive uses of their time and
value leisure time.

44

B

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. This result is effectively provided, and proved, in Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980). In the interest of being self-contained, we include here a sketch.
An agent having conditional expectation of liquidating value µ and variance V optimally
demands
x=

µ−p
.
γV

(B.1)

Conjecturing the form (6) for the price, we have
E[v|p] = E[v|v + ε + θq (q − Q)]
= m + βv,p (p − m) = m +

σv2
(p − m)
σv2 + σε2 + θq2 σq2

(B.2)

σv2
(s − m)
σv2 + σε2

(B.3)

E[v|s] = E[v|v + ε]
= m + βv,s (s − m) = m +
2
var(v|p) = σv2 − βv,p
σp2

=

σv2


σv2 σε2 + θq2 σq2
(1 − βv,p ) = 2
σv + σε2 + θq2 σq2

2
var(v|s) = σv2 − βv,s
σs2 =

(B.4)

σv2 σε2
.
σv2 + σε2

(B.5)

The price is now computed from the market-clearing condition, which shows that a linear
price (in q and s) exists and leads to equations determining its coefficients:
q=I

E[v|p] − p
E[v|s] − p
+ (N − I + A)
.
var(v|s)
var(v|p)

Direct computation establishes (7)–(9).
To compute the relative utility, we start by noting that, with a ∈ {u, i},


(µ −p)2
− 21 aV
−γua
a
e
=E e
,

(B.6)

(B.7)

where µa and Va are the conditional mean and variance of v for an investor of type a. To
complete the proof, one uses the fact that, if z ∼ N (µz , Vz ), then
h 1 2i
2
1
1 µz
E e− 2 z = (1 + Vz )− 2 e− 2 1+Vz ,

45

and performs the necessary calculations giving


σv−p
1 (m − θ0 )2
1
+
uu = log
2
γ
σv|p
2γ σv−p


1
σv−p
1 (m − θ0 )2
ui = log
.
+
2
γ
σv|s
2γ σv−p
(We note that the last term,

2
1 (m−θ0 )
,
2
2γ σv−p

(B.8)
(B.9)

represents the utility attainable by an agent who

cannot condition on the price.)
The proofs below make use of the following result.
Lemma 1 The function of I given by Iη increases up to a point I¯ and then decreases,
converging to zero.
Proof of Lemma 1. The function of interest is a constant multiple of


a + x2
h(x) := x log
,
b + x2

(B.10)

with a > b > 0. Its derivative equals


a + x2
b + x2 2x(b + x2 ) − 2x(a + x2 )
0
h (x) = log
+x
b + x2
a + x2
(b + x2 )2


a + x2
2(a − b)x2
.
= log
−
b + x2
(a + x2 ) (b + x2 )
For x = 0, the first term is clearly higher: h0 (0) > 0. For x → ∞, the second is larger,
so that lim h0 (x) < 0. Finally, letting y = x2 and differentiating h0 (y) with respect to y one
sees that h00 (y) = 0 when y satisfies the quadratic
y 2 − (a + b)y − 3ab = 0,

(B.11)

which clearly has a root of each sign. Thus, since y = x2 is always positive, h00 (x) changes
sign only once. Given that h0 (x) starts positive and ends negative and its derivative changes
sign only once, we see that h0 itself must change sign exactly once. This result
means that
 2
a+x
h is hump-shaped. Finally, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule to h(x) = log b+x2 /(1/x) to
conclude that limx→∞ h(x) = 0.
Proof of Proposition 2. Let M denote the function that assigns to a value of I the
corresponding value M at which managers are indifferent between entering and being passive
— the red line in Figure 1. Likewise, let I give the equilibrium number of investors as a
function of M ; note that the blue line in the figure graphs the function I −1 : I 7→ M , which
is clearly increasing as seen from (18).
46

The first observation is that (0, 0) is always an asset-management-market equilibirium.
Second, this is the only equilibrium as long as the cost c is high enough, since the benefit to
entering, η/(2γ), is bounded above (independent of cost functions).
η
, which is a particular
For part (ii), the statement can be rephrased as c(M(N ), N ) ≤ 2γ
way of requiring that c or k be small enough. Explicitly, the condition is that


η
η
c
N, N ≤
.
(B.12)
2kγ
2γ
Finally, given that I is increasing, I and M are positively related across equilibria. We
also note that the largest equilibrium is stable. This owes to the fact that, by virtue of the
lemma, the function M increases in I and then decreases to approach zero as I increases
without bound, while I −1 is increasing. It follows that the graph of M crosses that of I −1
the last time from above, for large enough I. If I = N is an equilibrium, on the other hand,
then M(N ) > I −1 (N ) and it is a stable equilibrium.
Proof of Proposition 3. Part (i) is a restatement of the fact that investors matched with
good managers rationally choose to pay the fee and invest with the manager rather than
invest as uninformed. Part (ii) is a juxtaposition of the facts that uninformed managers do
not provide any investment value and that the fee is strictly positive. Part (iii) is literally the
indifference condition for the active investors. For part (iv), we note that the outperformance
ui − f − uu = c is clearly larger if the equilibrium c is larger. Finally, part (v) follows from
expressing the aggregate outperformance as


η
− f − Af
(B.13)
I (ui − f − uu ) + A(−f ) = I
γ


using that ui − uu = γη . This outperformance is positive if and only if A ≤ I γη − f /f = I,
η
where we used f = 2γ
.
Proof of Proposition 4. (i) We offer an informal, graphical argument. As c decreases,
the blue line M(I) shifts to the right. Given that the blue line crosses the red one from
below, the number of investors I unambiguously increases, while the number of managers M
increases if and only if the red curve, thus I −1 (I), increases at the equilibrium point. The
increase in I translates into a lower η because of (12) and a lower f because of (14). Further,
from (17) we see that f I = M k so that the total fee revenue behaves is proportional to M ,
thus unimodal.
(ii) Fixing N , j can be taken high enough to ensure that


η
η
cj (M(N ), N ) = cj
N, N ≤
.
(B.14)
2kγ
2γ
Thus, for any level N , for j high enough Ij ≥ N , so that Ij tends to infinity, ηj tends to
47

zero, and fj decreases to zero. In addition, from Lemma 1 we know that Mj =
so fj Ij = Mj k → 0.

Ij η j
2γk

→ 0 and

Proof of Proposition 5. A decrease in k causes the red line M(I) to shift upwards —
i.e., M increases for every level of I.
Proof of Proposition 6.
Letting x denote either σv2 or σq2 , we note that
graphically, this translates in an upward shift in the red curve.
We rewrite (18)–(19) abstractly as
1
0 = − η + γc(M, I) ≡ g I (I, M ) = g I (I(M ), M )
2
1
M
0 = − η + γk
≡ g M (I, M ) = g M (I, M(I)),
2
I

∂η
∂x

> 0 —

(B.15)
(B.16)

and note that the fact that M crosses I −1 from above means that M0 (I) < (I −1 )0 (I), which,
using subscripts to indicate partial derivatives, translates into
−

gII
gIM
<
−
,
M
I
gM
gM

(B.17)

which is equivalent to
I M
M
gM
gI < gII gM

(B.18)

I
M
because gM
< 0 and gM
> 0.
The dependence of I and M on x is given as a solution to
 
 M
  
M
1 ∂η
1
gI
gM
Ix
,
=
I
I
1
gI gM
Mx
2 ∂x

which is given by


 
 I
M
1 ∂η
1
Ix
gM − gM
= I M
.
M
gIM − gII
Mx
2 ∂x
gM gI − gII gM

(B.19)

(B.20)

I
M
I M
M
We note that gM
− gM
< 0 and gIM − gII < 0, while the determinant gM
gI − gII gM
is
−1
negative because the function M(I) crosses I (I) from above. Thus, at an interior stable
equilibrium both I and M increase as σv2 or σq2 increases. At a corner equilibrium, given by
I = N < M−1 (M ), M increases with σv2 or σq2 , while I is constant.
The total amount of fees f I = kM increases with M .
The effect on the efficiency of the asset market, on the other hand, is not determined.

48

To see this clearly, differentiate (18) to get
1 dη
= γ (cM Mx + cI Ix )
2 dx

(B.21)

and remember that cM ≤ 0 and cI ≥ 0. Since Mx > 0 and Ix > 0, by setting one of the
dη
can
partial derivatives cM and cI to zero and keeping the other non-zero, the sign of dx
be made either positive or negative. Consequently the efficiency may increase as well as
decrease, a conclusion that translates to the fee f .
Exactly the same argument works when increasing (σv , σε ) or (σv , σε , σq ) proportionally.
Proof of Propositions 7–8. These propositions follow from the observation that the
derivation of the fee and indifference condition continues to hold, where the risk-aversion
and search cost are made investor specific. In particular, Equations (14) and (16) with γ
replaced by γi = γ R Wt−1 and c by ci give the propositions.
Proof of Proposition 9. We have
 h 1
i
 h 1
i
E[v−p|p]
E[v−p|s,p]
γη = log E e− 2 (v−p) var(v|p)
− log E e− 2 (v−p) var(v|s)
 



E [v − p|s, p]
E [v − p|p]
1
E (v − p)
− E (v − p)
≈
2
var(v|s)
var(v|p)

1
=
E[SRi2 ] − E[SRu2 ] ,
2

(B.22)
(B.23)
(B.24)

where the second line follows from linear approximations to the exponential and logarithmic
functions, and the third owes to the fact that the conditional variances are constant.
Proof of Proposition 10. We can write the (il)liquidity as a function of I given by
2

2 2

λ(I) =

σv θq
σε
var(v|s)
γ σσ2v+σ
2 + (N − I + A) var(v|p) σ 2 +σ 2 +θ 2 σ 2
v

ε

v

I + (N − I +

ε

q q

var(v|s)
A) var(v|p)

.

(B.25)

Suppose first that A = 0 and note that the numerator of λ is minimized by I = N , while
the denominator is increasing in I because var(v|s) < var(v|p) and var(v|p) decreases with I.
Consequently, λ is minimal at I = N . Given that (B.25) is a smooth function, we also infer
that λ decreases for I in a neighborhood of N — and therefore also if A lies in a suitable
neighborhood of N . Thus, if A and c are low enough that I is sufficiently close to N , then
λ decreases as c decreases further.
Once c is low enough that I = N − A, then λ is trivially constant.
Proof of Proposition 11. The effect of the cost cu is to increase the gain from trade
u
between an investor and the manager — from η to η+ cγ . Following the same line of reasoning

49

as in the proof of Proposition 6, we find
 I




M
1
1 ∂(η + cu )
gM − gM
Icu
,
= I M
M
Mc u
gIM − gII
2 ∂cu
gM gI − gII gM

(B.26)
u

)
which is positive given the proof of Proposition 6 and ∂(η+c
= 1 > 0.
∂cu
The other results follow from the facts that η decreases
 with I and that f I = kM .
1 η
u
The effect on the fee f is ambiguous because f = 2 γ + c = c may either increase or de-

crease, as one can see by considering examples for c such as c(M, I) =

c̄
M

and c(M, I) =

c̄I 2
.
M

Proof of Proposition 12. We omit the details of the derivation, which is standard. The
proof uses the well-known fact (B.1) to calculate the demands:
xji =
xu =

E[v|v − θ̂q (q − Q), sj ] − p

(B.27)

γ var(v|v − θ̂q (q − Q), sj )
E[v|v − θ̂q (q − Q)] − p
γ var(v|v − θ̂q (q − Q))

.

(B.28)

We note that, in computing the optimal demands, the following quantities are helpful:
var(v|p)−1 = σv−2 + θ̂q−2 σq−2

(B.29)

var(v|p, sj )−1 = σv−2 + σε−2 + θ̂q−2 σq−2 .

(B.30)

Furthermore, given the relation between η and the ratio of these two variances, using
θ̂q = γI σε2 , we derive


γ 2 σε2 σq2
1
η = − log 1 − 2
.
2
I + γ 2 σε2 σq2 (σε2 σv−2 + 1)

(B.31)

Remark: No agent would choose to search and invest with a second manager if the cost
and fee that she would have to pay were the same. Intuitively, this result is due to the
diminishing marginal value of information. Precisely, we have
var(v|p, sj1 , sj2 )−1 = σv−2 + 2σε−2 + θ̂q−2 σq−2
and the utility gain


1
var(v|p, sj )
γ (u2i − ui ) = log
2
var(v|p, sj1 , sj2 )


1
var(v|p)
< log
2
var(v|p, sj )
= γ (ui − uu ) .

50

(B.32)

References
Admati, Anat R., 1985, A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset securities
markets, Econometrica 53, 629–657.
Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pfleiderer, 1988, Selling and trading on information in financial
markets, The American Economic Review pp. 96–103.
Ang, Andrew, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Rui Zhao, 2008, Do funds-of-funds deserve their
fees-on-fees?, Journal of Investment Management 6, 34–58.
Bai, Jennie, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov, 2013, Have financial markets become more
informative?, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bergstresser, Daniel, John MR Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, 2009, Assessing the costs and
benefits of brokers in the mutual fund industry, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4129–4156.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. Van Binsbergen, 2012, Measuring managerial skill in the
mutual fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Black, Fischer, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529–543.
Buffa, Andrea M., Dimitri Vayanos, and Paul Woolley, 2014, Asset management contracts
and equilibrium prices, Boston University, working paper.
Cain, Matthew D., Stephen B. McKeon, and Steven Davidoff Solomon, 2015, Intermediation in private equity: The role of placement agents, Working paper, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, working paper.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, The Journal of Finance
52, 57–82.
Choi, James J, David Laibson, and Brigitte C Madrian, 2010, Why does the law of one price
fail? An experiment on index mutual funds, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1405–1432.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference in domestic portfolios, The Journal of Finance 54, 2045–2073.
Cuoco, Domenico, and Ron Kaniel, 2011, Equilibrium prices in the presence of delegated
portfolio management, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 264–296.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1981, Information aggregation in a noisy
rational expectations economy, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 221–235.

51

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Over-the-counter markets,
Econometrica 73, 1815–1847.
Dyck, Alexander, Karl V. Lins, and Lukasz Pomorski, 2013, Does active management pay?
new international evidence, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3, 200–228.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work,
Journal of Finance 25, 383–417.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross-section of
mutual fund returns, The Journal of Finance 65, 1915–1947.
French, Kenneth R, 2008, Presidential address: The cost of active investing, The Journal of
Finance 63, 1537–1573.
Fung, William, David A. Hsieh, Narayan Y Naik, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008, Hedge funds:
Performance, risk, and capital formation, The Journal of Finance 63, 1777–1803.
Garcia, Diego, and Joel M. Vanden, 2009, Information acquisition and mutual funds, Journal
of Economic Theory 144, 1965–1995.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2015, Money doctors, The Journal
of Finance 70, 91–114.
Gerakos, Joseph, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Adair Morse, 2014, Asset managers, University
of Chicago, working paper.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a
specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics
14, 71–100.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of
quarterly portfolio holdings, Journal of business pp. 393–416.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1976, On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where traders
have diverse information, Journal of Finance 31, 573–585.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hellwig, Martin F., 1980, On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal
of Economic Theory 22, 477–498.
Hortaçsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product differentiation, search costs, and competition in the mutual fund industry: A case study of the s&p 500 index funds, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, 403–456.

52

Jagannathan, Ravi, Alexey Malakhov, and Dmitry Novikov, 2010, Do hot hands exist among
hedge fund managers? an empirical evaluation, The Journal of Finance 65, 217–255.
Jain, Prem C., and Joanna Shuang Wu, 2000, Truth in mutual fund advertising: Evidence
on future performance and fund flows, The Journal of Finance 55, 937–958.
Jenkinson, Tim, Howard Jones, and Jose Vicente Martinez, 2015, Picking winners? investment consultants’ recommendations of fund managers, The Journal of Finance.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, Time-varying
fund manager skill, The Journal of Finance 69, 1455–1484.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, Unobserved actions of mutual
funds, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379–2416.
Kacperczyk, Marcin T, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, A rational
theory of mutual funds’ attention allocation, .
Kaplan, Steven N, and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital flows, The Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.
Khorana, Ajay, Henri Servaes, and Peter Tufano, 2008, Mutual fund fees around the world,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 1279–1310.
Korteweg, Arthur G., and Morten Sorensen, 2014, Skill and luck in private equity performance, University of Southern California, working paper.
Kosowski, Robert, Narayan Y Naik, and Melvyn Teo, 2007, Do hedge funds deliver alpha?
a bayesian and bootstrap analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 229–264.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Russ Wermers, and Hal White, 2006, Can mutual
fund stars really pick stocks? new evidence from a bootstrap analysis, The Journal of
Finance 61, 2551–2595.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 6, 1315–1335.
Lagos, Ricardo, 2010, Asset prices and liquidity in an exchange economy, Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 913–930.
Leland, Hayne E, 1992, Insider trading: Should it be prohibited?, Journal of Political Economy 100, 859–87.
Palvolgyi, Domotor, and Gyuri Venter, 2014, Multiple equilibria in noisy rational expectations economies, Working paper, Eotvos Lorand University.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740–781.
53

Pastor, Lubos, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active
management, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23–45.
Pedersen, Lasse Heje, 2015, Efficiently Inefficient: How Smart Money Invests and Market
Prices Are Determined. (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Rosch, Dominik M., Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Mathijs A. van Dijk, 2015, An empirical
analysis of co-movement in market efficiency measures, Rotterdam School of Management,
working paper.
Ross, Stephen A., 2005, Markets for agents: fund management, in Bruce N. Lehmann, eds.:
The Legacy of Fischer Black (Oxford University Press, New York, NY ).
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35–55.
Sialm, Clemens, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng, 2014, Home bias and local contagion: evidence
from funds of hedge funds, University of Texas at Austin, working paper.
Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, The Journal of
Finance 53, 1589–1622.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Presidential address: Investment noise and trends, Journal of
Finance 69, 1415–1453.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2005, Why are most funds open-end? Competition and the limits of
arbitrage, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 247–272.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2010, Information acquisition and underdiversification, The Review of Economic Studies 77, 779–805.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Paul Woolley, 2013, An institutional theory of momentum and reversal, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1087–1145.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, The Journal of Finance 55, 1655–
1703.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187–214.

54

