NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MODEL UNCERTAINTY AND THE EFFECT OF SHALL-ISSUE RIGHT-TO-CARRY
LAWS ON CRIME
Steven N. Durlauf
Salvador Navarro
David A. Rivers
Working Paper 21566
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21566

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

Durlauf thanks the Institute for New Economic Thinking and Vilas Trust for financial support and
the New Economic School for hospitality. Navarro and Rivers thank the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council, for financial support. We thank Joe Hotz, John Lott, Dan Nagin, and Steve Pischke
for helpful comments, and Maria Antonella Mancino, Joel Han, Nicholas Tenev, and Kegon Tan for
outstanding research assistance. This paper is dedicated to the memory of Eduardo Ley. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Steven N. Durlauf, Salvador Navarro, and David A. Rivers. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Model Uncertainty and the Effect of Shall-Issue Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime
Steven N. Durlauf, Salvador Navarro, and David A. Rivers
NBER Working Paper No. 21566
September 2015
JEL No. H0,K0
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the role of model uncertainty in explaining the different findings in the literature
regarding the effect of shall-issue right-to-carry concealed weapons laws on crime. In particular, we
systematically examine how different modeling assumptions affect the results. We find little support
for some widely used assumptions in the literature (e.g., population weights), but find that allowing
for the effect of the law to be heterogeneous across both counties and over time is important for explaining
the observed patterns of crime. In terms of model uncertainty, we find that there is substantial variation
in the estimated effects for each model across all dimensions of the model space. This suggests that
one should be cautious in using the results from any particular model to inform policy decisions.

Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
sdurlauf@ssc.wisc.edu
Salvador Navarro
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
Social Science Centre, Room 4071
London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5C2
snavarr@uwo.ca

David A. Rivers
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
Social Science Centre, Room 4024
London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5C2
drivers2@uwo.ca

1.

Introduction

Over the last two decades, there has been a dramatic expansion in the ability of
US citizens to carry concealed weapons. The US Supreme Court’s 2008 District of
Columbia vs. Heller decision established a personal right to carry arms. This decision
made inevitable that all US states establish “may-issue” laws: laws which defined
criteria under which a permit to issue concealed weapons may be obtained. A form of
these laws, “shall-issue,” which require permits to be issued unless the applicant falls
into certain narrow categories, has been adopted by 41 states. 38 of the shall-issue
states adopted the law prior to the Supreme Court decision. Shall-issue laws essentially
legalize concealed carry for the vast majority of a state’s population.
A key part of the policy debates preceding the adoption of shall-issue laws has
been the claim that legalization reduces certain crime rates. The theoretical argument is
that potential criminals considering crimes such as a street robbery will be deterred
based on beliefs about the likelihood that a potential victim is carrying a weapon.
Studies of the effects of shall-issue laws have also examined other violent crimes, such
as murder and rape. This has been done both because the deterrence logic of
concealed carry is generally felt not to hold for these types of crimes, and also because
of arguments that concealed carry may increase violent crimes by creating
opportunities, e.g., during a disagreement between people who are intoxicated.
Empirical evidence for these claims was initiated in work by Lott and Mustard
(1997); other prominent examples of work arguing in favor of a deterrent effect include
Lott (2010). This body of work in turn generated a set of studies which concluded that
claims of a deterrence effect were wrong and an artifice of special modeling
assumptions; e.g., Black and Nagin (1998), Ludwig (1998), and Ayres and Donohue
(2003). While the various participants in this literature have subsequently argued in
favor of their assumptions and criticized those of others, these further arguments have
not produced any resolution of the conflicting empirical conclusions, nor is there good
reason to think that they can. The different assumptions are not grounded in principled
behavioral arguments, i.e., substantive assumptions about economic theory; nor do they

1

involve statistical distinctions for which there is a logical basis for preferring one
approach to another.
This paper attempts to understand the conflicting claims in the concealed carry
literature. We do this by systematically exploring how different modeling assumptions
are linked to different findings on shall-issue’s effect on crime. In contrast to the
standard practice in the literature, we do not, ex ante, privilege any particular model. We
are concerned with the relative evidentiary support for a given model, as well as the
crime effect found through model averaging, but our primary objective is to explore the
evidentiary support across a set of models and to understand which assumptions do
and do not matter. Our analysis identifies a set of categories which span much of the
existing concealed carry literature. These assumptions range from specification of the
nature of the policy effect, to choices of control variables, to heteroskedasticity
corrections, to formulations of potential parameter heterogeneity, to choices of
instrumental variables. A major goal is to understand how these assumptions determine
the disparate findings in the literature.
Methodologically, the closest antecedents to this paper are Cohen-Cole, Durlauf,
Fagan, and Nagin (2009), Durlauf, Fu, and Navarro (2013), Durlauf, Navarro, and
Rivers (2010), which each explore the model space generating conflicting claims about
the deterrent effect of capital punishment. This work finds that affirmative claims of
deterrence required certain sets of modeling assumptions, which do not have strong
evidentiary support in comparison to other models.1 Bartley and Cohen (1998) also
explore robustness and fragility for concealed carry using Leamer’s (1983) extreme
bounds analysis to adjudicate differences between Lott and Mustard (1997) and Black
and Nagin (1998) with respect to choices of control variables. Our analysis considers a
much more systematic set of papers and assumptions and focuses on the nature of the
heterogeneity in deterrence estimates rather than a robustness analysis per se.
Furthermore, we employ Bayesian model averaging rather than extreme bounds

1

See Strnad (2007) for a general argument for the importance of accounting for model
uncertainty in empirical legal studies.
2

analysis as the basis for aggregating information across models.2 Our work attempts to
follow the spirit of Leamer (1978), who initiated systematic efforts to account for model
uncertainty in evaluating empirical claims, although we do not focus on extreme bounds
analysis per se.3
The modern literature on model uncertainty has focused on the development of
model averaging methods to facilitate statistical inferences which are not modelspecific.4 Eduardo Ley played a foundational role in this work both in helping to develop
a statistical framework for Bayesian model averaging (Fernandez, Ley, and Steel
(2001a)), as well as early applications (Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (2001b), Fernandez,
Ley, and Steel (2002)), which initially focused on the identification of the determinants of
heterogeneity in growth rates across countries. Ley’s work, in combination with Sala-iMartin, Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004), provided a constructive way to address model
uncertainty which has seen wide application, and hence the dedication. We will employ
model averaging methods to summarize our exploration of the model space. However,
our main goal is to understand how assumptions determine conclusions on the effects
of concealed carry laws.
As the concealed carry literature is based on observational data, the research
may be subjected to the standard critiques that are made by advocates of randomized
controlled trials and natural experiments as the gold standard for empirical social
science. A National Academy of Sciences report, Firearms and Violence (Wellford,

2

Brock, Durlauf, and West (2003) discuss why model averaging has better decisiontheoretic foundations.
3
Lott (2010) includes a broader set of control variables than we do, but eschews any
formal methods for incorporating model uncertainty in deterrence estimates (pg. 186).
Lott’s discussion conflates extreme bounds analysis with model uncertainty
assessment. While we concur with his concerns about informal sensitivity analysis, we
disagree with the rejection of systematic evaluation of deterrence effect variation across
a well-defined model space. In fairness to Lott, there is much informal robustness
analysis, in the sense of consideration of multiple specifications. Further, he is willing to
argue the merits of assumptions in a way that, in our language, corresponds to
dogmatic priors on the model space. Our approach complements his as we can show
which assumptions drive certain findings and which do not.
4
Draper (1995) and Raftery, Madigan, and Hoeting (1997) are seminal contributions
from statistics; see Doppelhofer (2008) for a concise overview of applications in
economics.
3

Pepper, and Petrie (2004)), expressed deep pessimism about the possibility that
observational data would be able to resolve the effect of shall-issue laws

“…with the current evidence it is not possible to determine that there is a causal
link between the right to carry laws and crime rates…It is also the committee’s
view that additional analysis along the lines of the current literature is unlikely to
yield results that will persuasively demonstrate a causal link between right-tocarry laws and crime rates (unless substantial numbers of states were to adopt
or repeal right-to-carry laws), because of the sensitivity of the results to model
specification.” (pg. 150-151)
This claim led one of the members of the panel, the eminent criminologist James Q.
Wilson, to dissent from the report, which is extremely rare. Wilson’s decision to dissent
is primarily based on his objections to the report’s claims that the concealed carry
literature was uninformative. Specifically, he criticizes the report for making this
conclusion based on the conflicting results on the effects of legalization generated by
models with and without controls. Wilson argues that models without controls, even if
they contradict other models, are intrinsically uninteresting.

“Suppose Professor Jones wrote a paper saying that increasing the number of
police in a city reduced the crime rate and Professor Smith wrote a rival paper
saying that cities with few police officers have low crime rates. Suppose that
neither Smith nor Jones used any control variables, such as income,
unemployment, population density, or the frequency with which offenders are
sent to prison in reaching their conclusions. If such papers were published, they
would be rejected by the committee out of hand for the obvious reason they
failed to produce a complete account of the factors that affect the crime rate.”
(pg. 270)
Wilson’s dissent, in turn, invoked the rejoinder

“…Everyone (including Wilson and the rest of the committee) agrees that
control variables matter, but there is disagreement on the correct set. Thus the
fact that there is no way to statistically test for the correct specification and that
researchers using reasonable specifications find different answers are highly
relevant. Given the existing data and methods, the rest of the committee sees
little hope in resolving this fundamental statistical problem.” (pg. 273-274)

4

As discussed in Durlauf, Navarro, and Rivers (2008), Wilson has the stronger side of
the argument. With reference to model uncertainty, model averaging and related
methods can constructively address the issues raised by the majority in the report. And
of course, one can just as easily criticize assumptions implicit in randomized trials. Our
position, which follows the spirit of Heckman (2005), is that there is no single privileged
type of empirical strategy in economics, which does not mean that methodological
arguments are vacuous, but rather that judgments need to be exercised with respect to
assumptions.
Our empirical findings may be summarized as follows. One assumption in the
literature, the use of population weights to control for heteroskedasticity in crime rates,
has so little evidentiary support that it is reasonably excluded from the analysis. For the
remaining assumptions, the effects of the law on crime range across positive and
negative values. With partial exceptions involving the specification of the way that shallissue law effects are measured and whether the laws are treated as endogenous, there
is no simple one-to-one mapping between any one assumption and uniformly positive or
negative set of estimates conditional on the assumption. Together, the full range of
assumption disagreements matter for the disagreements in conclusions.
We also employ model averaging to provide a summary evaluation of the modelspecific estimates that we study. Bayesian model averaging combines priors over the
model space, with a measure of data fit, to generate posterior probabilities for each
model, which are used to weight models in computing effects averaged across models.
Interestingly, conditional on a uniform prior on the model space, the posterior
model probabilities are almost entirely concentrated on a single model for both property
and violent crimes, although the models turn out to differ.5 For property crime, the
model-averaged point estimates imply a negative (deterrent) effect on crime in the short
run, but a positive and increasing effect on crime in the long run. For violent crime, the
results indicate positive effects on crime in both the short- and long-run.
Model averaging can help summarize, or in this case essentially eliminate, the
large degree of uncertainty associated with the choice of a model. However, this
5

But see Section 9, where we discuss sensitivity to the choice of priors and how this
affects which models receive non-negligible weights.
5

approach judges models based on the measure of fit implicit in the calculation of
posterior model probabilities, a decision rule that not all researchers/policymaker will
agree with. There is also likely to be disagreement over the selection of priors.
Absent other formal rules for either aggregating information over models, or for
selecting a particular model, the large degree of variation in estimated effects across
models implies that one should be cautious in using the results from any one particular
model to guide policy decisions. Put differently, a researcher/policymaker needs to be
very convinced that there is a strong basis for the particular model (or models) selected,
and for their associated assumptions. By the standard of Leamer’s extreme bounds
analysis, in which changes of sign across a model space are equated to fragility, there
is no assumption that can avoid fragility per se, although one assumption gives most
effect estimates the same sign.

2. Model uncertainty and policy effects: basic ideas

Our objective in this analysis is to explicitly incorporate model uncertainty into
descriptions of the evidentiary support for a given empirical claim. The standard
approach to policy evaluation, abstractly, is simply the construction of the posterior
probability for outcome o conditional on policy p , data D , and a model m ,
Pr ( o D, p, m )

(1)

This distribution can be used to compute first and second moments E ( o D, p, m ) and
var ( o D, p, m ) , as well as the posterior probability of the data, which provides a measure

of goodness of fit:
Pr ( D p, m ) .

6

(2)

Models may be understood as collections of assumptions which together provide
a statistical specification (see Brock and Durlauf (2014) for elaboration). The new model
uncertainty literature can be understood as relaxing the conditioning in equations (1)
and (2) on a single model and providing new ways to report evidence on policy effects.
Instead of a single model, one employs a set of candidate models, M ; elements m of
this set are differentiated by the assumptions from which they are constituted. From this
perspective, the identity of the “true” model is one of the unobservables for which an
analyst must account in drawing inferences. Further, the true model is itself of no
intrinsic interest. The objective of a policy analysis is solely to evaluate the effect of the
law on criminal behavior.
When assumptions are justified by economic or econometric theory, then it is of
course appropriate to condition empirical conclusions on them. If such a priori
information exists, then a researcher is justified in employing a dogmatic prior on the
model space, i.e., assigning Pr ( m ) = 1 to some model. Similarly if some assumptions
warrant a prior probability 1, then those models which contradict these assumptions
should receive prior probability 0. However, for a context such as concealed carry and
crime, the differences in modeling assumptions which have been used in competing
analyses do not, as we argue below, admit resolution on an a priori basis. While
arguments can be made in favor of or against particular assumptions, the models in the
literature are all plausible candidates for the crime process.
This general critique of the use of a single model applies to the concealed carry
literature at several levels. First, it means that there is no principled basis for functional
form assumptions or for the choice of control variables that are found in a given model.
Becker’s (1968) deterrence model involves the marginal costs and benefits of a
potential crime, but is mute on the forms of the cost and benefit functions, nor does the
theory say anything about their determinants. Choices of functional forms and control
variables involve judgments. Second, uncertainty exists with respect to the validity of
instruments. Unsurprisingly, a number of crime determinants are endogenous and so
instruments are used to account for correlation between them and the unobserved
heterogeneity in crime rates across localities. However, the absence of a principled

7

basis for constructing the crime model means that the literature has relied on ad hoc
informal arguments for the validity of particular instruments.
A third problem is that there is no reason to think that the parameters of a crime
regression should be invariant to other characteristics (either measured or unmeasured)
of the polities, i.e., it is not clear whether data taken across localities obeys the needed
exchangeability assumptions which underlie analyses based on common coefficients.6 It
is easy to identify reasons for parameter heterogeneity. For example, Southern states
where people are taught at early ages how to handle weapons, and where guns are
very much a part of the culture; and Northeastern states where guns are not common
among regular citizens, can be expected to exhibit different coefficients in a crime
regression that includes variables such as the conditional probability of arrest given
crime commission, gun prevalence, or the presence of a concealed weapons carry law.
The Lucas (1976) critique, further, can be argued to imply that the parameters in a
regression of the type employed in the concealed carry literature will depend on the
polity’s criminal sanction regime.
All of these issues suggest that model uncertainty is likely to play a key role in
crime regressions. In this respect, the literature on shall-issue carry laws is more of a
demonstration of sensitivity of policy effect calculations to model assumptions than a
body of work from which conclusions may be drawn. In fact, if the deterrent effects are
estimated because of their use in policy evaluation, decision theory requires that model
uncertainty be part of the appropriate loss function calculation.
Model averaging, when the loss function does not depend on the “true” model,
can provide a sufficient characterization of policy effects for policy comparisons if the
policymaker is solving a standard statistical decision problem with uncertainty; see

6

A collection of random variables { x1,..., xn } is exchangeable if the “labels” associated
with each variable (i.e., the subscripts) are irrelevant to describe their dependence. That
is, if Pr( x1,..., x n ) = Pr( xπ (1) ,..., xπ (1) ) for all permutations π defined on the set {1,.., n } .

Hence, if the collection is i.i.d., it is exchangeable; but the converse need not be true.
We emphasize exchangeability since we believe that it captures the idea that the social
science commitments of a researcher, by choice of modeling assumptions, reduce
unobserved heterogeneity to random variables on which one is willing to assume some
form of symmetry in their joint density; see Brock and Durlauf (2001).
8

Brock, Durlauf, and West (2003) for a formal argument and elaboration. Averaging
across models takes place by first calculating the posterior probability of the data:
Pr ( D p, m ) = ∫ Pr ( D p, m,θ m ) Pr (θ m p, m ) d (θ m ).

(3)

Equation (3) is often referred to as the integrated likelihood or as the marginal
likelihood. The right hand side of equation (3) makes it clear that the marginal
likelihood’s measure of fit consists of two parts: the fit of the model to the data as
described by the data likelihood conditional on the parameters ( Pr ( D p, m,θ m ) ), and the
prior probability that the parameters actually takes this value ( Pr (θ m p, m ) ). Notice that,
while increasing the number of parameters will increase the posterior probability of the
data by increasing the likelihood, it will decrease it by increasing the number of terms in
the prior. For this reason, we refer to the fit measured by the marginal likelihood as
“complexity-penalized fit”.
The posterior probability for each model can then be computed as

Pr ( m | D, p ) =

Pr ( D | p, m ) Pr ( m )

∑ Pr ( D | p, j) Pr ( j )

,

(4)

j ∈M

for some model priors Pr ( m ) . The model-averaged policy effect is then obtained by
weighting the estimated policy effects for each model (i.e., the outcome o ) by the
posterior probability for each model,

E ( o | D, p ) =

∑ E ( o | D, p, m ) Pr ( m | D, p ) .

m∈M

Its variance follows from

9

(5)

Var ( o | D, p ) =

∑ ⎡⎣Var ( o | D, p, m ) + E ( o | D, p, m )

m∈M

2

⎤ Pr ( m | D, p ) − E ( o | D, p )2 .
⎦

(6)

There are good reasons, however, why averaging using the posterior
probabilities in (4) across models may not be sufficient for an analysis whose objective
is to communicate evidence on policy effects. One reason concerns the specification of
the priors on the model space. We regard this as a qualitatively different problem from
the specification of priors for model-specific parameters. Why? While we have argued
that there are not good reasons to possess dogmatic priors based on economic or
statistical theory, at least for the context we study, this claim does not speak to the issue
of how to construct priors for the model space.
Consider the case in which there is model uncertainty depending on whether one
assumes rational or adaptive expectations in an environment. Different economists
would have very different priors based on the totality of social science knowledge each
possesses, or because each evaluates a common knowledge set differently in terms of
its implications for which model is correct. While the concealed carry literature does not
contain such stark disagreements on economic principles, authors have made
principled arguments in favor of various assumptions, which means that priors over the
model space would range widely. The judgments which underlie an element of a model
space reflect different views on assumptions, so while it may be reasonable to ask a
policymaker to relax a dogmatic model space prior, it is not reasonable to expect him to
only be interested in results in which assumptions or their negation receive equal a
priori weight.
Second, the literature on model robustness (Hansen and Sargent (2007)) has
given reasons to believe that preferences can exhibit ambiguity aversion with respect to
model uncertainty. In such cases, the worst case scenario for a policy will depend on
the identity of the true model, which in turn cannot be determined independently from
the policymaker’s preferences.
Both the classical Bayesian and modern ambiguity-based decision-theoretic
approaches differ from the way in which economists typically make policy
10

recommendations. By this, we mean that policy implications of alternative models are
most often advocated on the basis that one analysis is better than another, which in our
language, amounts to a claim that one set of assumptions is preferred to another.
Relative to a decision-theoretic approach, these disagreements do not involve formal
rules for comparing or aggregating claims across models. Policymakers are unlikely to
possess such rules either, let alone the training to compare the merits of different
empirical analyses.
These considerations imply that it is valuable to report information about the (unweighted) distribution of policy effects associated with (1) and (2). As first argued in
Brock, Durlauf, and West (2007), policy dispersion plots, which visually represent the
set of values of a policy effect across a model space, are useful in helping a
policymaker to understand policy-effect/model dependence. Durlauf, Fu, and Navarro
(2013) extend this idea by creating dispersion plots in which they organize models by
classes of assumptions, allowing a reader to identify which assumptions do and do not
matter for heterogeneity in model-specific policy effects. For example, a researcher may
have dogmatic priors with respect to some assumptions (e.g., use of instrumental
variables to address endogeneity of regressors) and so only wish to consider subsets of
the model space. The organization of the variety of estimates by broad assumption
classes illustrates that different researchers choosing particular models may find (and in
our case will find), different answers, even conditional on a subset of assumptions.
Hence, while model averaging is a useful way to provide scalar statistics (e.g.,
moments) for a policy effect, we believe policy dispersion plots are valuable as well.

3. Model space

As we have emphasized, the lack of scholarly consensus over the effect of
concealed carry laws on crime has centered on differences in the modeling choices
employed by various researchers. Since there is essentially an infinite number of
modeling choices available to a researcher, we employ the notion of exchangeability as
a guiding principle. The basic idea is to consider whether the model selected by the
11

researcher eliminates enough differences between (sets) of observations, e.g., Alameda
county in California and Jackson county in Mississippi, that one can assume that the
residuals are no longer a function of the identity of the particular observation. This is not
to say that violating exchangeability invalidates a model. Instead, one should consider
whether the sources of non-exchangeability invalidate the purpose for which the model
was built. Hence, when choosing a model space, we consider aspects like control
variable choice, specification of the effect of the law, heterogeneity in the effect of the
law both in the cross-section and over time, etc., that may lead to violations in
exchangeability that are likely to affect our estimates of the effect of the law on crime.
The model space we consider in this paper takes into account some of the key
sources of debate in the literature including modeling how the effect of the law varies
over time, controlling for demographics, modeling time trends in crime rates, and
dealing with the potential endogeneity of the laws. In addition, we also include some
dimensions to the model space that we feel are particularly relevant to the issue, but
that have received little or no attention in the literature. This includes the introduction of
additional relevant control variables, allowing the parameters of interest to be
heterogeneous, dealing with the potential endogeneity of arrest rates, and the use of
population weights. Below we discuss each dimension of the model space in detail. In
addition to identifying assumptions which differentiate existing papers, we also note
some cases in which the literature seems to have ignored some natural variations of
those specifications which have appeared so far.

i.

formulation of shall-issue laws as a crime determinant

Perhaps surprisingly, there has been disagreement in the literature as to the
formulation of the impact of shall-issue laws in the statistical crime model. These
disagreements depend on how one characterizes the dynamic effects of legalization.
The first part of the literature identified concealed carry effects using a dummy variable
to indicate whether the law is in place or not in a given location-time pair. This
specification has a substantive implication, as it entails that the introduction of the law
generates a permanent shift up or down in the crime rate. However, suppose that crime
12

rates were increasing in a location prior to the implementation of the law. Suppose
further that the effect of the law was to reverse this trend, generating a subsequent
decreasing rate of crime. If one just measured crime before and after the introduction of
the law, average crime rates would be similar, leading to the incorrect conclusion that
the law had little or no effect on crime.
An alternative to the dummy variable model that seeks to account for this
possibility is to allow for different time trends in crime before and after the law. This
approach has been used in John Lott’s work (Lott and Mustard (1997), Lott (2010)), and
has been referred to in the literature as the “spline” model (Ayres and Donohue (2003)).
If we let Yi ,t denote the log of the crime rate in county i at time t , and let t 0 denote the
time at which the law is implemented, a (very basic) spline model can be written as
Yi ,t = ( t − t0 ) ⎡⎣1( t0 > t ) π b + 1( t0 < t ) π a ⎤⎦ + εi ,t .

(7)

Here π b and π a measure the trends before and after the law is implemented.
The spline model of equation (7) allows for pre- and post-law trends. However, it
does not allow for the law to have any immediate impact on crime. As a response, a
“hybrid” specification proposed by Ayres and Donohue (2003) incorporates both the
trends of the spline model as well as the discrete shift allowed by the dummy model.
These two models are an attempt to account for differing temporal effects of the
law in order to improve on the pure dummy model. However, they both have the feature
that, as time elapses, the trend will keep pushing crime either up or down indefinitely.
As we illustrate next, this feature can lead to paradoxical results.
Take the example in Figure 1 which shows a case in which crime rates are
decreasing, then the law is implemented, the trend flattens and after a few years the
trend flattens even more. The real effect of the law is that it worsens crime (since it was
decreasing at a higher rate before the law was implemented) in the short run, and
makes it even worse in the long run.
How will a hybrid trend specification behave relative to this hypothetical pattern?
The pre-law trend will match exactly the real trend, but the post-law trend will
13

overestimate the effect in the short run and underestimate it in the long run. More
importantly, the dummy will show an immediate shift to a lower crime rate, i.e., it will
show that the law decreased crime immediately, even though the only effect of the law
is to worsen crime both in the short run and in the long run. The point we want to
illustrate is that one should be very careful when interpreting estimates from these
models, a task that gets even harder once the effect of the law is allowed to depend on
other variables as well (as we do in the section on parameter heterogeneity below).

ii.

control variables

Another important source of disagreement surrounds the selection of control
variables to include in the empirical model.7 These disagreements involve different
types of variables.
It is common to include control variables for socio-economic status, age, and
gender, in aggregated empirical analyses of crime. While their inclusion is, abstractly,
justified by choice-theoretic models of criminal behavior such as Becker (1968), there
are many potential measures of these underlying characteristics which are available for
use, and theory does not provide guidance on how to proceed. For example, Lott
includes a set of variables measuring the proportion of people in each county-year pair
that fall into different bins defined by race (white, black, and other), gender, and age
(divided into six groups).8 In contrast, Ayres and Donohue (2003) argue that the number
of such variables is excessive due to these variables being highly collinear and suggest
including only the subset pertaining to black and white males, since these groups
contribute to the vast majority of crime. They find that limiting the set of demographic
controls causes significant changes in the estimated effect of gun laws on crime, and in
some instances leads to a change in the sign of the effect.

7

For a discussion of these issues related to measuring the effect of the death penalty on
murder see Cohen-Cole, Durlauf, Fagan, and Nagin (2009), and Durlauf, Fu, and
Navarro (2013).
8
For example, one such bin would be “black, female, and between the ages of 20 and
29”, and the value would be between 0 and 1.
14

In addition to differences in demographics across localities, there may be other
factors related to location that are relevant for explaining crime rates. For example,
attitudes towards gun safety, violence, or even gun usage in general may differ across
various parts of the country. County-level fixed effects are one way to control for these
differences, and are commonly included in empirical models. However, fixed effects do
not capture any time-varying differences across counties. In order to address this, we
consider two additional variables that vary across both county and time and are
potentially related to both crime rates and gun control laws: gun prevalence and the
level of urbanization.
If one believes that the legalization of concealed weapons has an effect on
crime rates, then the same logic justifying this makes it plausible that the prevalence of
guns in the population directly affects crime. Since the presence of shall-issue laws
and the degree of gun prevalence might be correlated, one may want to include a
measure of gun prevalence in the regression equation.
While gun prevalence is not a standard control variable in the literature, there
are a few papers that include it. However, as is the case with demographic controls,
there is no consensus on the effect of inclusion. Duggan (2001) estimates a positive
correlation between gun prevalence and crime rates, but finds that controlling for gun
prevalence does not affect the relationship between gun laws and crime. Moody and
Marvel (2005) look only at the correlation between gun prevalence and crime, but find
no systematic relationship. They attribute the difference between their results and
Duggan’s to the choice of proxy variable for gun prevalence and differences in the
number of control variables for age included in the regressions.
In addition to controlling for gun prevalence, we also expand the model space
by introducing a measure of the level of urbanization in a county as a control variable.
As is the case with gun prevalence, the degree to which a county is urban or rural may
be related to both crime rates and the probability that a concealed carry law is in place.

iii.

time trends

15

Aggregate crime data often contain low frequency movements which are
unexplained relative to the substantive theoretical commitments involved in a crime
regression. As a result, there is controversy over how to model this type of unobserved
heterogeneity, which involves the specification of time trends.9 One option is to include
time-specific dummy variables that control for changes in crimes rates that affect all
localities equally. This allows for full flexibility in how crime rates evolve over time, but
does not allow these effects to vary by location. An alternative option is to include
region-time trends, which allow for differences across region, at the expense of less
flexibility in the time dimension.

iv.

parameter heterogeneity

A fourth source of model uncertainty is parameter heterogeneity. While
parameter heterogeneity has not been systematically explored in the concealed carry
literature, it has been shown to matter in other crime contexts, e.g., Shepherd (2005).
One exception is Black and Nagin (1998) who argue that affirmative evidence that
concealed carry reduces crime is sensitive to whether or not data from Florida are
included in the analysis. Black and Nagin argue that this sensitivity reflects the effects of
the Mariel boatlift on crime rates. Concealed carry legalization in Florida occurs during
the post-boatlift crime increase. Black and Nagin attribute the subsequent decrease in
crime to the absorption of this population into Florida society and the identification of
criminals who came in the boatlift, not concealed carry per se.
Black and Nagin’s argument should be understood in the context of whether
crime observations from different US counties can be thought of as draws from a
common model with fixed parameters.10 Essentially, the issue is whether, after
controlling for a large set of variables, one should assume that the effect of concealed
carry on crime is independent of the identity of the observation. For example, should
one assume that the effect of the law is the same for county-time pairs where gun
9

See Durlauf, Navarro, and Rivers (2008) for further discussion.
Brock and Durlauf (2001) provide an analysis of parameter heterogeneity as an
example of an exchangeability violation and discuss how such violations can, if not
accounted for, create spurious policy conclusions.
10

16

prevalence is very large as for county-time pairs in which there are few guns amongst
the population?
The vast majority of the literature implicitly assumes that the effects of a policy, in
this case shall-issue laws, are the same for all states and counties, in all time
periods.11,12 However, the response of crime rates to these laws may depend on a
number of factors. We consider three factors that we believe could create heterogeneity
in the effects of gun laws.
First, we allow for the laws to have differing effects depending on the level of
urbanization in a county. Response to the laws may be very different in rural versus
urban areas. For example, in rural areas, since people are more spread out, there may
be fewer confrontations involving weapons. It may also be the case that in rural areas
people know each other better, and therefore are more informed about who has a
weapon and who does not, potentially altering the benefit of having a concealed
weapon.
We also include a specification that allows for the effects of the laws to vary by
region. Some regions may have differing attitudes regarding the use and safety of
firearms, which could lead to different effects of the law.
Finally, we allow for the effects of the laws to depend on the prevalence of guns
in a county. Since shall-issue laws allow individuals to carry concealed weapons, these
laws could have a very different effect in areas with very few guns to begin with,
compared to areas with many guns. For example, allowing people to carry concealed
weapons in a place where gun prevalence is very low might have a small effect on
crime as very few people have guns. From the perspective of a criminal, the probability
of ending up in a confrontation with an armed victim is minimal, even if they are allowed
to carry concealed weapons in principle.

11

Examples of papers which allow for parameter heterogeneity in a crime context are
Black and Nagin (1998), Shepherd (2005), Durlauf, Navarro, and Rivers (2010), and
Durlauf, Fu, and Navarro (2013).
12
The spline and hybrid models discussed above allow for the law to affect the linear
trend in crime rates, but do not allow the effect to depend on calendar time, nor do they
allow for non-linear trends.
17

v.

instrumental variables

The concealed carry literature has attempted to address the endogeneity of the
timing of legalization. Intuitively, relatively high (or low) crime rates may have
determined which laws are passed, and not the other way around. We follow the
convention in the literature and use the Republican vote share in the most recent
presidential election to instrument for the laws.13
An additional concern that has received less attention in the literature is that the
arrest rates for various crimes may also be endogenously determined. For example, if a
county experiences an increase in the rate of a given crime, it may find it more difficult
to find and arrest the perpetrators of those crimes with a given set of police resources.
Alternatively, a county may respond to an increase in crime by allocating additional
resources towards catching criminals. In either case, arrest rates would be endogenous.
In order to control for the endogeneity of arrest rates, we employ an instrumental
variable strategy that is common in other literatures, particularly industrial organization,
but to our knowledge has not been applied in crime contexts. We use the so-called
Hausman-Nevo instruments (see Hausman (1995) and Nevo (2001)). These
instruments exploit the panel structure of the data, and are constructed as a function
(often the average) of the endogenous variable in other locations. In our context, we
implement this in the following way. For each county-time pair, we compute the average
arrest rate in all regions of the US in that period, excluding the region in which that
county is located.
The identifying assumption behind this instrumental variable strategy is that
arrest rates for a given type of crime are correlated across different counties (for
instance, it may be easier to catch perpetrators of certain types of crimes), but the arrest
rates in other regions of the US do not endogenously respond to variation in the local
crime rate.

13

The Republican vote share is used extensively in the literature as an instrument for
shall-issue laws, e.g., Lott and Mustard (1997), Ayres and Donohue (2003), among
many others.
18

vi.

population weights

Our final form of model uncertainty centers on population weights. The use of
population weights has become standard practice in empirical crime studies. There are
various reasons for why one may want to include weights,14 but the usual argument is
based on concern regarding heteroskedasticity of the residuals. The intuition for wanting
to weight aggregate observations (typically at the state or county level) is the following.
Consider a simple linear probability model for the probability an individual j in county i in
period t commits a crime ρ j ,i ,t :

ρ j ,i ,t = X ′j ,i ,t β + η j ,i ,t ,

(8)

where X j ,i ,t is a vector of observable characteristics, and η j ,i ,t is a mean-zero error term
with variance σ 2 . If we average this equation over individuals within each county and
period, we obtain the following model for the county-time-specific crime rate:

N i ,t

Pi ,t =

∑ρ
j =1

j ,i ,t

Ni ,t

= X ′i ,t γ + ε i ,t ,

(9)

Ni ,t

where X 'i ,t =

∑X′
j =1

Ni ,t

j ,i ,t

and Ni ,t is the number of individuals in county c in period t.
Ni ,t

Since the residual in this new equation is given by ε i ,t =
by

σ2
Ni ,t

∑η
j =1

j ,i ,t

Ni ,t

, its variance will be given

. The aggregate residual, the one obtained by running county-level panel data

14

See Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge (2013) for a useful discussion of the various
justifications for using weights and the misapplication of weights in empirical work.
19

regressions, is therefore heteroskedastic in proportion to the county population.
Weighting by population makes the residual homoskedastic and generates the correct
standard errors in a regression.
There are two problems with this argument. First, it ignores the possibility that
location-time-specific unobservables are present, which we denote as Λ i ,t . With
individual-level data, we could directly control for this form of heterogeneity using
distinct location-specific, time-specific, and location-time-specific fixed effects. However,
since we only observe county-level aggregate data, unobserved determinants of the
crime rate that vary by location and over time, such as unmeasured demographic and
socio-economic factors, as well as any other crime-related policy changes will enter the
error term via Λ i ,t . Adding them to equation (9) gives us the following equation for the
county-level crime rate:
Pi ,t = X 'i ,t γ + ν i ,t ,

(10)

where ν i ,t = Λ i ,t + ε i ,t . Since the average population in a county is over 100,000, and the
variance of ε is equal to

σ2
Ni ,t

, the variance of ε will tend to be quite small. Therefore,

unless the variation in county-level unobservables is extremely small in relation to
variation in individual unobservable determinants of crime, the variance of error term in
equation (10) will be dominated by the variance of Λ i ,t . Consequently, the use of
population weights will overweight observations from more populous counties, leading
to invalid confidence intervals, and potentially misleading point estimates.
The second problem is that in the majority of the literature on the effects of shallissue right-to-carry laws (and in the models we consider in this paper), the crime rate is
measured in logs, not in levels. Therefore the intuition described above no longer
applies because the error in the aggregate crime equation is no longer a simple average
of the underlying individual errors. For these two reasons we also consider models that
do not use population weights.

20

Our model space consists of all possible combinations of the model elements
described above. The size of the model space is then the product of the dimensions of
each element: formulation of the law’s effect on crime (3), demographic controls (2),
additional covariates (3), time effects (2), parameter heterogeneity—none, gun
prevalence (GP), urban, region, GP and urban, GP and region (6), IV/non-IV (2), and
population weights (2), for a total of 864 models.
When we include interactions between the effect of shall-issue laws with gun
prevalence, urbanization, and region we also separately include these variables as
controls. As a result some models already contain the additional covariates (gun
prevalence and urban dummies).15 This leaves us with 624 distinct models, for each
property and violent crime. In order to organize our discussion of the model space, we
first define a baseline model and then fill out the model space by considering deviations
from this baseline in each possible dimension. See Figure 2 for a characterization of the
model space.
All models employ the log of the crime rate per 100,000 people as the dependent
variable. Covariates which always appear are a measure of the shall-issue law, the
arrest rate, socio-economic controls, age and race controls, time effects, and county
fixed effects. All of the models under consideration are variations of this baseline
specification:16
15

Region dummies are already implicit in every model given the presence of countylevel fixed effects.
16
For the instrumental variables models, we also have equations corresponding to the
EndogenousVariablei ,t =

α ' InstrumentVectori ,t +
γ 1PovertyRatei ,t + γ 2UnemploymentRatei ,t +
γ 3Populationi ,t + γ 4RealPerCapitaPersonalIncomei ,t +
endogenous regressors:

γ 5RealPerCapitaUnemploymentInsurancei ,t +
γ 6RealPerCapitaIncomeMaintenancei ,t +
γ 7RealPerCapitaRetirementPaymentsi ,t +
γ 8 Age / RaceControlsi ,t + ∑TimeEffects +
t

∑ CountyEffects
i

21

i

+ v i ,t .

⎛
⎞
# Crimesi ,t
=
ln ⎜
⎜ Population / 100,000 ⎟⎟
i ,t
⎝
⎠
β1LawDummy i ,t + β 2 ArrestRatei ,t +

γ 1PovertyRatei ,t + γ 2UnemploymentRatei ,t +
γ 3Populationi ,t + γ 4RealPerCapitaPersonalIncomei ,t +
γ 5RealPerCapitaUnemploymentInsurancei ,t +

(11)

γ 6RealPerCapitaIncomeMaintenancei ,t +
γ 7RealPerCapitaRetirementPaymentsi ,t +
γ 8 Age / RaceControlsi ,t + ∑TimeEffects +
t

∑ CountyEffects

i

+ ε i ,t .

i

In the baseline model, both the shall-issue laws and the arrest rate are treated as
endogenous. As we discussed above, we use the share of people who voted
Republican in the most recent presidential election and the average arrest rate in the
other regions of the county to instrument for each variable respectively.

4. Implementation

In this section we discuss issues related to estimating all the models contained in
the model space described above. Estimation is performed via a MCMC Gibbs sampler.
The most general version of the class of models we estimate is an instrumental
variables model with county fixed effects and population weights. Since all of the
models we consider are special cases of this, we only discuss how to implement the
general version that includes all of these features.
Let i = 1,...,I index counties and t = 1,...,T index time. The general version of the
model can be written as
Yi ,t = X 'i ,t β + W 'i ,t α + ψ i + εi ,t ,

22

(12)

where the

j = 1,..., J

elements of X i ,t

are potentially correlated with εi ,t

(i.e.,

endogenous) while the h = 1,..., H elements of Wi ,t are assumed exogenous. When we
estimate models where the law and the arrest rate are assumed exogenous, we simply
make X i ,t a subset of Wi ,t . We also assume access to a set of k = 1,..., K instruments
Zi ,t such that
X i ,t , j = Z 'i ,t γ j + W 'i ,t λ j + ζ i , j + υi ,t , j

(13)

for all j , with both Zi ,t and Wi ,t assumed to be independent of υi ,t , j .
Let Qi ,t denote the population of county i at time t , and let qi ,t = Qi ,t .17 To

⎛ τ
allow for heteroskedastic errors, we assume that εi ,t ~ N ⎜⎜ 0, ε
⎝ Qi ,t
independent

from

ψ ,ζ .

This

allows

us

to

define

⎞
⎛ τ v,j
⎟⎟ ,υi ,t , j ~ N ⎜⎜ 0,
⎠
⎝ Qi ,t

new

random

⎞
⎟⎟ , jointly
⎠

variables

ε i ,t = qi ,t εi ,t ~ N ( 0,τ ε ) and vi ,t = qi ,tυi ,t ~ N ( 0,τ v ) such that

Yi ,t = X 'i ,t β + W 'i ,t α +

ε i ,t
qi ,t

X i ,t , j = Z 'i ,t γ j + W 'i ,t λ j +

v i ,t
qi ,t

(14)

.

We do not specify anything about the dependence of ψ ,ζ on either X ,W and/or Z .
To construct the Gibbs sampler, we employ an Empirical Bayes approach (see
Casella (1985) for an introduction) in which we first estimate the parameters γ , λ and fix

17

For models that do not include population weights, Qi ,t may be set equal to 1 without
loss of generality.
23

them throughout the rest of the analysis.18 The full details of the algorithm we employ
can be found in Durlauf, Navarro and Rivers (2014); here we sketch the basic ideas.
The first step in estimation of the model involves the county fixed effects.
Traditional Bayesian approaches deal with fixed effects using a “mixed” effect strategy
in which the distribution of the effect is parameterized, allowing it to depend on
moments of the distribution of X ,W , Z . This approach introduces many additional
parameters to estimate, which increases the computational burden, and may lead to
imprecision in estimates of the parameters of interest. Furthermore, there is no basis for
imposing any particular dependence structure between X ,W , Z and ψ ,ζ , or making
particular distributional assumptions on ψ ,ζ . As we discuss below, adopting traditional
methods to remove the fixed effects (i.e., within or first differencing), present both
implementation and empirical challenges that make them unappealing in our context.
Instead, we introduce a new procedure, which we call “random first differencing”,
that eliminates the fixed effects by differencing the data with respect to a fixed, but
randomly chosen period. To see how this procedure works, let ri denote a random
period in which county i is observed in the data and, for any random variable V , let
Vi ,Δt = Vi ,t − Vi ,ri . By taking differences with respect to the randomly chosen period ri , we

have

18

An alternative approach is to include an additional block in the Gibbs sampler
associated with γ , λ and sample these parameters as well. We chose not to take this
approach for two reasons. First, sampling these parameters substantially increases the
computation burden, as the dimension of Z and W can be quite large. Second, the
marginal likelihood in equation (3) penalizes models with additional parameters.
However, the goal of the analysis is to judge models from the perspective of how well
they do regarding explaining the crime rate. Hence γ , λ are essentially “nuisance”
parameters that should not be considered when judging the model. Our approach
avoids the penalty associated with these extra parameters, hence improving the fit of
models with many instrumented endogenous variables relative to models with less or
none (i.e., OLS).
24

Yi ,Δt = X i',Δt β + W i ,'tΔα −
X i,t , j = Z i ,t γ j + W i ,t λ j −
Δ

'Δ

'Δ

ε i ,r

i

qi ,ri

+

v i ,ri
qi ,ri

+

ε i ,t
qi ,t
v i ,t
qi ,t

(15)
.

The main advantage of this “random first differencing” procedure is that, if we complete
the data and condition on ε i ,ri (and the observed qi ), then

ε i ,t
qi ,t

−

ε i ,r

i

qi ,ri

will be independent

over time, and the same is true for v j .
By comparison, using the traditional within differencing approach leads to a
complicated joint distribution of the errors over time. This substantially increases the
computational burden of the algorithm compared to the conditionally i.i.d. data
generated by our procedure.
Random first differencing also solves the problem associated with just firstdifferencing the data when you have a dummy variable that switches only once per
county (as we do for the case of the law). In this case, the only identifying power in the
data is given by that one period switch in the dummy, causing the researcher to rely on
a very small portion of the variation in the data. Our procedure also overcomes the
difficulties associated with differencing with respect to a fixed period, in which case the
results can be sensitive to the period that is chosen.19
In order to deal with the potential heteroskedasticity associated with population
weights, we simply pre-multiply the random first differenced data by q i ,t . Letting

(

Vi ,Δt ,q = qi ,t Vi ,t − Vi ,ri

) for any random variable V , the model is given by

19

By doing random first differencing, we are effectively integrating against the
distribution of the data, which leads to something that resembles the within differences
fixed effect type estimator.
25

Yi ,Δt ,q = X i',Δt ,q β + W i ,'tΔ,qα −

qi ,t
qi ,ri

X i,t , j = Z i ,t γ j + W i,t λ j −
Δ ,q

' Δ ,q

' Δ,q

qi ,t
qi ,ri

ε i ,r + ε i ,t
i

(16)
v i ,ri + v i ,t .

The remaining step for implementation is the specification of priors for the
parameters. For the regression coefficients β ,α we specify independent normal priors

(

)

N 0,σ 2 , with σ 2 = 10 in our baseline estimates.20 In order to specify priors for the

distributions of the residuals, notice that one can rewrite the crime equation as
Yi ,Δt ,q =
J
.
⎛ J
⎞ q ⎛ J
⎞ J
Z i',Δt ,q ∑ γ j β j + W i ,'tΔ,q ⎜ ∑ λ j β j + α ⎟ − i ,t ⎜ ∑ v i ,ri β j + ε i ,ri ⎟ + ∑ v i ,t β j + ε i ,t .
j =1
⎝ j =1
⎠ qi ,ri ⎝ j =1
⎠ j =1

J

Let v i ,t ,J +1 = ∑v i ,t β j + ε i ,t
j =1

and define v i ,t = (v i ,t ,1,…,v i ,t ,J ,v i ,t ,J +1 )′ as the

(17)

( J + 1) × 1

vector of SUR residuals for county i at time t . We assume v i ,t ~ N ( 0, Π −1 ) , where Π is
the precision matrix of the SUR equations.21 Finally, for Π we assume a proper Wishart
prior, Π ~ W ( b,V ) , set b = J + 2 and set V to be an identity matrix. The key to deriving
our Gibbs sampling algorithm is that, conditional on the random variable pair ε i ,ri ,vi ,ri ,
equation (16) is a standard instrumental variables model. The only difference is that we
then have to derive the posterior distribution for ε i ,ri ,vi ,ri . Details of the Gibbs sampling
algorithm are given in Durlauf, Navarro and Rivers (2014).

20

We scale the data appropriately in order to ensure that the variance of the prior is not
too “restrictive” relative to the size of the mean estimate. In Sections 7 and 9, we
discuss the sensitivity of our results to the specification of the priors.
21
Notice that the normality assumptions are in no way crucial since they can be replaced
by more flexible distributions like mixtures of normals.

26

Finally, we discuss how we calculate the marginal likelihood of the data. Recall
from equation (3) that the posterior probability of the data given the model (i.e., the
marginal likelihood) has the form
Pr ( D m ) = ∫ Pr ( D m,θ m ) Pr (θ m m ) d (θ m ).

Integrals of this form, however, can be very hard to calculate numerically. To see why,
consider a Monte Carlo estimator for (3). Unless the prior is very similar to the posterior,
most of the values for θ m that one would sample to calculate the integral will have very
small likelihood (especially if the posterior is concentrated relative to the prior) and the
variance of the estimated integral will be large. As a consequence one would need to
take an enormous number of draws from the prior in order to obtain precise estimates of
the integral in equation (3), otherwise the estimates will be numerically unstable.
Closed-form solutions and good approximations for some specific models with
specific priors exist which avoid the explicit calculation of the right hand side of (3) (e.g.,
Eicher, Lenkoski and Raftery (2009)). These results, however, do not generalize to
panel data models, mixed effects, and heteroskedasticity, and so cannot be applied to
the statistical models which are used to evaluate concealed carry laws.
Instead, we apply the procedure of Chib (1995) to compute equation (3). The key
insight of Chib (1995) is to recognize that, due to Bayes’ Rule, the marginal likelihood
can be expressed as the following:

Pr ( D | m ) =

Pr ( D | m,θ m ) Pr (θm | m )
Pr (θ m | D, m )

,

and that this relationship holds for any value of θ m . Chib suggests selecting a value of

θ m that is a high density point in the posterior distribution, such as the mean.
Calculating the posterior is accomplished by a Monte Carlo estimate based on the
draws from the Gibb’s sampler. For larger models like ours, in which θ m is divided into
blocks, additional Gibbs draws are required.
27

Calculating the marginal likelihood requires us to evaluate the conditional
likelihoods for each model. Deriving the conditional likelihood for non-IV models is

(

straightforward. Let εi Δ = εiΔ,1 ,...,εiΔ,T

i

)′ . In this case,
(

Pr ( D | m,θ m ) = Pr Yi ,t Δ ,Wi ,t Δ , m,θ m

(

)

)

(

(18)

)

= Pr Yi ,t Δ | Wi ,t Δ , m,θ m = ∏ fε Δ Yi Δ − Wi ' Δα ,
i

i

where fεΔ is the T dimensional multivariate normal density defined by εiΔ .
i

Since our focus is on comparing models based on how well they explain crime
rates, for IV models we compute the conditional likelihood based only on the partial
likelihood of the outcome equation (12), taking first random differences in order to
eliminate the county fixed effects.
In the IV models, X is potentially endogenous due to the correlation between εiΔ

(

)

and the first stage residuals v iΔ,1, j ,...,v iΔ,T , j . Therefore, we cannot evaluate the likelihood
using the unconditional distribution of εiΔ , as we do above for the non-IV models.
Instead we use the conditional distribution of εiΔ , conditional on the first stage residuals
in order to capture the dependence between εiΔ and X .22

22

The validity of this approach follows directly from the fact that one can write the
parameter posteriors as functions of the joint distribution of the endogenous Y Δ , X Δ :

(

Pr θ m | m,Y , X ,W , Z

functions

(

Δ

Δ

of

Δ

Δ

)=

the

)

Pr θ m | m,Y Δ , X Δ ,W Δ , Z Δ =

(

)

Pr Y Δ , X Δ | m,θ m ,W Δ , Z Δ Pr (θ m | m )

(

Δ

Δ

Δ

Pr Y , X | m,W , Z Δ

)

conditional
distribution
of
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Pr (Y | m,θ m , X ,W , Z ) Pr (θ m | m )

(

Pr Y Δ | m, X Δ ,W Δ , Z Δ

28

)

,

or
YΔ

.

alternatively

as

on

XΔ:

(

)

′
Let ω iΔ, j = v iΔ,1, j ,...,v iΔ,T , j , the T dimensional vector of residuals from the j th first

(

)

′
stage regression, and let ωiΔ = ωiΔ,1,...,ω iΔ,J . The partial likelihood of Y given X is then

given by:

(

)

(

)

Pr Yi ,Δt | X iΔ,t ,Wi ,Δt , ZiΔ,t , m,θ m = ∏ fεΔ |ω Δ Yi Δ − X i ' Δ β − Wi ' Δα .
i

i

i

(19)

Notice that when εiΔ is uncorrelated with ωi Δ , X is no longer endogenous and fε Δ |ω Δ
i

i

collapses to fεΔ .23
i

5. Data

The main source of data for this paper is a county-level panel dataset covering
1979-2000. Various versions of this dataset have been used extensively in previous
studies on the effect of shall-issue laws on crime.24,25 The dataset consists of
information on crime rates and arrest rates for various crime categories that comes from
the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. This is supplemented with data on the presence of
shall-issue laws in each state. The dataset also contains information from the US
Census Bureau on a wide set of socio-economic and demographic controls.
In order to expand the model space, we add some additional variables to the
dataset. First, we introduce a measure of gun prevalence used previously by Moody

23

Note that for IV models, the full variance-covariance matrix of the errors
(v i ,t ,1,…,v i ,t ,J ,ε i ,t )′ needs to be estimated and integrated into equation (19).

24

Papers using this dataset include Lott and Mustard (1997), Bartley and Cohen (1998),
Black and Nagin (1998), Dezhbakhsh and Rubin (1998), Lott (2010), Plassmann and
Tideman (2001), Ayres and Donohue (2003, 2009a, 2009b), Moody and Marvell (2008,
2009), Aneja, Donohue, and Zhang (2011), among many others.
25
The dataset we employ was downloaded from John Lott’s website
http://www.johnlott.org in January 2013.
29

and Marvell (2005). Moody and Marvell use the data collected by Duggan (2001) from
the General Social Survey (GSS) of the National Opinion Research Center (NORC),
which includes questions related to gun ownership. According to Moody and Marvell,
this is the only direct measure of gun ownership at the state level.
One drawback of the survey is that it only covers 3000 people, and it is not asked
in every state in every year. In order to deal with this, Moody and Marvell show that the
percentage of suicides that were committed using guns is a good proxy for gun
ownership as measured by the survey. Therefore, we collected data on the percentage
of

gun

suicides

from
26

(http://wonder.cdc.gov/).

the

Centers

for

Disease

Control

and

Prevention

We then scaled this percentage by the correlation between

gun ownership and gun suicides found by Moody and Marvell, and use this as our
measure of gun prevalence in our empirical analysis.
We also collected data from the US Census Bureau that measures the
percentage of people living in urban areas. We define a county as urban if more than
70% of the population live in urban areas and define it as rural if less than 30% live in
urban areas. Our results are robust to alternative choices of cutoffs and to the use of a
continuous measure of urbanization.
The original dataset includes a measure of the percentage of the population that
voted Republican in the most recent Presidential election. However, this variable only
goes up to 1998, so we updated this series to 2000 using data collected from the Atlas
of US Presidential Elections (http://www.uselectionatlas.org).

6. Defining effects

Since the dummy, spline, and hybrid specifications differ in how the law enters
the model, and because we have some specifications in which the effects of the law
vary across observations, there is no single parameter that can be used to compare
26

These data are available at both the county and state levels. However, due to
confidentiality concerns, this data is not reported if the total number of suicides, or
number of suicides by guns, is too low. As a result, data are missing for a large number
of county-level observations. Therefore, we use the state-level data in our analysis.
30

the results of the different models. In order to compare the results across models, we
compare the crime rates for each observation when we allow the law to be in effect
versus when it is not. We call this the marginal effect of the law. We focus on average
marginal effects (AME) of the law, where we average the effect over all states in 1998.
This means that we are calculating the change in the crime rate which would have
occurred if all states had legalized shall-issue in 1998. We compute the effect of the
law at implementation, as well as one and two years afterwards. We also calculate the
average across all three periods. The primary reason for this is that the spline and
hybrid models allow the effect of the law to vary over time.27 In order to capture this,
we measure the effect of the law over this three-year window, allowing the values of
controls to evolve over the same three-year window.
Other types of policy effects can be calculated. One alternative, which we call
AME-Law measures the average effect of the law for only those states which had
actually implemented shall-issue by 1998, using a three-year window for crime rates
and controls.28 As a complement to this, we also compute AME-No Law, which
measures the effect for states that did not implement the law during our sample period.
These two measures allow for the possibility that states which implemented the law
and those who did not were aware of the heterogeneity in its effects. Our main
measure of the effect of the law, AME, is a weighted average of AME-Law and AMENo Law.
In total this gives us twelve different average marginal effect estimates for each
model.29 We compute each of these marginal effect measures for all models in the
model space. In order to focus our discussion, we primarily use the version that
measures the effect for all states (AME), and we use the average of this measure
27

The average marginal effects also vary over time when we allow the effect of the law
to depend on certain characteristics of the county (e.g., gun prevalence and the level of
urbanization). While the levels of gun prevalence and urbanization do change over time,
these changes are typically small.
28
We also computed the average marginal effect for only states that implemented the
law, evaluated when the law was implemented in each state, instead of in 1998. The
results were very similar.
29
We compute each of the three AME measures for each of the three years following
the introduction of the law, as well as an average over these three years, for a total of
four estimates per AME measure.
31

across all three years. We discuss the cases in which there are important differences
between the various measures and their corresponding relevance for gun control
policy.

7. Preliminary analysis and identification of a policy-relevant model space

A standard issue in exploring model spaces concerns the high dimension of the
space. Madigan and Raftery (1994) propose a way of decreasing a set of candidate
models by eliminating highly improbable ones via a procedure they call “Occam’s
Window”. The basic idea of the procedure is to set a threshold for a model’s posterior
probability and to then eliminate models with lower probabilities than this threshold. For
the context of understanding the role of assumptions in outcomes, we follow the spirit of
the “Occam’s Window” procedure by checking whether certain assumptions are
associated with qualitatively lower likelihoods than their (contradictory) counterparts,
and so resolve such cases based on complexity-penalized goodness of fit. We start with
this evaluation in order to allow subsequent analyses to focus on assumptions which
possess non-negligible posterior weights. Specifically, we identify assumptions such
that the model with the highest likelihood from those maintaining the assumption still
has a lower likelihood that the model with the lowest likelihood among models which do
not maintain it. There is one assumption whose associated models are dominated by
the posterior probabilities found in the rest of the model space.
The assumption that is associated with dominated models is the use of
population weights to control for heteroskedasticity. This finding suggests that the
common practice of adding population weights to regressions using county-level or
state-level data is not supported by the data. As discussed in Section 3, when one
considers the presence of location-time-specific unobservables in the model, the
standard argument for using population weights is weakened, and may in fact introduce
heteroskedasticity, instead of correcting for it. Further, models with weights tend to
overstate the effect of the laws on the crime rate compared to the models without
weights. In other words, the models with weights are more likely to find that the laws
32

lead to an increase in crime. As a result, the standard use of population weights in the
literature may be leading to an upward bias in the estimate of the effect of the laws on
crime in light of the lack of support for the assumption. The model space described in
Figure 2 generates 624 models. Half of this set consists of models with population
weights. After eliminating these dominated models, 312 models remain for analysis.
This means that we now examine model uncertainty with respect to control variables for
demographics

and

location-specific

heterogeneity,

parameter

heterogeneity,

specification of time trends, and instrumental variables.
In addition to our baseline set of priors discussed above, we also estimate
versions of the model under two alternative specifications of the parameter priors: a
high variance case in which we increase the variance in the priors for β ,α to σ 2 = 20
instead of 10 and we set the Wishart prior to Π ~ W ( b,V ) , with b = J + 1 instead of

J + 2 ; and a low variance case in which we set σ 2 = 1 and b = J + 5 . While the choice of
priors have an impact on the marginal likelihoods for each model (which we discuss
below in Section 9), the estimated AME’s are very similar across the different choices of
priors. Therefore, we report the AME results from our baseline set of priors only.
Figures 3A and 3B present dispersion plots which graphically represent the
heterogeneity in average marginal effects (AME) that appears as one moves across the
model space.30 The estimated AMEs are represented by the solid black line, and 95%
confidence intervals around the estimates are represented by the dotted lines. Roughly
one-half of the models produce a positive effect of the law on crime, i.e., shall-issue
laws increase crime, whereas the remaining models suggest a negative effect.
Magnitudes also vary considerably. For violent crime, the estimates range from the law
implying a decrease in crime of 15% to an increase of 26%, and for property crime
ranging from a decrease of 19% to an increase of 35%. Based on these results, it is
easy to see how the concealed carry literature contains such disparate claims.
Depending on the model chosen by the researcher, the results can vary from a large
decrease to a large increase in the crime rate. We now examine the sources of this
heterogeneity in estimated policy effects.
30

In Table A in the Appendix, we present the marginal likelihood values for the nondominated models for both violent and property crime.
33

8. Assumptions and policy effects

In Figures 4A-4H we present the average marginal effects (three-year average of AME)
for all models. These figures are the same as Figures 3A and 3B, except that the
models are grouped according to each model dimension. In order to make the figures
easier to read, we drop the confidence bands around the estimates. For example,
Figures 4A and 4B group the models by the formulation of the law (i.e., dummy, spline,
hybrid). These figures illustrate two important features of our estimates. First, there is a
substantial degree of heterogeneity both across and within each dimension of the model
space. Second, they show how moving within each dimension of the model space
affects the estimated effect of the law.

i.

formulation of shall-issue laws as a crime determinant

For both violent and property crime, there is a clear difference in the estimated
average marginal effects between the dummy, spline, and hybrid models. As can be
seen in Figure 4A, for violent crime, the dummy specifications generate the largest (in
absolute value) negative effects of the law, the hybrid generates the largest positive
ones, and the spline is in between. However, there is a substantial amount of
heterogeneity within each group, as all three contain both positive and negative
estimates. With property crime the differences are more pronounced, and flipped
compared to the violent crime results. As Figure 4B illustrates, the hybrid produces the
largest (in absolute value) negative values, and the dummy model produces the largest
positive values, again with the spline in between. The sign of the effect is more uniform
within the dummy and spline categories, with the dummy producing mostly positive
estimates, and the spline producing mostly negative estimates, although there is
substantial variation in the magnitude of the dummy model estimates.
In most cases, the hybrid or spline specification is preferred to the dummy model
(has a higher marginal likelihood value, see table A in the Appendix). In about half of the
34

cases for property crime, and about one-quarter of the cases for violent crime, the
hybrid model has a higher marginal likelihood than the spline model. While the hybrid
model is a more flexible version of the spline model, in many cases the contribution of
this increased flexibility towards explaining the observed crime rates is offset by the
penalty for the increased model complexity.31
Together these results suggest that the effect of legalization of concealed carry is
heterogeneous over time, and that the use of a single dummy variable is insufficient to
capture the effect of the law. The hybrid and spline are reduced form ways of allowing
for this but, as illustrated in Figure 1 and its associated discussion, more work needs to
be done to investigate the source and implications of this heterogeneity.32

ii.

control variables

We next examine the effects of alternative control variable choices. For violent
crime, there is no systematic pattern in either the estimated marginal effects or the
likelihoods between specifications with the full set of age and race variables (36 in total)
and those with only the black/white subset (12 variables). The specifications with the full
set of age and race variables are preferred in almost all cases for property crime.
Similar to violent crime, however, there is no systematic pattern in the average marginal
effects. For both types of crime, the difference in marginal effects is very small (less
than 1% on average), and thus both versions (with and without full age and race
variables) provide similar answers to the question of the effect of shall-issue laws on
crime.
For the additional control variables, it appears that gun prevalence is useful for
helping to explain violent crime patterns, as its inclusion leads to higher marginal
31

This is confirmed when we do sensitivity analysis in Section 9. As we increase the
prior precision (i.e., decrease the variance), the implied penalty for complexity is
reduced and the marginal likelihoods for more complex models (i.e., hybrid) increase
relative to those for the simpler models (i.e., spline).
32
Black and Nagin (1998) interact the law with a set of five lead and lag dummies,
allowing the effect of the law to vary over the 11-year period centered around the
enactment of the law, however they fail to find any statistically significant effects of the
law on crime.
35

likelihood values for most specifications. However, urbanization leads to lower marginal
likelihood values in all cases, suggesting that the contribution to the likelihood is undone
by the implicit penalty in the marginal likelihood for the extra parameters. Neither set of
additional control variables has a systematic pattern in the marginal likelihoods for
property crime. As was the case with demographic variables, for both types of crimes,
these additional variables generate only small changes in the average marginal effects.
As we discuss below, the more important impact of these additional variables is through
allowing the effect of the law to depend on gun prevalence and urbanization by
interacting them with the law variables.

iii.

time trends

With only two exceptions (both for violent crime), the models with time dummies
are preferred to their counterparts with region trends. This finding indicates that the
time-series patterns in crime rates do not follow a linear trend and are better
approximated by flexible time dummies, even at the expense of not allowing the timeseries pattern to be region-specific. However, even though the models with time
dummies are strongly preferred in terms of marginal likelihoods, the distribution of
AME’s illustrated in Figures 4C and 4D for both types of models is quite similar, with an
average difference of 0.25% for violent crime and 0.04% for property crime. Hence, as
was the case with additional covariates, the use of time dummies outperforms region
trends, but has little effect on the estimated effects of the law.

iv.

parameter heterogeneity

Figures 4E and 4F plot the estimated AME’s when one allows for the effects of
the law to be heterogeneous. On average, the models that allow for interactions with
urbanization generate the highest AME’s, and those with region interactions generate
the lowest AME’s.
As shown in Table A in the Appendix, for violent crime there is a clear pattern in
the marginal likelihoods, and the models that include interactions of the law and region
36

are strictly preferred to the other models. These specifications on average produce
lower effects of the law compared to the other models (i.e., small negative effects
versus effects close to zero). However, as Figure 4E illustrates, there is still a
considerable amount of heterogeneity in the estimated effects within each group.
With property crime, the pattern is less clear. The models with interactions are
generally preferred to the models without any parameter heterogeneity. Overall, the
models that include interactions with urban dummies and the models that include
interactions with urban dummies and gun prevalence have the highest marginal
likelihood values. There is no systematic pattern in the AME's for the models with urban
interactions, but on average they produce the largest positive effects of the law. As was
the case with violent crime, there are large differences in the estimated effects within
each group.
In general we find that the effect of shall-issue laws on both property and violent
crime is increasing in gun prevalence. In other words, the more guns there are in the
population, the more likely the law leads to an increase in overall crime. One potential
explanation for this result is that as the number of guns in the population increases, any
potential deterrent effect of individuals being able to carry concealed weapons is
mitigated by the increase in the number of guns actively being carried in public (as
opposed to just being owned).
When we allow for the effects of the law to vary with the degree of urbanization,
we also find evidence of heterogeneous effects. For property crime, the effect of the law
is monotonically decreasing in urbanization. The more urban (rural) a county is, the
more likely the law will decrease (increase) crime. With violent crime there seems to be
a similar pattern, although it is less pronounced, particularly with the spline and hybrid
specifications.
The results with regional heterogeneity are harder to interpret. This is partially
due to differences in the crime trends across regions, which we discussed earlier. For
violent crime, the dummy model specification suggests that the effect of the law for the
South is to increase crime (or decrease crime less) relative to the other regions.
However, once we allow for the effect of the law to vary over time via the spline or
hybrid models, the result flips, with the law associated with a decrease in crime (or a
37

smaller increase in crime) in the South relative to the other regions of the country.
Moreover, when we also allow the law to interact with gun prevalence, the change is
even stronger, due to the fact that gun prevalence is higher on average in the South.
For property crime there is also evidence of heterogeneous effects of the law
across regions, but there is no consistent pattern across models. These results suggest
that there is important heterogeneity in the effect of shall-issue laws across regions.
While interacting the effect of the law helps to both isolate this heterogeneity and to
better fit the observed patterns of crime, region differences alone do not inform us as to
the ultimate source of this underlying heterogeneity, something we discuss more in the
conclusion.

v.

instrumental variables

When we compare the models which treat the laws and the arrest rate as
endogenous (IV models) to those in which they are assumed to be exogenous (non-IV
models), we find that the IV models are almost exclusively preferred to their non-IV
counterparts. However, the non-IV models are not dominated as a group, as was the
case with population weights. This implies that although there is strong support for
treating the laws and arrest rate as endogenous, there are other dimensions of the
model space that are equally, if not more, important. On average the IV models
generate higher average marginal effects (5.6 and 0.5 percentage points higher for
violent and property crime, respectively). Figures 4G and 4H demonstrate the reasons
for these differences. For violent crime, it is driven by the fact that almost all non-IV
models generate negative effects of the law, but the IV models generate a majority of
positive effects. With property crime, on the other hand, the difference is driven by the
magnitude of the effects, as opposed to the sign.

vi.

differences across the average marginal effect measures

So far we have focused our discussion on the three-year average of AME, one of
twelve measures we compute for each model. In many cases the average marginal
38

effects vary little, if at all, across the three measures and across the different years in
which the effect is measured. However, there are two situations for which this is not the
case, and they are worth highlighting. The first case is when the models contain trends
(spline/hybrid). The trend component of these specifications produces an effect of the
law that builds over time, and unless the trend effect is equal to zero, the magnitude of
the effect depends on how long the law has been in place. In some cases the trend is
quite large, which makes it difficult to evaluate the effect of the law compared to other
models. In addition, as the discussion surrounding Figure 1 shows, the linear trend
specification has the unappealing feature that the magnitude of the effect grows without
bound. We believe that while the results from these models suggest that there is
important time-heterogeneity in the effects of the laws, the correct specification of these
time-effects warrants further research. Furthermore, there may be short-run versus
long-run trade-offs in terms of the effects of the laws that need to be considered.
The second situation in which there are important differences across the average
marginal effects measures are when the models include interactions of the law with
region. This result is presented graphically in Figure 5. When the average marginal
effects are computed for states that implemented the law (AME-Law), compared to
states that did not implement the law (AME-No Law), we see sizeable differences.
(Recall that our main AME measure is just a weighted average of these two measures.)
This is reflective of the fact that those regions that were more likely to adopt shall-issue
laws experienced different effects of the law compared to regions that were less likely to
adopt. This is an important result to note, particularly to policymakers trying to decide
whether to enact such laws. The effects of the law vary across location, and the
experiences of those that previously enacted the law are not necessarily going to be
replicated in other locations.
This discussion is quite wide ranging. We summarize our findings on the model
space as follows.

1. In terms of complexity-penalized fit (i.e., marginal likelihoods), models that a)
allow for heterogeneity and b) correct for endogeneity, substantially outperform
their counterparts.
39

2. The effect of the law seems to be very heterogeneous across many dimensions.
Interacting the law with observables like gun prevalence, or urban or region
dummies shows that a) having more guns seems to reduce the potential
deterrent effect of the law, b) more urbanization increases the potential deterrent
effect of the law and c) there seem to be important regional differences in the
effect of the law on crime.

3. While the effects of the law are heterogeneous along many dimensions, some
assumptions lead to specific patterns of results. For the case of violent crime,
models that do not account for the endogeneity of the law almost surely lead to
negative (i.e., deterrent) effects of the law, while models that use instrumental
variables are very likely to find a positive effect of the law. For property crimes,
the AME’s are ordered according to the specification of the effect of the law.
Models that use a dummy specification point to a positive effect of the law, spline
models find (small) negative effects, while hybrid models find more mixed effects.

4. There is little support for the substitution hypothesis of Lott (Lott and Mustard
(1997), Lott (2010)) in which criminals shift their activity from violent crimes
towards less confrontational crimes like property crimes.

5. Finally, all results should be interpreted with caution, as there is enormous
heterogeneity in the estimated effects across models, in terms of the signs,
magnitudes, and their economic and statistical significance.

9. Posterior Probabilities and Model-Averaged Results

We have focused our discussion thus far on the distribution of AME’s over the
model space, documenting how the estimated effects of shall-issue laws vary across
and within different modeling assumptions. However, as we have alluded to above,
40

models vary in their degree of evidentiary support, as summarized by their marginal
likelihood values. In order to illustrate the relationship between the AME’s and the
support for each model in the data, in Figures 6A and 6B we plot the same AME’s we
plot in the previous figures, but now sorted by the value of the marginal likelihoods.
For the case of violent crimes, the models with the highest marginal likelihoods
all point to small effects of the law on crime, the effect being positive for the top models.
For property crime, the preferred models all point to much larger (mostly negative)
effects of the law on crime. This is due to the fact that for property crime, the hybrid
models receive the highest marginal likelihood values, and these models are the ones
that generate the largest negative effects of the law. These models are all characterized
by large negative (deterrent) effects initially, followed by a positive trend afterwards.
Therefore, although the AME’s in the first few years are negative, they are shrinking
over time, and would eventually turn positive.
We now turn to the model-averaging exercise as described by equations (5) and
(6) in Section 2. Since we have no strong a priori reason to prefer one model
specification over another, we employ a uniform prior distribution over the model space.
Given the large differences between the marginal likelihoods documented in Table A in
the Appendix (even between the most likely models), changes in the model priors will
have a negligible impact on the calculation of the posterior model probabilities. In order
for the specification of the model priors to make a difference, one would have to prefer
the second most likely model at least 9 times more a priori (even more so for property
crime) than the most likely model for it to make a difference.
For violent crime, only two models receive posterior probabilities above 1%. We
label these as model A and model B. The specifications for each are listed below, based
on the characterization of the model space in Figure 2.
• Model A: Spline, collapsed demographic controls, add gun prevalence
controls, time dummies, region interactions, IV, no population weights.
• Model B: Spline, collapsed demographic controls, no additional covariates,
time dummies, region interactions, IV, no population weights.

41

The difference between the two models is that model A also includes gun prevalence
and gun prevalence-squared as control variables. The posterior probability weights for
model A and model B are 90.1% and 9.9%, respectively.
As can be seen in Table 1, both models produce similar results in terms of the
AME's. For both models, all three average marginal effect measures suggest a similar
pattern. As a result of the law being introduced, violent crime increases in the first year
and continues to increase afterwards.33 In addition, the effect is the strongest for those
states that had not introduced shall-issue laws as of 1998, suggesting that the increase
in crime resulting from the law would be even larger if these states were to introduce
such laws.
With property crime, the posterior model probabilities load essentially on one
model, which we denote as model C.
• Model C: Hybrid, all demographic controls, no additional covariates, time
dummies, gun prevalence and urban interactions, IV, no population weights.

For property crime there is initially an economically and statistically significant drop in
crime of 12%. However, as was the case with violent crime, there is a positive trend in
the effect of the law on crime. As a consequence the deterrent effects of the law get
wiped out and would become increasingly positive if extended over the long run.
However, as the discussion surrounding Figure 1 suggests, one should be careful about
how to interpret the immediate effects of the hybrid model.
Beyond the estimated effects we just presented, the model averaging exercise
illustrates a pattern that warrants further research. The fact that the data prefer models
with interactions between time and the effect of the law, shows that the law has effects
that are not only heterogeneous in the cross section (by region, prevalence of guns,
etc.) but with strong time heterogeneity as well. However, the practice of introducing this
time heterogeneity via simple trends is problematic. For our estimates, the effect on

33

Note that when the model includes interactions of variables with the law, the AME
measures will not necessarily follow a simple linear trend over time. In fact, depending
on how the interacted variables change over time, they need not even be monotone.
42

crime of introducing guns continues to grow over time. So it seems important to
consider richer specifications of the policy effect than have appeared in the literature.

i.

robustness to parameter priors

As we discuss above, in order to analyze the sensitivity of our results to the
choice of the priors over the parameters, we estimate the model under three different
prior specifications: baseline, low variance, and high variance. While our estimated
effects of shall-issues laws are very similar across all three prior specifications, the
marginal likelihoods do change.
For the high variance set of priors, the marginal likelihoods for more complex
models get reduced relative to simpler models (since the implied penalty for complexity
increases). The ordering of models based on the marginal likelihood remains mostly
unchanged, and in fact it is the same for the most likely models.
With the low variance case, the marginal likelihoods are relatively higher for more
complex models as the implied penalty is reduced. For the case of property crime, the
ordering is again mostly unchanged, especially for the most likely models. However, the
ordering does change for the case of violent crimes. In this case the most likely models
are more complex versions (e.g., hybrid, full set of demographic variables, and the
addition of interactions of the law with gun prevalence) of the preferred models with the
baseline priors. The AME’s generated by these models all produce very small estimated
AME’s that are not statistically different from zero.

10. Conclusions

Relative to the strong claims made by particular papers in the literature, we find
evidence that the estimated effects of shall-issue right-to-carry laws on crime are very
sensitive to modeling assumptions. Furthermore, particular subsets of assumptions
(e.g., dummy vs. hybrid) can mark the difference between getting a negative or a
positive effect of the law. However, our model averaging exercise does lend some
43

support to the law having a negative (but with a positive trend) effect on property
crimes, and a small but positive (and increasing) effect on violent crimes. Based on
these results, we do not find evidence of these laws leading to substitution away from
violent crime and into property crime. Overall, we conclude that the evidence that shallissue right-to-carry laws generate either an increase or decrease in crime on average
seems weak.
However, we do find some interesting results that we believe are revealing as to
how shall-issue laws affect crime. For both types of crime, the degree of gun prevalence
in a county is an important determinant of how the law affects crime. Interestingly, for
violent crime, heterogeneity across regions is also important, whereas the level of
urbanization is more important for property crime. While there are regional differences in
urbanization, it appears that there are other differences across region that drive violent
crime. With property crime, the level of urbanization seems to be an important
difference that transcends regional boundaries.
Urban areas differ from rural areas in how closely people live to one another.
Property crimes, by definition, do not involve confrontations with victims. Therefore, it
seems natural that concealed carry laws could have different effects on crime in areas
in which potential witnesses to property crimes (who may be carrying concealed
weapons) are more dispersed compared to areas in which they are tightly clustered.
Alternatively, it may be easier to carry a concealed weapon regularly in a rural area in
which there may be fewer places in which weapons are not allowed, such as mass
transit and state or federal facilities, resulting in differential usage of the law in rural
versus urban locations.
For violent crimes, with the exception of murder, there is always at least one
witness to the crime, the victim. Therefore, the fact that there might be other armed
witnesses might be less relevant for these crimes. Of course, our finding that
urbanization matters more for property crimes, and region matters more for violent
crimes, does not mean that urbanization is not relevant. Rather, it reveals that there are
other factors that vary across regions, which are more important. The use of region
interactions helps to identify the level at which these differences exist, but does not

44

provide any direct evidence as to the underlying mechanism. Attitudes towards
violence, gun safety, and gun usage in general are examples of potential differences.
We believe that, in particular, our results related to parameter heterogeneity
highlight an area of research that is currently underdeveloped in the literature. The fact
that interacting the effect of the law with time trends and region helps to better explain
crime patterns in the data, suggests the presence of important sources of heterogeneity
that are not captured by current models of crime.
One can speculate as to the underlying mechanisms at work here, and attempt to
identify additional observable variables to include in the model. However, progress will,
we believe, primarily depend on the introduction of a more structural approach to the
analysis of shall-issue laws. The assumptions underlying both the theories that predict
the law will lead to an increase in crime and those that predict a decrease all involve
individuals making different decisions in the presence of concealed carry laws.
Incorporating into the analysis mechanisms that generate both possible effects, in
addition to allowing for counterfactual analysis, permits specification testing of the
model’s substantive behavioral commitments.
An example of where a more structured approach to modeling crime would help
arises in our finding that a time-varying effect of the law is important to explain the
patterns in the data. Without a model that explains why these temporal patterns arise, it
is not clear how to interpret these changes or how useful it is to even estimate them as
opposed to just recovering some “average” effect of the policy. Is this heterogeneity a
consequence of restrictions on the “technology” of crime commission, and hence the
policy fundamentally alters how criminals commit crimes? Are these patterns the
consequence of changes in expectations by the agents, and what we see is simply a
temporary effect while agents “figure out” how to identify gun-carrying individuals, for
example? Do they arise because of interactions with other (potentially unmeasured)
laws that also change over time, etc.? The answers to these questions have different
implications for both policy evaluation (e.g., we may not be able to estimate the effect

45

independently of other policies) and implementation (e.g., packages of policies, either
concurrently or in particular sequences, may be more effective).34

34

See for example Murphy (2003), Heckman and Navarro (2007), and Cooley, Navarro
and Takahashi (2014) for a discussion of issues surrounding time-varying treatment
effects.
46

References

Aneja, A., J. Donohue, and A. Zhang. 2011. “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws and
the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy.” American
Law and Economics Review 13: 565-632.
Ayres, I. and J. Donohue. 2003. “Shooting Down the ‘More Guns, Less Crime’
Hypothesis.” Stanford Law Review 55: 1193-1312.
Ayres, I. and J. Donohue. 2009a. “Yet Another Refutation of the More Guns, Less Crime
Hypothesis—With Some Help from Moody and Marvell.” Econ Journal Watch 6: 35-59.
Ayres, I. and J. Donohue. 2009b. “More Guns, Less Crime Fails Again: The Latest
Evidence from 1977-2006.” Econ Journal Watch 6: 218-238.
Bartley, W. and M. Cohen 1998. “The Effect of Concealed Weapon Laws: An Extreme
Bound Analysis.” Economic Inquiry 36: 258-265.
Becker, G. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Analysis.” Journal of Political
Economy 78: 169-217.
Black, D. and D. Nagin, 1998. “Do Right-To-Carry Laws Deter Violent Crime?” Journal
of Legal Studies 27: 209-219.
Brock, W. and S. Durlauf. 2001. “Growth Empirics and Reality.” World Bank Economic
Review 15: 229-272.
Brock, W., S. Durlauf, and K. West. 2003. “Policy Evaluation in Uncertain Economic
Environments (with discussion).” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 235-322.
Brock, W., S. Durlauf, and K. West. 2007. “Model Uncertainty and Policy Evaluation:
Some Theory and Empirics.” Journal of Econometrics 136: 629-664.
Brock, W. and S. Durlauf. 2014. “A Sturdy Policy Evaluation.” Journal of Legal Studies,
forthcoming.
Casella, G. 1985. “An Introduction to Empirical Bayes Data Analysis.” American
Statistician 39 (2): 83–87.
Chib, S. 1995. “Marginal Likelihood from the Gibbs Output.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 90: 1313-1321.
Cohen-Cole, E., S. Durlauf, J. Fagan, and D. Nagin. 2009. “Model Uncertainty and the
Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment.” American Law and Economics Review 11:
335-369.

47

Cooley, J., S. Navarro, and Y. Takahashi. 2014. “Identification and Estimation of Timevarying Treatment Effects: How the Timing of Grade Retention Affects Outcomes.”
Mimeo, University of Western Ontario.
Dezhbakhsh, H. and P. Rubin. 1998. “Lives Saved or Lives Lost? The Effects of
Concealed-Handgun Laws on Crime.” The American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings 88: 468-474.
Donohue, J. 2004. “Guns, Crime, and the Impact of State Right-to-Carry Laws.”
Fordham Law Review 73: 623-640.
Doppelhofer, G. 2008. “Model Averaging”. The New Palgrave Dictionary in Economics,
revised edition. S. Durlauf and L. Blume, eds. London: MacMillan.
Draper, D. 1995. “Assessment and Propagation of Model Uncertainty.” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, series B. 57: 45-97.
Duggan, M. 2001. “More Guns, More Crime.” Journal of Political Economy 109: 10861114.
Durlauf, S., C. Fu, and S. Navarro. 2013. “Capital Punishment and Deterrence:
Understanding Disparate Results.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 29: 103-121.
Durlauf, S., S. Navarro, and D. Rivers. 2008. “On the Interpretation of Aggregate Crime
Regressions.” Crime Trends, A. Goldberger and R. Rosenfeld, eds. Washington DC:
National Academies Press.
Durlauf, S., S. Navarro, and D. Rivers. 2010. “Understanding Aggregate Crime
Regressions.” Journal of Econometrics 158: 306-317.
Durlauf, S., S. Navarro, and D. Rivers. 2014. “A Bayesian MCMC Panel Data Procedure
under Endogeneity and Heteroskedasticity.” Mimeo, University of Western Ontario.
Eicher, T., A. Lenkoski, and A. Raftery. 2011. “Bayesian Model Averaging and
Endogeneity Under Model Uncertainty: An Application to Development Determinants.”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 26: 30-55.
Fernandez, C., E. Ley and M. Steel. 2001a. “Model Uncertainty in Cross-Country
Growth Regressions.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 16: 563-576.
Fernandez, C., E. Ley and M. Steel. 2001b. “Benchmark Priors for Bayesian Model
Averaging.” Journal of Econometrics 100: 381-427.

48

Fernandez, C., E. Ley and M. Steel. 2002. “Bayesian Modelling of Catch in a NorthWest Atlantic Fishery.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied
Statistics) 51: 257-280.
Hansen, L. and T. Sargent. 2007. Robustness. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hausman, J. 1996. “Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition”.
The Economics of New Goods, T. Bresnahan and R. Gordon, eds. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. 2005. “The Scientific Model of Causality.” Sociological Methodology 35: 197.
Heckman, J. and S. Navarro. 2007. “Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic Treatment
Effects”, Journal of Econometrics 136: 341-396.
Hoeting, J., D. Madigan, A. Raftery, A. and C. Volinsky. 1999. “Bayesian Model
Averaging: A Tutorial.” Statistical Science 14: 382-401.
Leamer, E. 1978. Specification Searches. New York: John Wiley.
Leamer, E. 1983. “Let’s Take the Con Out of Econometrics.”
Review 73: 31-43.

American Economic

Lott, J. 2010. More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun Control Laws,
3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lott, J. and D. Mustard. 1997. “Crime, Deterrence and Right-to-Carry Concealed
Handguns.” Journal of Legal Studies 26: 1-68.
Lucas, R. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.”
Conference Series on Public Policy 1: 19-46.

Carnegie-Rochester

Ludwig, J. 1998. “Concealed Gun Carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from
State Panel Data.” International Review of Law and Economics 18: 239-254.
Madigan, D. and A. Raftery. 1994. “Model Selection and Accounting for Model
Uncertainty in Graphical Models Using Occam’s Window.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 89: 1535-1546.
Moody, C. and T. Marvell. 2005. “Guns and Crime.” Southern Economic Journal 71:
720-736.
Moody, C. and T. Marvell. 2008. “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws.” Econ Journal
Watch 5: 269-293.

49

Moody, C. and T. Marvell. 2009. “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws, Continued.” Econ
Journal Watch 6: 203-217.
Murphy S. 2003. “Optimal Dynamic Treatment Regimes.” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series B (with discussion) 65: 331-366.
Nevo, A. 2001. “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry.”
Econometrica 69: 307-342.
Plassmann, F. and T. N. Tideman. 2001. “Does the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns
Deter Countable Crimes? Only a Count Analysis Can Say.” Journal of Law and
Economics 44, S2: 771-798.
Raftery, A., D, Madigan, and J. Hoeting. 1997. “Bayesian Model Averaging for Linear
Regression Models.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92: 179-191.
Sala-i-Martin, X., G. Doppelhofer, and R. Miller. 2004. “Determinants of Long-Term
Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach.” American
Economic Review 94: 813-835
Shepherd, J. 2005. “Deterrence Versus Brutalization: Capital Punishment’s Differing
Impacts Across States.” Michigan Law Review 104: 203-255.
Solon, G., S. Haider, and J. Wooldridge. 2013. “What Are We Weighting For?”
Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Strnad, J., 2007. “Should Legal Empiricists Go Bayesian?”
Economics Review 9: 195-303 .

American Law and

Wellford, C., J. Pepper, and C. Petrie, eds. 2004. Firearms and Violence. Washington
DC: National Academy of Sciences Press.

50

Figure 1: Hybrid Model Example
Crime rate

Crime rate
Pre-Law Trend
Post-Law Trend

Law Implemented

Time

Figure 2: Model Space
Crime
Category

Formulation
of the Laws

Demographics

Additional
Covariates

Time Effects

Instrumental
Variables

Homoskedastic/
Heteroskedastic

4. Region

1. non-IV

1. No weights

5. GP, GP
Squared and
Region

2. IV

2. Population weights

Parameter
Heterogeneity

1. None
2. GP and GP
squared
1. None
1. Property
2. Violent

1. Dummy
2. Spline
3. Hybrid

1. All

2. Urban

2. Collapsed
Demographics

3. Gun
Prevalence
(GP) and GP
Squared

1. Time
Dummies
2. Region
Trends

3. Urban

6. GP, GP
Squared and
Urban

Figure 3A: Average Marginal Effects - Violent Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
Note: Each dot on the solid black line represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a
shall-issue law, computed for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). The dashed lines show the
corresponding 95% confidence interval.

Figure 3B: Average Marginal Effects - Property Crime
0.5
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
Note: Each dot on the solid black line represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shallissue law, computed for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). The dashed lines show the
corresponding 95% confidence interval.

Figure 4A: Average Marginal Effects - By Law Specification - Violent Crime
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

AME

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
Spline

-0.15

Hybrid

-0.2

Dummy

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 4B: Average Marginal Effects - By Law Specification - Property Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

Spline
Hybrid

-0.3

Dummy

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 4C: Average Marginal Effects - Region Trends vs Time Dummies - Violent Crime
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

AME

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2

Time Dummies

Region Trends

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 4D: Average Marginal Effects - Region Trends vs Time Dummies - Property Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

Time Dummies

Region Trends

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 4E: Average Marginal Effects - Parameter Heterogeneity - Violent Crime
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

AME

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

GP &
GP2

-0.15

Urban

None

-0.2

Region

GP &
GP2,
Urban

GP &
GP2,
Region

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). GP and GP2 stand for gun prevalence and gun
prevalence squared.

Figure 4F: Average Marginal Effects - Parameter Heterogeneity - Property Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
GP &
GP2

-0.2
None
None

-0.3

GP &
GP2

Urban
Urban

Region

Region

GP
GP&&
GP2,
GP2,
Urban
Urban

GP &
GP2,
GP
& GP2,
Region

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). GP and GP2 stand for gun prevalence and gun
prevalence squared.

Figure 4G: Average Marginal Effects - IV versus Non-IV Specifications - Violent Crime
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

AME

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2

non-IV

IV

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 4H: Average Marginal Effects - IV versus Non-IV Specifications - Property Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

non-IV

IV

Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME).

Figure 5A: Differences in the Average Marginal Effects: Models with Region Interactions ‐
Violent Crime
60.0%

Differenes between the Average
Marginal Effects Measures

50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-10.0%
-20.0%
-30.0%
-40.0%
Note: Each bar represents the difference between AME‐Law and AME‐No Law, for each model that contains
interactions of the law with region dummies. AME‐Law is the three‐year average marginal effect for those states
that implemented the law, evaluated using the characteristics of those states that implemented the law. AME‐No
Law is the same, except that it is evaluated for those states that did not implement the law.

Figure 5B: Differences in the Average Marginal Effects: Models with Region Interactions ‐
Property Crime
30.0%

Differenes between the Average
Marginal Effects Measures

25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%
-5.0%
-10.0%
-15.0%
-20.0%
Note: Each bar represents the difference between AME‐Law and AME‐No Law, for each model that contains
interactions of the law with region dummies. AME‐Law is the three‐year average marginal effect for those states
that implemented the law, evaluated using the characteristics of those states that implemented the law. AME‐No
Law is the same, except that it is evaluated for those states that did not implement the law.

Figure 6A: Average Marginal Effects ordered by Marginal Likelihood - Violent Crime
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

AME

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). The models are ordered by the value of the marginal
likelihood from the lowest (on the left) to the highest (on the right).

Figure 6B: Average Marginal Effects ordered by Marginal Likelihood - Property Crime
0.4
0.3

AME

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
Note: Each bar represents a specific model's three-year average effect of introducing a shall-issue law, computed
for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000 (AME). The models are ordered by the value of the marginal
likelihood from the lowest (on the left) to the highest (on the right).

Table 1: Model Averaging Results
Violent Crime
Posterior
Probability

AME
Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Average

Year 1

AME-Law
Year 2
Year 3

Average

Year 1

AME-No Law
Year 2
Year 3

Average

Model 1

90.1%

2.15%
(0.68%)

4.30%
(1.36%)

6.45%
(2.04%)

4.30%
(1.36%)

1.27%
(0.48%)

2.54%
(0.96%)

3.82%
(1.44%)

2.54%
(0.96%)

4.20%
(4.50%)

8.39%
(8.99%)

12.59%
(13.48%)

8.39%
(8.99%)

Model 2

9.9%

2.13%
(0.65%)

4.25%
(1.29%)

6.38%
(1.94%)

4.25%
(1.29%)

1.26%
(0.44%)

2.51%
(0.88%)

3.77%
(1.31%)

2.51%
(0.88%)

4.16%
(4.44%)

8.31%
(8.88%)

12.46%
(13.32%)

8.31%
(8.88%)

2.15%
(0.68%)

4.29%
(1.35%)

6.44%
(2.03%)

4.29%
(1.35%)

1.27%
(0.48%)

2.54%
(0.95%)

3.81%
(1.43%)

2.54%
(0.95%)

4.19%
(4.49%)

8.39%
(8.98%)

12.58%
(13.46%)

8.39%
(8.98%)

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Average

Year 1

Average

Year 1

-12.10%
(1.66%)

-12.48%
(1.34%)

-8.39%
(1.20%)

-10.99%
(1.33%)

-14.40%
(1.55%)

-12.11%
(1.28%)

-6.72%
(1.60%)

Model-Averaged Results

Property Crime
Posterior
Probability

Model C

100.0%

AME

AME-Law
Year 2
Year 3
-13.40%
(1.30%)

-8.54%
(1.16%)

AME-No Law
Year 2
Year 3
-10.35%
(1.32%)

-8.06%
(1.18%)

Average
-8.37%
(1.31%)

Notes: Model A is the spline specification that includes a subset of demographic controls, gun prevalence and gun prevalence squared as additional covariates, time dummies, interactions with region dummies,
instrumental variables, and no population weights. Model B is the same as model A, except that it excludes the gun prevalence covariates. Model C is the hybrid specification that includes the full set of demographic
controls, no additional covariates, time dummies, interactions with gun prevalence and urban dummies, instrumental variables, and no population weights.
AME is the average marginal effect for all states using their characteristics in 1998-2000. AME-Law and AME-No Law are the average marginal effects for states that introduced shall-issue laws, and those that did not,
during the sample period, also using their characteristics in 1998-2000.
Standard errors of the average marginal effects are given in italics and parentheses below the point estimates.

Table A-1: Likelihood - Violent Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared

Instrumental
Variables
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-11503.79
-11791.37
-11526.89
-11803.91
-11500.68
-11797.42
-11525.23
-11813.21
-11495.82
-11767.23
-11521.18
-11777.99
-11485.71
-11740.85
-11481.90
-11752.87
-11486.05
-11766.33
-11509.89
-11780.47
-11476.38
-11725.69
-11474.25
-11741.49
-11467.56
-11669.82
-11638.87
-11682.50
-11485.79
-11687.53
-11517.63
-11697.47
-11480.40
-11668.94
-11516.97
-11680.27
-11308.73
-11497.79
-11292.09
-11504.26
-11496.10
-11689.02
-11531.97
-11696.01
-11330.95
-11513.49
-11312.01
-11516.61
-11456.86
-11737.25
-11491.85
-11712.56
-11474.15
-11784.61
-11506.92
-11803.04
-11426.21
-11727.04
-11467.71
-11721.17
-11301.82
-11609.76
-11296.53
-11625.41
-11445.83
-11757.38
-11481.40
-11763.69
-11306.08
-11638.14
-11299.35
-11651.15
-11510.51
-11799.63
-11537.50
-11814.40
-11509.58
-11807.19
-11535.24

Table A-1: Likelihood - Violent Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
None
None

GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None

Instrumental
Variables
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-11823.92
-11494.44
-11750.41
-11491.54
-11763.48
-11486.93
-11737.39
-11485.35
-11752.80
-11475.28
-11678.73
-11772.10
-11692.96
-11494.00
-11698.21
-11527.10
-11707.46
-11320.28
-11507.10
-11302.38
-11515.14
-11339.89
-11523.36
-11321.76
-11526.84
-11464.64
-11746.01
-11502.85
-11723.03
-11481.92
-11795.70
-11516.17
-11813.25
-11310.26
-11619.58
-11305.23
-11635.56
-11317.73
-11648.83
-11308.07
-11661.23
-11494.75
-11787.53
-11515.84
-11800.52
-11486.92
-11765.60
-11511.15
-11775.99
-11480.10
-11740.16
-11474.97
-11753.12
-11460.07
-11667.15
-11687.29
-11680.60
-11471.71
-11669.19
-11506.87
-11678.83
-11306.53
-11498.76
-11289.88
-11506.78
-11448.14
-11733.44
-11481.65
-11707.71
-11420.48
-11723.79
-11459.63
-11716.55
-11300.13
-11614.41
-11295.27
-11630.81
-11534.21
-11852.26

Table A-1: Likelihood - Violent Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region

Instrumental
Variables
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-11563.23
-11856.71
-11540.50
-11861.64
-11568.73
-11866.92
-11536.97
-11854.56
-11570.33
-11855.63
-11473.02
-11808.55
-11485.39
-11811.85
-11548.40
-11864.98
-11575.91
-11866.26
-11484.79
-11819.20
-11494.02
-11822.50
-11493.32
-11832.21
-11523.82
-11833.44
-11516.05
-11864.77
-11545.82
-11865.05
-11519.90
-11846.22
-11551.92
-11846.27
-11371.01
-11713.76
-11353.65
-11705.74
-11540.79
-11876.73
-11572.67
-11877.85
-11400.00
-11750.84
-11378.92
-11741.02
-11497.12
-11835.35
-11526.23
-11837.03
-11536.92
-11881.65
-11564.22
-11883.49
-11522.12
-11856.54
-11555.72
-11854.98
-11386.81
-11721.50
-11368.28
-11712.62
-11565.34
-11900.54
-11593.49
-11902.35
-11431.17
-11772.40
-11410.05
-11763.22
-11539.45
-11861.59
-11573.14
-11867.19
-11548.30
-11872.18
-11578.53
-11877.16
-11483.61

Table A-1: Likelihood - Violent Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared

Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region

Instrumental
Variables
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-11818.72
-11495.73
-11822.06
-11492.96
-11829.57
-11504.30
-11832.84
-11501.75
-11841.71
-11533.04
-11843.55
-11524.13
-11872.34
-11554.68
-11875.02
-11380.93
-11724.89
-11363.11
-11715.74
-11408.46
-11758.73
-11389.32
-11751.59
-11506.52
-11845.23
-11536.05
-11847.25
-11544.47
-11890.84
-11574.82
-11894.17
-11396.20
-11731.19
-11378.71
-11722.91
-11439.53
-11781.76
-11420.86
-11773.37
-11524.60
-11843.52
-11552.58
-11848.68
-11529.56
-11845.78
-11559.25
-11848.24
-11467.96
-11802.26
-11478.65
-11804.76
-11487.25
-11825.71
-11515.23
-11827.35
-11510.37
-11838.31
-11542.30
-11839.50
-11369.51
-11712.64
-11352.01
-11704.26
-11492.54
-11827.05
-11518.57
-11829.62
-11518.27
-11846.10
-11547.99
-11848.10
-11384.38
-11718.92
-11365.46
-11709.37

Note: Each line corresponds to a specific model. Every specification excludes population weights. GP stands for gun prevalence. For a description of the various modeling assumptions see
Section 3.

Table A-2: Likelihood - Property Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared

Instrumental
Variables
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-35.89
-401.25
-203.37
-507.66
75.72
-348.28
-54.28
-403.52
34.46
-329.57
-129.63
-415.46
-33.52
-366.83
-181.19
-452.38
128.12
-272.92
-3.93
-322.21
-23.79
-350.69
-176.16
-411.64
61.86
-341.69
-73.75
-419.02
70.56
-353.75
-51.87
-421.19
94.30
-288.34
-56.44
-368.28
124.36
-282.92
32.52
-357.19
96.44
-304.18
-37.08
-373.65
121.40
-280.30
42.81
-339.71
75.55
-308.19
-48.06
-298.96
192.35
-329.02
102.00
-402.21
109.88
-235.81
-15.15
-259.76
144.73
-276.74
44.82
-312.23
219.46
-256.63
120.05
-330.07
165.11
-296.92
64.02
-352.56
-27.86
-404.12
-200.30
-513.68
81.87
-348.24
-50.16

Table A-2: Likelihood - Property Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
None
None

GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None

Instrumental
Variables
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-408.86
-26.18
-369.79
-180.72
-457.00
-16.39
-352.49
-173.64
-416.01
71.99
-342.70
-72.40
-422.93
79.38
-353.71
-51.04
-424.73
131.83
-283.72
35.03
-360.26
125.01
-279.08
47.06
-343.37
82.01
-307.46
-45.96
-300.29
202.42
-329.32
107.93
-405.88
149.41
-274.41
45.55
-313.24
171.49
-297.20
65.17
-355.51
-19.22
-402.47
-177.41
-505.07
52.35
-330.27
-103.70
-412.32
-21.58
-367.28
-163.59
-446.69
72.93
-344.16
-58.19
-419.82
101.49
-292.52
-38.71
-367.18
132.86
-283.30
46.66
-355.49
85.66
-307.19
-33.57
-293.73
120.53
-235.09
-1.62
-256.32
147.08
-281.74
53.51
-313.68
-89.29
-1160.43

Table A-2: Likelihood - Property Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Urban
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region

Instrumental
Variables
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-274.35
-1313.43
-90.77
-1176.67
-268.95
-1322.73
-80.72
-1132.52
-272.38
-1278.52
-98.01
-1148.21
-278.78
-1288.77
-83.11
-1149.60
-267.83
-1289.78
-102.61
-1154.32
-276.94
-1285.10
47.08
-1118.89
-93.45
-1252.63
47.06
-1120.39
-81.93
-1239.20
54.90
-1072.16
-93.49
-1196.45
48.82
-1119.01
-71.27
-1240.74
54.50
-1076.17
-82.40
-1186.35
39.16
-1094.07
-66.03
-1197.80
41.47
-1123.20
-99.02
-1256.13
28.07
-1145.43
-96.20
-1262.58
40.13
-1086.09
-108.27
-1208.77
36.57
-1120.51
-80.44
-1239.98
26.06
-1110.81
-107.84
-1219.26
12.58
-1116.31
-87.45
-1217.60
-81.35
-1162.52
-272.34
-1318.34
-82.43
-1178.00
-266.06
-1327.83
-89.39

Table A-2: Likelihood - Property Crime
Model Specification
Formulation of
the Laws
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Dummy
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Spline
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid
Hybrid

Demographics

Additional Covariates

Parameter Heterogeneity

All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset
All
All
Subset
Subset

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared

Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
GP and GP squared
Region
Region
Region
Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
GP and GP squared and Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region
None
None
None
None
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Region
Region
Region
Region

Instrumental
Variables
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV
non-IV

Time Dummies and
Region Trends
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends
Time Dummies
Region Trends

Log
Marginal
Likelihood
-1150.09
-277.61
-1293.18
-94.62
-1155.80
-274.08
-1289.00
53.53
-1118.69
-91.69
-1255.07
54.81
-1120.00
-80.12
-1241.73
52.73
-1116.73
-69.73
-1241.95
43.96
-1094.42
-63.47
-1199.03
47.90
-1121.95
-97.26
-1258.60
33.85
-1144.13
-95.56
-1265.13
40.16
-1118.14
-79.78
-1241.35
18.53
-1115.81
-85.47
-1218.69
-75.29
-1170.70
-253.62
-1322.17
-68.67
-1143.28
-252.33
-1287.35
-86.23
-1158.94
-262.18
-1296.98
58.68
-1127.71
-77.94
-1261.50
66.50
-1082.93
-75.32
-1205.44
57.79
-1127.81
-57.39
-1248.23
51.12
-1133.48
-81.55
-1265.44
51.45
-1096.50
-90.89
-1217.93
44.72
-1132.61
-67.06
-1248.89

Note: Each line corresponds to a specific model. Every specification excludes population weights. GP stands for gun prevalence. For a description of the various modeling assumptions see
Section 3.

