                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE PRICE OF RESPONSIBILITY:
           THE IMPACT OF HEALTH REFORM ON NON-POOR UNINSUREDS

                                           Mark Pauly
                                           Adam Leive
                                         Scott Harrington

                                       Working Paper 21565
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21565


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mark Pauly, Adam Leive, and Scott Harrington. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Price of Responsibility: The Impact of Health Reform on Non-Poor Uninsureds
Mark Pauly, Adam Leive, and Scott Harrington
NBER Working Paper No. 21565
September 2015
JEL No. I11,I13,I18

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the change in net (of subsidy) financial burden (“the price of responsibility”)
and in welfare that would be experienced by a large nationally representative sample of the “non-poor”
uninsured if they were to purchase Silver or Bronze plans on the ACA exchanges. The sample is the
set of full-year uninsured persons represented in the Current Population Survey for the pre-ACA period
with incomes above 138 percent of the federal poverty level. The estimated change in financial burden
compares out-of-pocket payments by income stratum in the pre-ACA period with the sum of premiums
(net of subsidy) and expected cost sharing (net of subsidy) for benchmark Silver and Bronze plans,
under various assumptions about the extent of increased spending associated with obtaining coverage.
In addition to changes in the financial burden, our welfare estimates incorporate the value of additional
care consumed and the change in risk premiums for changes in exposure to out-of-pocket payments
associated with coverage, under various assumptions about risk aversion. We find that the average
financial burden will increase for all income levels once insured. Subsidy-eligible persons with incomes
below 250 percent of the poverty threshold likely experience welfare improvements that offset the
higher financial burden, depending on assumptions about risk aversion and the value of additional
consumption of medical care. However, even under the most optimistic assumptions, close to half
of the formerly uninsured (especially those with higher incomes) experience both higher financial
burden and lower estimated welfare; indicating a positive “price of responsibility” for complying with
the individual mandate. The percentage of the sample with estimated welfare increases is close to
matching observed take-up rates by the previously uninsured in the exchanges.


Mark Pauly                                          Scott Harrington
Health Care Management Department                   Wharton School
The Wharton School                                  University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania                          206 Colonial Penn Center
208 Colonial Penn Center                            3641 Locust Walk
3641 Locust Walk                                    Philadelphia, PA 19014-6218
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218                         harring@wharton.upenn.edu
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

Adam Leive
Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
204 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
leive@wharton.upenn.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

       A major objective of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is to reduce financial barriers to

insurance, and thus to change the patterns of care and the total amount of care consumed. The

ideal outcome envisioned by designers of the law was near-universal coverage, with virtually all

Americans covered by health insurance. Such an outcome would presumably please the bulk of

the population that was and is insured and that previously paid for charity and bad debt care used

by the uninsured. But what would its effect be on the financial and economic welfare of those

formerly uninsured people? That is the question this paper addresses.

       The law includes three main provisions intended to reduce the number of uninsured with

incomes above the Medicaid eligibility threshold of 138 percent of the Federal Poverty Level

(FPL): (1) an individual mandate that will impose a fine if individuals remain uninsured (subject

to an exception if coverage is “unaffordable”); (2) insurance premium subsidies to persons with

incomes below 400 percent of FPL who obtain individual insurance through the exchanges and

insurance cost sharing subsidies to persons with incomes up to 250 percent of FPL who obtain

selected coverage through the exchanges; and (3) regulation of the relative premiums different

people pay for individual insurance by prohibiting underwriting and pricing based on health risk

and restricting premium variation in relation to age.

       There is little evidence on how reform might have affected the financial and economic

well-being of these “non-poor” potential enrollees (i.e., those with incomes above 138 percent of

FPL). The data does indicate that many previously uninsured individuals who were not poor

have obtained coverage through the exchanges during the first two enrollment years. Enrollment

data for 2015 indicate that 83 percent of exchange enrollees had incomes less than 250 percent of

FPL (ASPE 2015) and that estimated take up rates for exchange coverage by the previously




                                                                                                   2
uninsured decline sharply with increases in income (Avalere 2015).1 This paper estimates the

potential financial and welfare consequences of moving this “non-poor” uninsured population,

defined as those with incomes above the Medicaid limit, from no coverage to coverage.2

         In addition to the ACA’s obvious concern for the poor uninsured, there has been

considerable policy interest in the larger population of non-poor uninsured for several reasons.

Some argue that they act “irresponsibly” in not buying insurance and then failing to pay the full

cost of care they receive, relying instead on charity care and bad debt forgiveness. Their

irresponsibility is assumed to harm the insured members of the community both because the

insured finance some of the care used by the uninsured and because they experience distress in

observing the uninsured foregoing needed care due to financial barriers. Others are concerned

that, even when the non-poor uninsured are willing to pay the full cost of care out of pocket, they

may forgo care of high benefit to themselves and of concern to the rest of the community.

Indeed, the provision in the ACA imposing a financial penalty on those who fail to obtain

qualified coverage is called the “individual shared responsibility provision.”

         Reducing the extent and consequences of such “irresponsible” behavior was a major

motivation for including the individual mandate in the ACA and other health reform proposals.

One key question therefore is the law’s effect on the average cost of medical care and insurance

now shifted to the formerly uninsured who purchase coverage in response to the law. Another

key issue is the extent to which the law reduced the financial risk (variability) in the cost of care

for the formerly uninsured. But perhaps the most important key question is the extent to which

this population will move from uninsured to insured, and the gains and losses they would


1
  The extent to which previously uninsured persons have obtained coverage outside of the ACA exchanges is not yet
known.
2
  Below this income threshold, individuals are eligible for Medicaid unless their state has opted out of the expansion.
We consider 138 percent of FPL as the steady-state eligibility level for Medicaid.


                                                                                                                     3
experience from doing so. We therefore estimate the average financial impact of the law and

other dimensions of welfare change resulting from the value of greater protection against the risk

of high out-of-pocket cost and greater use of care.

         Our empirical approach begins with a comparison of the payments (all out of pocket)

made for care by the uninsured before the ACA to expected benchmark premiums and out-of-

pocket payments under ACA Silver and Bronze insurance plans.3 This comparison estimates the

financial effects of coverage for the uninsured who obtain and pay for such coverage. We

further estimate the welfare changes from increased coverage by developing estimates of any

changes in “risk premiums,” the values of increased risk protection. We also estimate the value

to the formerly uninsured of any additional care they receive associated with insurance coverage

under various assumptions concerning potential increases in the demand for care (whether due to

moral hazard or income effects), and valuation of that care. Our estimates account for both

premium subsidies and cost sharing subsidies. We focus on the lowest-cost Bronze plan and the

second-lowest Silver plan as benchmark post-ACA choices.4

         Finally, we use the resulting estimation of welfare gains and losses (in a way different

from the elasticity-based simulation models used to predict post-ACA takeup) to describe the

likely pattern of enrollment in or rejections of the new regulated, subsidized, and penalized

options available to consumers after the ACA. Our results should be interpreted as predictions of

the financial and welfare implications if nearly all of the uninsured were to purchase these types



3
  The ACA permits five categories of plans to be sold in the individual health insurance market with benchmark
actuarial values (percentage of eligible medical costs reimbursed by the plan, in parentheses): Bronze (60 percent),
Silver (70 percent), Gold (80 percent), Platinum (90 percent), and catastrophic plans for young adults (< 60 percent).
As noted, premium subsidies are available for plans purchased through the ACA exchanges for persons with
incomes up to 400 percent of FPL. Cost sharing subsidies are available to purchases of Silver plans with incomes up
to 250 percent of FPL.
4
  Premium subsidy amounts are based on the second lowest cost Silver plan offered in an enrollee’s geographic
rating area.


                                                                                                                    4
of coverage as the law intended. We do not estimate any welfare effects for the rest of the

community from redistribution of the cost of care or from values they might attach to improved

health or reduced financial risk for the formerly non-poor uninsured.

       We find that, since the non-poor uninsured previously paid a relatively small share of

their medical spending before the ACA and had a low level of total spending and use of care,

most of them will experience both high premiums (net of subsidies) and (perhaps surprisingly)

high average or expected out-of-pocket payments if they were to buy ACA coverage. At lower

income levels, subsidies for premiums and cost sharing will limit the financial costs and

incentivize purchase. At all income levels, the premiums will still represent positive payments

for those who (by definition) previously paid nothing for insurance, while the effect of coverage

in reducing out-of-pocket payments tends to be modest. At higher income levels, small or zero

subsidies and currently modest penalties will not be enough to affect the large welfare losses that

the middle class uninsured would experience were they to buy coverage. The minority of high

risks among the middle class uninsured may gain, but most uninsured will lose and, according to

our estimates, will prefer to remain uninsured at the current penalty levels for violating the

individual mandate.

       So in terms of welfare, our results suggest that many persons with low incomes may fare

better after the ACA, but those formerly uninsured at higher incomes not in poor health

consistently are worse off from purchasing coverage regardless of the assumptions made

regarding spending increases and risk aversion. For those at low income levels, the welfare

benefits from Silver coverage in terms of less variable out-of-pocket payments and from

increased use of care may outweigh financial costs, leading to welfare improvements even if

financial burden increases. Given that insurance reduces the variability of out-of-pocket




                                                                                                    5
payments, the specific magnitudes of the welfare estimates, and the extent to which lower

income groups benefit, depend in part on the assumed level of risk aversion and in part on the

assumed extent of welfare cost due to moral hazard. We consider a “best-case” scenario in terms

of the benefits furnished by insurance that assumes high risk aversion and values additional care

equal to its cost (effectively assuming zero welfare cost of moral hazard). Under that scenario,

we estimate meaningful welfare gains for the lowest-income group but still estimate sizable

average welfare losses for those above 250 percent of FPL, significantly reducing incentives for

obtaining coverage to comply with the law.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the basic empirical framework and

data. Section III presents the specific approach to measuring the financial and economic welfare

impacts of ACA coverage on the uninsured. Section IV presents results, and Section V

concludes.



II. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND DATA

       We use nationwide data from the CPS to measure the nationwide pre-ACA distribution of

uninsured persons by age, sex, income, and state. The CPS provides the largest available sample

of the uninsured at the state level. Information on the distribution of the uninsured by state is

critical for our analysis because ACA insurance premiums vary by state. We use the nationwide

MEPS to measure total health expenditures for this population and to estimate out-of-pocket

payments in both the pre- and post-ACA periods. The MEPS contains measures of health care

utilization and spending both by the patient and by other sources using the most detailed

collection methods among nationwide surveys measuring health expenditure (Caswell and




                                                                                                    6
O’Hara 2010), and it is the most frequently used data on total spending and out-of-pocket

spending for the uninsured.

           Our empirical model then compares the expected value of out-of-pocket payments for the

population in the CPS sample of uninsureds with estimates of the sum of the premium and

expected out-of-pocket payments for benchmark insurance plans for that population post ACA.

That is, the measure of Financial Impact (FI) is defined as:

           FI = E(OOPU) – (Prem + E(OOPI)

where E(OOPU) is the expected out-of-pocket payment when uninsured, E(OOPI) is the expected

out-of-pocket payment under the benchmark insurance plan, and Prem is the premium for that

plan.

           The CPS sample includes adults who are citizens or non-citizen legal immigrants. We

exclude observations who have any form of health insurance coverage (public or private), are

younger than age 25 or older than 64, or have incomes below 138 percent of the FPL. We also

limit the sample to single-person families to reduce possible errors in determining eligibility for

family insurance coverage or premium tax credits in the exchanges. We combined CPS data for

surveys from the years 2010 through 2012.

           Premiums on all plans in each geographic rating area were collected from Healthcare.gov

for the states in the Federally-Facilitated Marketplaces (FFM) and from state-based exchanges in

State-based Marketplaces (SBM).5 Premiums can vary within states by rating area. The

premiums collected from the government’s website are for individuals aged 40. We estimate

premiums for other ages of CPS respondents using standard age curves from the Center for




5
    We are grateful to Evan Saltzman for sharing his data on premiums from Taylor et al. (2015).



                                                                                                      7
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) or state-specific age-curves if applicable as published

by the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO).6



III. CALCULATION OF FINANCIAL AND WELFARE IMPACTS

A. Premiums and Out-of-Pocket Payments

        The measure of financial impact we use is the change in the sum of premiums and

expected out-of-pocket payments.7 This measure automatically adjusts for changes in coverage

by using estimates of changes in average or expected out-of-pocket payments. For example, a

formerly uninsured person who experiences a reduction in average out-of-pocket payment (after

any cost-sharing subsidies) will experience a financial gain if this reduction exceeds the increase

in net-of-subsidy premium paid. In the pre-ACA period this measure is obviously just the

expected out-of-pocket payment since no premiums are paid.

        The measure of premiums is a weighted average of the benchmark insurance premium for

each age level and state, weighted by proportions in the CPS population. Within each of a set of

income strata (based on income relative to the poverty line), the out-of-pocket payments and

premiums are estimated separately for different age-gender subgroups, to reflect both potential

demographic effects on out-of-pocket payments and the effect of age on exchange premiums.

We then calculate the average difference pre- and post-ACA within each income stratum, using

the demographic proportions in the CPS sample as weights.




6
  The age-curve data by state is available at: www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Programs-and-Initiatives/Health-Insurance-
Market-Reforms/state-rating.html#age (accessed September 3, 2015).
7
  This measure is the “total expected price” (TEP) from our earlier work (Pauly, Harrington, and Leive 2015), except
that pre-ACA TEP for the uninsured only measures expected out-of-pocket payment. Changes in TEP represent the
first-order effects of insurance coverage as modeled in the literature on health plan choice (Abaluck and Gruber
2011; Handel 2013; Heiss, Leive, McFadden, and Winter 2013).


                                                                                                                  8
        Estimated out-of-pocket payments in the pre-ACA period using pre-ACA MEPS data are

constructed from predictions from a GLM regression (with gamma family and log link) of out-

of-pocket payment against a third-order polynomial in age interacted with sex, variables

measuring income levels and ratio to the poverty line, census region of residence, MSA or non-

MSA location, race, survey year, and self-reported health status diagnoses of chronic conditions.

As described in detail below, we construct different risk groups based on age, sex, health status,

and income and take the means from the out-of-pocket payment regression predictions by risk

group. Since the MEPS sample is smaller than the CPS, we pool years 2007 through 2012.

        To construct the measure of expected out-of-pocket payment under a benchmark ACA

plan in the post-ACA period, we use data on total health care spending from the MEPS for each

demographic, health status, and income subgroup. We then match MEPS estimates to the

demographics of the CPS population within each income stratum. We impose the same

restrictions on income and age as we do in the CPS. We inflate both out-of-pocket payments and

total spending using the medical care component of the consumer price index from the Bureau of

Labor Statistics. We do not use the restricted state-level MEPS because the small sample sizes

by state prevents us from estimating spending distributions by age, sex, health status, and

income. We instead use the same distributions of spending for all states and do not make any

adjustments because analysis with the CPS found that state of residence was an insignificant

predictor of pre-ACA out-of-pocket spending.8



8
  The CPS contains data on out-of-pocket payments but not total health care spending. Our results are not sensitive
to using the CPS to estimate pre-ACA OOP instead of the MEPS. We use the MEPS for pre-ACA OOP because we
require its associated measure of total spending to estimate out-of-pocket payments post-ACA. In our previous
analysis of those insured in the individual market (Pauly, Harrington, and Leive 2015), we studied the sum of
insurance premiums and out-of-pocket payments in the pre-ACA period. Since the two quantities are tied together
through coverage generosity, we used the CPS for pre-ACA TEP since it contained both OOP and premiums for
large samples by state. Since our focus is now on the uninsured whose premiums were zero in the pre-ACA period,
we use the MEPS to estimate out-of-pocket payments both before and after the ACA for consistency.


                                                                                                                  9
       Measuring premiums and estimating out-of-pocket payments post-ACA requires a

number of assumptions. For a given plan, ACA premiums vary by age, geographic region, and

smoking status. Net-of-subsidy premiums vary by income level and the second-lowest cost

Silver plan in a region. Our calculations are based on non-smoker premiums, which will

understate average increases in TEP for the previously uninsured to the extent that post-ACA

premiums for smokers are higher than for non-smokers. Enrollees with incomes up to 400

percent of the FPL are eligible for premium subsidies in the form of tax credits. The law

stipulates the maximum percentage of modified adjusted gross income that the enrollee is

required to pay for coverage according to their income, as shown in the Appendix. The tax

credit is calculated as the difference between this maximum amount and their second-lowest

Silver plan premium in the person’s geographic rating area. This credit can also be directly

applied to the premiums of other plans, such as less expensive Bronze plans. We calculate the

tax credit using adjusted gross income measured in the CPS.

       To provide a range of estimates of the financial impacts under various plan choices, we

analyze premiums of the second-lowest premium Silver plan and the lowest premium Bronze

plan. The lowest premium Bronze plan corresponds to the cheapest option (ignoring catastrophic

plans for ages under 30). The second-lowest premium Silver plan is an important benchmark

because it determines the size of the tax credit, and cost sharing subsidies for persons with

income up to 250 percent of FPL are only available if a Silver plan is purchased. Evidence from

states participating in the Federally Facilitated Marketplace indicates that most consumers chose

the lowest or second-lowest cost Bronze and Silver plans (Burke, Misra, and Sheingold 2014).

We do not consider what plans the formerly uninsured actually chose in the exchanges, both




                                                                                                 10
because that data is still fragmentary and, more importantly, is endogenous to the TEP measure

we seek.

           For both the lowest premium Bronze and second-lowest premium Silver plans, we

construct a state-level premium average that is weighted by the uninsured population within each

county. The uninsured population is measured from the American Community Survey.9 Ideally,

we would match the premiums from each rating area to each of our CPS observations based on

zip code. However, the CPS data does not include geographic information necessary to match to

ACA rating areas. Instead, we match at the state-level, assigning the state’s average premium to

each CPS observation within that state.

           To estimate expected out-of-pocket costs under the ACA, we need a distribution of

medical care spending for the person to which the benefit provisions of Bronze or Silver

coverage will be applied. After gaining insurance coverage, the distribution of spending use for

the formerly uninsured may shift upward. Indeed, a major rationale for reform was to increase

the consumption of care by low-income uninsured people. The new level of consumption may

not match that of previous voluntary insurance purchasers, even after controlling for

demographics, due to different preferences or tastes for medical care between former insurance

purchasers and non-purchasers. For example, it is reasonable to believe that voluntary insurance

purchasers facing market premiums at a given risk level likely have higher demands for care

(conditional on insurance coverage) than those who must be subsidized or compelled to buy

insurance. But because the ACA forbids most risk underwriting (except for location, age, and

smoking), the uninsured population may have higher average risk than the insured population

within each demographic cell even without moral hazard. On the other hand, if there was



9
    The results are not sensitive to weighting by the total population rather than the uninsured population.


                                                                                                               11
previously adverse selection because of imperfect risk rating, the average uninsured health risk

may be lower. And if the uninsured have low tastes for care, the risk of spending—which is

what matters—may actually be lower for an uninsured person with health problems than for a

healthy insured person.

         We allow for variation in potential demand responses due to price, income effects, and

shifts in risk by estimating out-of-pocket spending using two different distributions of total

health spending from the MEPS. As a lower bound, we use the pre-ACA spending distribution

of the uninsured, which assumes no demand response (17,977 observations). At the other

extreme, we use the distribution of persons with full-year private insurance in either the

individual or group markets (42,903 observations). This group spends more than double that of

the uninsured, conditional on age, sex, and income.

         In each scenario, we further split the distributions by sex, ages above and below 40, self-

assessed health (fair or poor vs. good, very good, or excellent) and two income groups (above vs.

below 250 percent FPL) for a total of 16 age/sex/income cells. Sample size limitations preclude

forming distributions based on finer categories of age, income, and other factors. The choice of

16 age/sex/income cells balances the goal of predictive information about health expenditure

against adequate cell sizes.

         Based on the CPS sample, a sizeable fraction of the uninsured eligible for exchanges

have incomes well in excess of the poverty line. The proportion of the uninsured eligible for

exchanges with incomes above 175 percent of the poverty line is 80 percent, and the proportion

with incomes above 250 percent of the poverty line is 48 percent.10




10
  As noted in the introduction, take up of coverage in the exchanges has been negatively and strongly related to
income (Avalere 2015).


                                                                                                                   12
        As described earlier, for each observation in the relevant MEPS subsample we calculate

the (counterfactual) out-of-pocket payment that would result from applying representative cost

sharing for Bronze and Silver plans to their observed spending. We assume Bronze plans have a

deductible of $3,000 and coinsurance of 40 percent and that Silver plans have a $1,500

deductible and 20 percent coinsurance. Both plans have an OOP limit of $6,350.11 Although

specific benefit design information exists for each plan, the spending data is measured at

aggregate levels not detailed enough in terms of service or timing to create valid counterfactual

estimates, as data on individual insurance claims would permit.

        We incorporate cost sharing subsidies that reduce out-of-pocket payments for Silver

plans if the enrollee’s income level is below 250 percent of the FPL. These subsidies take the

form of reduced deductibles, coinsurance rates, and out-of-pocket maxima (see Appendix). For

each MEPS observation, we apply the cost sharing subsidies applicable to that level of income

when calculating out-of-pocket payments from total health spending. Very importantly, we also

assume that the formerly uninsured who obtain coverage receive no charity care or bad debt

adjustments to their cost sharing in the post-ACA period. The means of the simulated out-of-

pocket payments for each of the demographic groups are then assigned to the corresponding CPS

observations that match that age/sex/health status/income cell, weighting by the demographics of

the CPS population within that particular cell.12




11
   These parameters are consistent with those computed by various actuarial firms for Bronze and Silver plans
presented in Kaiser Family Foundation (2011) and meet the actuarial value regulations using the CCIIO calculator.
The deductibles are lower (and coinsurance higher) than reports on the deductibles most popular in plans actually
purchased.
12
   We adjust the mean out-of-pocket payment calculated from the MEPS according to the demographics in the CPS
within cells to account for differences in the age and income distributions within cells between surveys. As an
extreme example, if the CPS cell including ages below 40 includes 99 respondents aged 25 and 1 respondent aged
35, while the corresponding MEPS cells includes 99 respondents aged 35 and 1 respondent aged 25, we want to
correct for this difference since spending is related to age.


                                                                                                                13
B. Welfare Adjustments to Estimated Financial Impact

1. Risk aversion

         Because the demand for insurance stems from risk aversion, it is important to consider

the value of financial protection furnished by insurance. Given variability in the incidence and

severity of illness, any person’s observed out-of-pocket payment will likely differ from its

expected value (or from the average out-of-pocket payment for a population with the same socio-

demographic characteristics). We develop a measure of the variance of out-of-pocket spending

about its conditional mean before and after reform as a measure of financial protection, and value

any increased protection using Arrow-Pratt approximations of the risk premium assuming

constant absolute risk aversion.13

         Specifically, we calculate the variance of the difference between actual OOP and

predicted OOP from a GLM regression controlling for age, sex, geographic region, income,

years of education, survey year, race, smoking status, and prior diagnoses of chronic conditions.

We include measures of prior health status because they may be associated with differences in

expected out-of-pocket payments both while uninsured and with incomplete coverage in Bronze

or Silver plans. The residuals from these regressions represent the unexplained portion of out-of-

pocket costs that are uncertain from the consumer’s perspective. As a measure of risk, we

calculate the variances of the residuals under Bronze and Silver benefit designs described above

for each of the 16 demographic groups from our spending distributions. In calculating OOP for



13
  Note that the distribution of out-of-pocket payment will be affected by moral hazard as well as by insurance
coverage provisions. Other things equal, greater moral hazard will attenuate the financial value of insurance
protection for persons whose insurance includes cost sharing by boosting both total care consumed and aggregate
cost sharing for that care. If moral hazard is sufficiently high, financial risk may increase under insurance with cost
sharing. For example, if lowering cost sharing from 50percent to 40 percent caused spending to increase from 100 to
130, out-of-pocket spending would increase from 50 to 52. Even with demand elasticity lower than unity, moral
hazard attenuates the risk protection from greater insurance coverage.



                                                                                                                    14
those with incomes below 250 percent FPL, we incorporate cost sharing subsidies as shown in

the Appendix.

         The Arrow-Pratt risk premium approximation is 0.52, where  is the coefficient of

absolute risk aversion and 2 is the variance of unexplained OOP.14 The difference in variances

pre- and post-ACA multiplied by 0.5 thus yields the change in the risk premium, which will be

positive if the variance of OOP decreases once insured. We focus on results using a coefficient

of absolute risk aversion of 3 x 10-4 based on the insurance plan choice literature (Cohen and

Einav 2007; Handel 2013; Handel and Kolstad 2015).15 In robustness tests, we examine the

sensitivity of our results to other assumed levels of risk aversion.



2. Value of additional health care

         The second welfare adjustment reflects the value of additional care encouraged by

insurance. We have already incorporated additional OOP from higher spending associated with

providing coverage to the formerly uninsured. If there are no other impediments, and ignoring

income effects, the value of this care to the insured must equal or exceed the price paid out-of-

pocket, otherwise the care would not have been consumed (assuming informed consumers). But

its value must fall short of the total cost of the incremental care (otherwise the care would have

been consumed with no insurance), ignoring income effects. We assume that the value of the

marginal dollar’s worth of insured care to someone who obtains insurance with cost sharing c in

the post-ACA period is $c. But what was the marginal value of a dollar’s worth of care not


14
   This formula for the Arrow-Pratt approximation assumes risk is additively separable from wealth. The
approximation is accurate only for small risks or special cases such as CARA utility with normally distributed risks.
15
   At this level of risk aversion, a consumer with CARA utility U(x)  exp(x) / would be indifferent
between accepting or rejecting a bet that offered a 50-50 chance to win $1,000 or lose $768. As another example, a
consumer with CARA utility and this level of risk aversion who faces a 20 percent chance of suffering a $1,000 loss
would be willing to pay a risk premium of $225 to fully insure the prospective loss.
                                                   
                                                                                                                   15
covered by insurance in the pre-ACA period? If there were no charity or bad debt care it would

be worth $1. Assuming a linear demand curve, the value of the additional care would then be

(0.5) (1 - c) times the increment in spending. We use this value in our empirical estimates.

       What is the effect of charity or bad debt care that reduced the cost of care to uninsured

people below its price? We can use the MEPS data to calculate the ratio r of out-of-pocket

payments to estimated total cost of care for the uninsured. That ratio is less than one for all

income categories (though it is higher for higher income uninsured) because of charity care and

bad debt. If the uninsured were able to adjust quantities, taking r into account, the starting point

marginal value would be $r and the change in cost sharing would be (r - c)—so the value of

additional care would be lower than described in the previous paragraph. Since one of the

purposes of charity care for donors was presumably to increase access and use of care by the

uninsured to higher levels than they would have chosen facing the full price, we would expect

some increase. But it may be that there were some (more) strict limits on care for the uninsured.

This would be especially likely for bad debt, but could even characterize charity care if donors

were more interested in alleviating the financial burden on the uninsured than in expanding

volume. Hence we do not add a further downward adjustment to the value of care in our

empirical estimates, but note that they could represent an overvaluation of the benefits from

additional use from the direct consumer’s perspective.

       Figure 1 illustrates. We assume away income effects in this example, so that the demand

curve for a representative uninsured person DU also reflects that persons’ marginal benefit from

care. The coinsurance rate after the person buys coverage is c, and the person is able to obtain

the quantity he or she would demand at that price QI. If in contrast the person were both

uninsured and had to pay the full price of care, the quantity would be QU. But if the person




                                                                                                   16
received charity care that reduced the marginal price per dollar of care to r, he or she would

demand QR.

       The two potential measures of the value of any additional care obtained by the formerly

uninsured person are: (1) the area under the demand curve from QR to QI; or (2) the area under

the demand curve from QU to QI. The latter amount would correspond to the limiting case in

which donors (or debt forgiveness) held the increase in use in the pre-reform case to zero.

       In summary: to estimate the value of the additional care caused by the presence of

insurance coverage, we need to consider the effective marginal price before the ACA and the

effective marginal price after the ACA given the choice of some particular ACA “metallic” tier

of coverage. If the marginal price before the ACA were 100 percent of the cost or price, then the

value of increased use is 0.5(P – cP)DQ, where c is the post ACA coinsurance rate and DQ is the

increase in use associated with it. But if the effective coinsurance rate before reform was less

than unity (because of charity care), then the value may be as low as r, so the calculation would

be 0.5(rP – cP)DQ.

       We provide one additional calculation corresponding to a “best-case” scenario in terms of

the benefit furnished by insurance. One might assume that, because of imperfect information

and other impediments, the additional care used had a higher value than implied by the previous

discussion. There are some estimates that the additional use of care for the formerly uninsured

might yield health benefits so large that it is cost effective (Miller, Vigdor, and Manning 2004).

In the “best-case” scenario, we assume that incremental care had value equal to its cost in

calculating welfare changes from insurance. We also use a higher level of risk aversion of 0.001

to calculate the risk reduction benefits from ACA coverage in this scenario.




                                                                                                   17
IV. RESULTS

         The CPS and MEPS data indicate that the uninsured spent relatively modest amounts out-

of-pocket, on average, prior to the ACA. The mean OOP for the MEPS data shown in Table 1 is

$409 (which is slightly higher than for the CPS). The data strongly suggest that the non-poor

uninsured received costly care for which they did not pay, even at relatively high income levels.

The difference between the “cost of care” the uninsured received (shown as total spending pre-

ACA) and what they paid (OOP pre-ACA) is usually attributed to charity care and bad debt. The

actuarial value of the implicit insurance that the uninsured received (at zero premiums), i.e., the

fraction of total care not paid by the uninsured varies little across income groups, and averages

about 75 percentmore generous than a Bronze plan and similar to that for a Silver plan.16

         Gross and net premiums for Silver and Bronze plans are presented in the remaining

columns of Table 1. The gross premiums differ by income only due to differences in the age

distribution within each income stratum. Gross premiums on average are substantially higher

than pre-ACA expected out-of-pocket payments for all income strata. Even with premium tax

credits, Silver premiums are more than twice the level of expected pre-ACA OOP, even for those

between 138 and 175 percent of FPL who receive large premium subsidies. On average for the

full sample of formerly uninsureds, the net Silver premium of $2,458 is more than five times

larger than pre-ACA OOP. The minimum premium Bronze plan has an average annual net

premium of $1,541 across income groups. Applying the tax credit to lowest cost Bronze plans

allows those at lower incomes to purchase coverage at very low prices. Individuals between 138

and 175 percent FPL would pay an average of just over $21 per month ($261 annually) for the

minimum premium Bronze plan. But for all other income groups and for all other coverage


16
  Specifically, the actuarial value is calculated as 1– r, where r is the ratio of total OOP summed across consumers
to total spending summed across consumers. We use both OOP and total spending from the MEPS for consistency.


                                                                                                                  18
options, the post-ACA premiums alone exceed the average out-of-pocket payment while

uninsured. So even if we assumed that post-ACA insurance eliminated out of pocket payments,

the average uninsured person will suffer a financial loss because he or she will pay more in

premiums than their expected payments when uninsured.

       Table 2 presents estimated expected OOP in Bronze and Silver plans, again displaying

pre-ACA OOP while uninsured for comparison. For both metallic levels, we present estimates

for the two spending distributions used to simulate OOP in the post-ACA period: (1) original

uninsured spending (implying no moral hazard); and (2) spending for persons insured in the

individual market. For the uninsured with low incomes, estimated out-of-pocket spending is

moderately reduced in Silver plans due to cost sharing subsidies if the spending distribution

remains the same as without insurance, whereas the higher-income uninsured consistently have

higher out-of-pocket spending even after obtaining coverage. With Bronze coverage, average

OOP increases because cost-sharing subsidies are only available with Silver plans and the

implicit actuarial value (as a proportion of total spending) from bad debt and charity care while

uninsured was well above the 60 percent benchmark for Bronze coverage.

       Table 3 shows that the sum of premiums and out-of-pocket payments (TEP) substantially

exceeds the amounts paid while uninsured, even at lowest income levels. For all of the reasons

just discussed, those receiving low or zero subsidies from the ACA pay more on average than

they did in the pre-ACA period. But even these lower income people receiving significant

premium and cost sharing subsidies end up paying more than before the ACA, largely because

the ACA subsidies fall short of the implied subsidy provided by charity and bad debt care in the

pre-ACA period.




                                                                                                    19
          As shown in Table 4, Panel A, ACA-approved coverage often does reduce the standard

deviation of out-of-pocket spending for Silver plans, (while potentially increasing the mean

value). However, the variability of OOP spending increases at all income levels for Bronze

plans. The cap on out-of-pocket payments and Silver plan cost sharing subsidies drive the

reductions in risk for Silver plans. On average, the standard deviation for OOP in Silver plans

falls even though mean spending rises with the privately insured distribution due to better

coverage.

          Panel B of Table 4 translates the change in variances (pre minus post) into a change in

the risk premium, so that positive numbers indicate a fall in the risk premium after the ACA,

representing greater financial protection. The large reductions in OOP risk for Silver plans

translate into reduced risk premiums compared to pre-ACA OOP (Panel B of Table 4). In

contrast, although Bronze plans cap out-of-pocket payments, the relatively low variability in pre-

ACA OOP results in small increases in the risk premium from pre-ACA levels to post-ACA

levels using the spending distribution of the previously uninsured. The increases in risk

premiums for Bronze plans based on individually insured spending are greater, indicating less

risk protection benefits in Bronze plans compared with charity and bad debt care in the pre-ACA

period.

          Estimates of total medical care spending and the value of the increased care consumed

due to insurance are presented in Table 5. The estimated values of increased care are between

$2,064 and $2,760 using the conventional approximation to measuring the welfare cost of moral

hazard, which assumes the marginal value of care is half its cost. The estimated benefits for

Bronze coverage are modestly larger than for Silver coverage because the consumer pays higher




                                                                                                    20
out-of-pocket prices under Bronze plans and thus less of total spending is counted as deadweight

loss compared to Silver plans (with total spending assumed to be constant).

       The total welfare change from obtaining coverage is calculated by subtracting the

benefits from insurance from the additional amounts paid for insurance and care. Specifically,

the difference in the risk premium and value of increased care consumed represent the benefits

from insurance, while the difference in the sum of premium and average OOP (post minus pre)

represents the price paid.

        Table 6 presents estimates of welfare change by income group if all (or a random

sample) of that group were to obtain coverage. Average welfare for the uninsured population

would be estimated to decline after the ACA if all members of that population obtained

coverage. The fall in welfare is roughly the same amounts on average for Bronze and Silver

plans. At the lowest income stratum and under the assumption that spending increases, there are

welfare gains because of subsidies and increased access. Those at all higher-income levels, a

majority of the uninsured eligible for exchanges, suffer welfare losses that increase with income

because subsidies diminish and then disappear.

        To examine the sensitivity of our results to health risk, the risk aversion parameter, and

the value of additional consumption, we also provide estimates for subpopulations at various risk

levels and for the entire population using a risk aversion coefficient of 0.001 and an assumption

that the value of all additional care is equal to the amount of spending. Table 7 shows the

distribution of welfare changes for subpopulations based on health risk. As expected, higher risk

groups that will benefit from community rating will sometimes be better off because they benefit

from substantially increased care but their specific premiums do not reflect that higher use.

Table 8 in contrast shows the “best-case” scenario in terms of the benefits furnished by insurance




                                                                                                 21
for the population of formerly uninsured.17 Persons between 138 and 175 percent of FPL on

average are now substantially better off with Silver and Bronze coverage using the distribution of

privately insured spending but face welfare losses under the previously uninsured spending

distribution. The estimates still indicate welfare declines for higher-income groups, with the

estimated losses ranging up to several thousand dollars.

        To summarize, we consistently find that the previously uninsured with incomes above

250 percent of FPL would on average experience welfare declines with Silver or Bronze

coverage. Tables 9 and 10 provide estimates of takeup rates calculated by subtracting from any

welfare loss the penalty associated with the individual mandate as well as the explicit subsidies.

Not unexpectedly, predicted takeup rates are high among high risks but low among the more

numerous low and average risks even in the optimistic best case scenario. Estimated takeup rates

are close to those observed in the insurance exchanges (Avalere 2015).



V. CONCLUSION

        Our estimates indicate that the majority of the previously uninsured would be subject to

substantial negative financial impacts by purchasing insurance on exchanges in response to the

ACA. Impacts on welfare are less stark, with potential gains at low income and high risk levels.

However, many of the non-poor formerly uninsured are estimated to be worse off because the

subsidies are not large enough and coverage not generous enough to offset their new obligation

to pay part of the premium along with required cost sharing. This loss contributes to the

relatively low estimated takeup rates to date for exchange coverage for persons who do not

qualify for large premium subsidies and cost sharing subsidies. The result is driven by the


17We do not provide estimates based on the lower value of additional care discussed earlier in the paper, where the
uninsured adjusted their use based on lower marginal out-of-pocket prices due to charity care.


                                                                                                                 22
uninsured paying a small fraction of their costs prior to the ACA, and this empirical pattern also

explains the low estimated value of providing Medicaid to the uninsured in recent work by

Finkelstein, Hendren, and Luttmer (2015).

       To be sure, benefits from ACA coverage include better protection against very large and

unexpected out-of-pocket payments, and access to additional care which provides some health

and consumption benefits. Even if a formerly uninsured person is made worse off, the rest of the

community may gain from the now “responsible” behavior. It will be important to examine the

level and pattern of these increased financial burdens to judge whether they are of sufficient

social value to justify their imposition.




                                                                                                 23
References

Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly:
Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program.” American Economic Review
101(4): 1180–1210.

ASPE. 2015. “Health Insurance Marketplaces 2015 Open Enrollment Period: March Enrollment
Report.” ASPE Issue Brief, March 10.

Avalere Health. 2015. “Exchanges Struggle to Enroll Consumers as Income Increases.”
Washington, DC: Avalere Health LLC, March 25.

Burke, Amy, Arpit Misra, and Steven Sheingold. 2014. “Premium Affordability, Competition,
and Choice in the Health Insurance Marketplace, 2014.” ASPE Research Brief, Department of
Health and Human Services.

Caswell, Kyle, and Brett O’Hara. 2010. “Medical Out-of-Pocket Expenses, Poverty, and the
Uninsured.” U.S. Census Bureau SEHSD Working Paper 2010-17.

Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice.”
American Economic Review 97(3): 745-788.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark Cullen. 2013. “Selection
on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance.” American Economic Review 103(1): 178–219.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo Luttmer, 2015, “The Value of Medicaid:
Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment” NBER Working Paper
21308

Handel, Benjamin. 2013. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
Nudging Hurts.” American Economic Review 103(7): 2643–82.

Handel, Benjamin, and Jonathan Kolstad. 2015. “Health Insurance for Humans: Information
Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare.” American Economic Review (forthcoming).

Heiss, Florian, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. 2013. “Plan Selection in
Medicare Part D: Evidence from Administrative Data.” Journal of Health Economics 32(6):
1325-1344.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2011. “What the Actuarial Values in the Affordable Care at Mean.”
Publication No. 8177, Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

Miller, Wilhelmine, Elizabeth Richardson Vigdor, and Willard G. Manning. 2004. “Covering the
Uninsured: What Is it Worth?” Health Affairs – Web Exclusive, W4-157 – W4-167.




                                                                                              24
Pauly, Mark, Scott Harrington, Adam Leive. 2015. “Sticker Shock in Individual Insurance under
Health Reform.” American Journal of Health Economics (forthcoming).

Taylor, Erin, Evan Saltzman, Sebastian Bauhoff, Rosalie Pacula, and Christine Eibner 2015.
“More Choice in Health Insurance Marketplaces May Reduce the Value of the Subsidies
Available to Low-Income Enrollees.” Health Affairs 34(1): 1104-1110.




                                                                                             25
Figure 1. Valuation of additional consumption from lower prices due to insurance
                                coverage




      $




                                                                                   26
                        Table 1. Average annual pre-ACA OOP and post-ACA premiums
                                   for alternative spending distributions ($)
                                                                            Net Silver    Gross
Income                               Total      Gross Silver                premium       Bronze      Net Bronze
 group                  OOP pre-   spending       premium                      (2nd      premium       premium
(%FPL)                   ACA       pre-ACA      (2nd lowest)   Tax credit    lowest)     (lowest)      (lowest)

138 – 175 (N = 1,515)        373        1,624          3,794        2,735        1,059        2,857           261
175 – 250 (N = 2,390)        351        1,510          3,739        1,923        1,816        2,812           910
250 – 325 (N = 1,518)        462        1,978          3,787          880        2,907        2,847         1,967
325 – 400 (N = 763)          457        1,976          3,943          587        3,356        2,961         2,374
>400 (N = 1,333)             461        1,975          4,033            0        4,033        3,030         3,030

Total (N = 7,519)            409        1,761          3,836        1,378        2,458        2,885         1,541




                                                                                                                    27
        Table 2. Average annual out-of-pocket payments for alternative spending distributions ($)

                                                   Silver                              Bronze

                                       Previous             Privately        Previous           Privately
 Income group        Pre-ACA
                                       uninsured             insured         uninsured           insured
    (%FPL)             OOP
                                       spending             spending         spending           spending
 138 – 175                    373              357                 1,032             784               1,909
 175 – 250                    351              340                 1,004             745               1,851
 250 – 325                    462              691                 1,613             965               2,271
 325 – 400                    457              683                 1,602             952               2,257
 >400                         461              686                 1,603             957               2,259

Total                         409               513               1,304               857             2,064
Note: The first column presents estimated OOP paid by the uninsured before the ACA using data from the MEPS.
The remaining columns estimate OOP under Silver and Bronze plans assuming different distributions of total
spending as described in the text using data from MEPS.




                                                                                                               28
        Table 3. Average annual total expected price (TEP) for alternative spending distributions ($)

                                                  Silver                               Bronze

                                       Previous            Privately        Previous            Privately
Income group
                      Pre-ACA          uninsured            insured         uninsured            insured
   (%FPL)
                                       spending            spending         spending            spending
138 – 175                     373            1,416                2,091           1,045                2,170
175 – 250                     351            2,156                2,820           1,655                2,761
250 – 325                     462            3,598                4,520           2,932                4,238
325 – 400                     457            4,039                4,958           3,326                4,631
>400                          461            4,720                5,636           3,987                5,289

Total                         409            2,971               3,762            2,398                 3,605
Note: The first column presents estimated OOP paid by the uninsured before the ACA. The remaining columns
present the sum of premiums and expected OOP payments under Silver and Bronze plans assuming different
distributions of total spending as described in the text using data from MEPS.




                                                                                                                29
                     Table 4. Standard deviation of unpredictable OOP and risk premiums for alternative spending distributions ($)

                                                                             A. Standard deviation of unpredictable OOP

                                                                 Silver                                                                  Bronze

Income group                              Previous uninsured              Privately insured                        Previous uninsured           Privately insured
                  Pre-ACA OOP
   (%FPL)                                      spending                       spending                                  spending                    spending
138 – 175                 1,242                       500                            704                                      1,345                       1,869
175 – 250                 1,214                       490                            697                                      1,317                       1,854
250 – 325                 1,270                     1,012                          1,404                                      1,416                       1,881
325 – 400                 1,266                     1,009                          1,401                                      1,411                       1,879
>400                      1,280                     1,004                          1,383                                      1,406                       1,867

Total                     1,248                         745                        1,040                                      1,369                       1,867

                                                         B. Change in Risk premiums (pre- minus post ACA Arrow-Pratt approximations)

                                                                 Silver                                                                  Bronze

Income group                              Previous uninsured                                                        Previous uninsured
                                                                          Privately insured                                                     Privately insured
   (%FPL)                                      spending                                                                  spending
                                                                              spending                                                              spending

138 – 175                                         229                            193                                         -16                       -262
175 – 250                                         217                            181                                         -16                       -266
250 – 325                                         123                            -20                                         -29                       -252
325 – 400                                         118                            -24                                         -31                       -256
>400                                              128                             -9                                         -22                       -242

Total                                             174                             87                                         -21                       -257
  Note: Panel A presents the standard deviation from the residual of a GLM regression of out-of-pocket spending against a cubic in age interacted with sex, cubic
  in income as a percentage of the FPL, indicators for year, race, MSA or non-MSA area, four Census regions, and income levels. Panel B reports the difference in
  variances of unexplained OOP multiplied by one-half the coefficient of absolute risk aversion of 0.0003. This estimate of the change in risk premiums represents
  the value of differences in risk protection after the ACA.



                                                                                                                                                                30
            Table 5. Average annual total spending and value of additional care or alternative spending distributions ($)


                                                                                               Value of Increased Care Consumed


                                        Total Spending                                        Silver                          Bronze

   Income
                   Previous uninsured           Privately insured                       Privately insured                Privately insured
    group
                        spending                    spending                                spending                         spending
   (%FPL)

138 – 175                           1,605                       5,321                                    2,064                               2,601
175 – 250                           1,499                       5,061                                    2,171                               2,493
250 – 325                           1,979                       5,922                                    2,563                               2,760
325 – 400                           1,966                       5,908                                    2,562                               2,759
>400                                1,960                       5,885                                    2,551                               2,747

Total                               1,750                       5,525                                    2,339                               2,643
Note: The value of additional care equals one-half of the change in total spending for the respective distribution of spending.




                                                                                                                                                     31
     Table 6. Average change in welfare by income for alternative spending distributions ($)

                                       Silver                                    Bronze

                          Previous              Privately            Previous             Privately
   Income group
                          uninsured              insured             uninsured             insured
      (%FPL)
                          spending              spending             spending             spending

    138 – 175                       -814                  539                 -688                  543
    175 – 250                     -1,588                 -117               -1,320                 -184
    250 – 325                     -3,014               -1,516               -2,499               -1,268
    325 – 400                     -3,464               -1,963               -2,901               -1,672
    >400                          -4,131               -2,633               -3,548               -2,323

   Total                          -2,388                 -928               -2,010                  -810
Note: The change in welfare is calculated assuming a coefficient of absolute risk aversion  equal to 0.0003
and that the value of additional care equals one-half the change in total spending. All changes are
significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level based on tests from running an OLS regression of welfare
change for each observation against indicator variables, clustering by age-state pairs.




                                                                                                               32
 Table 7. Average change in welfare by health status and income for alternative spending distributions ($):

                                                        Silver                                    Bronze

                                          Previous               Privately            Previous              Privately
     Self-assessed health                 uninsured               insured             uninsured              insured
                                          spending               spending             spending              spending

Fair or Poor                                      -2,038                   728                -1,961                     791
Good, Very Good, Excellent                        -2,421                -1,083                -2,015                    -960


                                                                      Fair or Poor health
Income group (%FPL)
 138 – 175                                          -387                 2,219                  -815                    2,027
 175 – 250                                        -1,235                 1,434                -1,316                    1,179
 250 – 325                                        -2,743                  235*                -2,340                      621
 325 – 400                                        -3,336                  -651                -2,856                    -247*
 >400                                             -4,551                -1,536                -4,040                   -1,062

                                                           Good, Very Good, or Excellent health
Income group (%FPL)
 138 – 175                                          -863                   346                  -673                      372
 175 – 250                                        -1,621                  -262                -1,321                     -311
 250 – 325                                        -3,039                -1,676                -2,513                   -1,441
 325 – 400                                        -3,477                -2,098                -2,905                   -1,818
 >400                                             -4,101                -2,710                -3,513                   -2,411
     Note: The change in welfare is calculated assuming a coefficient of absolute risk aversion  equal to 0.0003
     and that the value of additional care equals one-half the change in total spending.. * Change not statistically
     different from zero at the 0.1 level. All changes are significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level based
     on tests from running an OLS regression of welfare change for each observation against indicator variables,
     clustering by age-state pairs.




                                                                                                                                33
             Table 8. Average change in welfare under “Best-case” scenario
                       for alternative spending distributions ($):


                                   Silver                                  Bronze

     Income            Previous           Individually         Previous          Individually
      group            uninsured             insured           uninsured            insured
     (%FPL)            spending             spending           spending            spending


   138 – 175                    -279               2,642                -725              1,046
   175 – 250                  -1,081               1,695              -1,358                263
   250 – 325                  -2,728                -183              -2,565               -674
   325 – 400                  -3,188                -640              -2,973             -1,087
   >400                       -3,832              -1,279              -3,598             -1,709

  Total                       -1,982                 712              -2,060                -277
Note: The welfare estimates in this table assume a coefficient of absolute risk aversion  = 0.001
and the value of additional care equals its cost. All changes are significantly different from zero
at the 0.01 level based on tests from running an OLS regression of welfare change for each
observation against indicator variables, clustering by age-state pairs.




                                                                                                      34
                                 Table 9. Predicted take-up rates by income for alternative spending distributions ($)

                                                                                                                       "Best case" scenario
                                  Previous uninsured                   Privately insured                  Previous uninsured         Privately insured
                                       spending                            spending                            spending                  spending
Income group                    Silver            Bronze             Silver          Bronze                 Silver       Bronze         Silver         Bronze
(%FPL)
 138 – 175                               8%               0%               75%             77%                   26%        16%            100%              74%
 175 – 250                               0%               0%               46%             49%                   16%         5%             90%              57%
 250 – 325                               0%               1%                7%             13%                    2%         1%             53%              37%
 325 – 400                               1%               1%                3%              8%                    1%         1%             38%              25%
 >400                                    1%               1%                5%              5%                    1%         1%             34%              21%

Total                                    2%               0%               32%             35%                   11%         5%              69%             46%
        Note: For the base scenario (columns 1-4), the coefficient of absolute risk aversion equals 0.0003 and the value of additional care is assumed to equal
        one-half its cost. For the “Best-case” scenarios, risk aversion  = 0.001 and value of additional care equals its cost.




                                                                                                                                                                35
                                                      Table 10. Predicted take-up rates by income and health status

                                                                                                                                     "Best case" scenario
                                               Previous uninsured                   Privately insured                   Previous uninsured         Privately insured
                                                    spending                            spending                             spending                  spending
                                             Silver            Bronze             Silver           Bronze                Silver       Bronze         Silver          Bronze
Health status
Fair or Poor                                       17%                 4%               69%             73%                   40%         26%             89%               79%
Good, Very Good, or Excellent                       1%                 0%               29%             32%                    8%          3%             67%               43%

                                                                                                 Fair or Poor health
Income group (%FPL)
 138 – 175                                         53%                0%                92%             91%                   76%         44%            100%               86%
 175 – 250                                          3%                0%                76%             75%                   49%         30%            100%               76%
 250 – 325                                          6%                7%                80%             81%                   21%         17%             81%               81%
 325 – 400                                          8%                8%                31%             70%                    8%         10%             73%               73%
 >400                                              12%               12%                29%             32%                   12%         12%             68%               75%

                                                                                       Good, Very Good, or Excellent health
Income group (%FPL)
 138 – 175                                            3%               0%               73%             76%                   20%         13%            100%               73%
 175 – 250                                            0%               0%               43%             47%                   13%          2%             89%               55%
 250 – 325                                            0%               0%                0%              7%                    0%          0%             51%               33%
 325 – 400                                            0%               0%                0%              1%                    0%          0%             35%               21%
 >400                                                 1%               1%                4%              3%                    1%          1%             31%               17%
     Note: For the base scenarios (Columns 1-4), the coefficient of absolute risk aversion  equals 0.0003 and value of additional care equals one-half its cost. For the
     “Best-case” scenarios (Columns 5-8), risk aversion  = 0.001 and value of additional care equals its cost.




                                                                                                                                                                      36
                                        Appendix

                      Schedule of Premium and Cost Sharing Subsidies

                                 Premium subsidy:                  Cost sharing subsidy

                AGI from CPS
 Income group                    Max % income on        Max               Max             Max OOP
                 uninsured
    (%FPL)                          premium           deductible       coinsurance         limit
                 sample ($)

138 – 150               18,513                4.0              0               0.15             1000
150 – 200               24,363                6.3            400               0.15             2000
200 – 250               33,080                8.0           1500                 0.2           2,250
250 – 400               42,005                9.5     No subsidy         No subsidy       No subsidy
>400                    80,448         No subsidy     No subsidy         No subsidy       No subsidy




                                                                                                37
