                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MONETARY POLICY, BOND RISK PREMIA, AND THE ECONOMY

                                           Peter N. Ireland

                                        Working Paper 21576
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21576


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




I would like to thank Michael Belongia, Anna Cieslak, Urban Jermann, and two anonymous referees
for very helpful comments on previous drafts. I received no external support for and have no financial
interest that relates to the research described in this paper. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and
recommendations expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Trustees
of Boston College or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy, Bond Risk Premia, and the Economy
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 21576
September 2015
JEL No. E32,E43,E44,E52,G12

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops an affine model of the term structure of interest rates in which bond yields are
driven by observable and unobservable macroeconomic factors. It imposes restrictions to identify the
effects of monetary policy and other structural disturbances on output, inflation, and interest rates
and to decompose movements in long-term rates into terms attributable to changing expected future
short rates versus risk premia. The estimated model highlights a broad range of channels through which
monetary policy affects risk premia and the economy, risk premia affect monetary policy and the economy,
and the economy affects monetary policy and risk premia.


Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu
1     Introduction

With their traditional instrument of monetary policy, the short-term federal funds rate,
locked up against its zero lower bound since 2008, Federal Reserve officials have resorted to
other means for influencing long-term interest rates in order to provide further stimulus to a
struggling US economy. Some of these non-traditional policy measures, such as the provision
of “forward guidance,” aim to lower long-term interest rates by shaping expectations about
the future path of short-term rates, in particular, by creating expectations that the federal
funds rate will remain at or near zero even as the economy continues to recover. Other new
programs, including multiple rounds of “large-scale asset purchases,” known more popularly
as “quantitative easing,” attempt to lower long-term interest rates more directly by reducing
the term, or risk, premia that ordinarily cause long-term rates to exceed the average expected
value of the short-term policy rate and thereby generate a yield curve with its most typical,
upward slope. As former Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke (2013, p.7) explains: “To the
extent that Treasury securities and agency-guaranteed securities are not perfect substitutes
for other assets, Federal Reserve purchases of these assets should lower their term premiums,
putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and easing financial conditions more
broadly.”
    In addition to the assumption, stated clearly by the Chair, that Federal Reserve bond
purchases work to lower long-term rates by reducing the size of term or risk premia, a second
assumption, equally important but left implicit, that provides the rationale for those policy
actions is that reductions in risk premia are effective at stimulating the private demand for
goods and services and thereby work to increase aggregate output and inflation in much the
same way that more traditional monetary policy actions do. Yet, as Rudebusch, Sack, and
Swanson (2007) astutely note, although this “practitioner view” that smaller long-term bond
risk premia stimulate economic activity is quite widely held, surprisingly little support for
the view can be found in existing theoretical or empirical work. In textbook New Keynesian
models such as Woodford (2003) and Galı́’s (2008), for instance, the effects of monetary

                                              1
policy actions on aggregate output arise only to the extent that they have implications for
current and future values of the short-term interest rate. Thus, as Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003) show, these models offer a rationale for the provision of forward guidance but not for
large-scale asset purchases. Andrés, López-Salido, and Nelson (2004) elaborate on the New
Keynesian framework, introducing features that imply the imperfect substitutability referred
to in Chair Bernanke’s comment from above, to demonstrate how downward movements in
long-term yields can stimulate aggregate demand even holding the path of short rates fixed.
More recently, however, Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012) have estimated this model with
US data from 1987 through 2009 and concluded that the extra effects running through this
additional channel are of limited practical importance. In a similar exercise, Kiley (2014)
finds somewhat stronger effects of changes in risk premia on aggregate demand, but mainly
when the long-term interest rates used in the estimation are those on corporate bonds instead
of Treasury securities.
   In the meantime, using a variety of empirical approaches, Ang, Piazzesi, and Wei (2006)
and Dewachter, Iania, and Lyrio (2014) find that changes in bond risk premia do not help
forecast future output, while Hamilton and Kim (2002), Favero, Kaminska, and Söderström
(2005), and Wright (2006) obtain estimates associating larger bond risk premia with faster
future output growth, exactly the opposite of what the practitioner view asserts. Jardet,
Monfort, and Pegoraro (2013), by contrast, detect evidence of the expected, inverse relation
between risk premia and future output, but estimate the effect to be short-lived, reversing
itself after less than one year. Rudebusch, Sack, and Swanson (2007) also find some evidence
of an inverse relation between term premia and future output, although, as they point out,
this result appears quite sensitive to both the specification of the forecasting equation and
the choice of sample period used to estimate the model. Finally, Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo
Duca (2013) find stronger links between monetary policy actions, financial market measures
of risk, and economic activity that are consistent with the practitioner view, but derive their
risk measures from the stock-option-based VIX instead of from risk premia embedded into


                                              2
the prices of the government bonds that the Federal Reserve has been purchasing.
   Motivated by the weak and often conflicting results reported in previous studies, this
paper develops and estimates a model designed specifically to explore the interplay between
monetary policy, bond risk premia, and the economy. Rather than imposing a strong set
of theoretical assumptions about how these channels of transmission arise, as, for example,
Andrés, López-Salido, and Nelson (2004) do in their extension of the tightly-parameterized
New Keynesian model, the approach taken here uses a more flexible, multivariate time
series model to assess the extent to which, operating through a wider range of mechanisms,
changes in monetary policy affect bond risk premia and the economy and changes in bond
risk premia influence aggregate output and inflation and lead the Federal Reserve, in turn, to
adjust its monetary policy stance relative to what purely macroeconomic conditions would
otherwise dictate. The paper’s goal, therefore, is to add to the existing empirical literature,
cited above, in hopes of highlighting more clearly the regularities in the data that future
theoretical work, perhaps along the same lines as Andrés, López-Salido, and Nelson (2004),
might try to explain more fully.
   Of course, even with a more flexible empirical specification, some assumptions must be
drawn from theory in order to identify the effects that different fundamental shocks have
on endogenous variables. Here, those assumptions are borrowed from three sources. First,
following Ang and Piazzesi (2003), cross-equation restrictions implied by no-arbitrage in
an affine model of the term structure of interest rates are used to identify the unobserved
risk premia built into observable bond yields. But while Ang and Piazzesi’s (2003) original
model allows macroeconomic variables to affect the behavior of the yield curve, by design it
omits channels through which changes in the yield curve can feed back on and affect their
macroeconomic drivers. Here, as in Ang, Piazzesi, and Wei (2006), Diebold, Rudebusch, and
Aruoba (2006), and Pericoli and Taboga (2008), the model allows for such feedback effects.
Going further than those previous studies, however, the model developed here draws, second,
on identifying assumptions like those used in more conventional vector autoregressions for


                                              3
macroeconomic variables alone to isolate the effects of monetary policy shocks on bond
risk premia and the effects of shocks to bond risk premia on output and inflation. Similar
assumptions are also employed by Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca (2013) but, as noted above,
using observed movements in the equity options-based VIX measure of stock market volatility
rather than movements in bond risk premia implied by no-arbitrage. Third, as in the New
Keynesian models outlined by Woodford (2003) and Galı́ (2008), Federal Reserve policy is
described here by a monetary policy rule like that proposed by Taylor (1993), according to
which the short-term interest rate adjusts in response to movements in output and inflation.
Once again going beyond previous work, however, the analysis here adds a bond risk premium
term, identified with the help of the affine term structure model, to the short list of variables
to which the policy rate potentially responds. Estimates of the model’s key parameters
provide evidence of a rich set of multi-directional channels linking monetary policy, bond risk
premia, and the economy, while impulse responses and forecast error variance decompositions
highlight the quantitative importance of these various channels.
   In addition to its three core macroeconomic variables – the short-term nominal interest
rate, the output gap, and inflation – and five longer-term bond yields, the model developed
here also includes two unobserved state variables. Inspired by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008),
time-variation in bond risk premia within the affine pricing framework is driven by a single
factor. Rather than measuring this factor using the observable combination of forward rates
isolated by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) in their earlier work, however, the specification
here follows Dewachter and Iania (2011), Dewachter, Iania, and Lyrio (2014), and Cieslak
and Povala (2015) by treating this “risk” variable as unobservable, identified through the
comparison of long-term rates and the expected path of future short-term rates implied by
the affine model’s cross-equation restrictions. This more flexible approach leaves the model
free to focus on the possible linkages between monetary policy, bond risk premia, and the
economy, while still imposing enough structure to avoid the overparameterization that, as
Bauer (2015) explains, often blurs the view of bond risk premia provided by less highly-


                                               4
constrained term structure models.
    The model features, in addition, an unobservable long-run trend component of inflation,
interpreted as a time-varying target around which the Federal Reserve has used its interest
rate policy to stabilize actual inflation. A fluctuating, but unobserved, inflation target of
this kind is introduced into the New Keynesian macroeconomic model by Ireland (2007) and
into models that include both macroeconomic and term structure variables by Kozicki and
Tinsley (2001a, 2001b), Dewachter and Lyrio (2006), Hördahl, Tristani, and Vestin (2006),
Spencer (2008), Doh (2012), Hördahl and Tristani (2012), and Rudebusch and Swanson
(2012). Implied time paths for these unobservable risk premium and inflation target vari-
ables, generated using the same Kalman filtering and smoothing algorithm used to estimate
model’s parameters via maximum likelihood, provide additional insights into the broader
effects of monetary policy and other shocks to the US economy. They are examined and
discussed below, together with the model’s implications for the interplay between monetary
policy, bond risk premia, aggregate output, and inflation.



2     Model

Bond yields in this affine pricing model get driven by five state variables: two unobserv-
able and three observable. The first unobservable, denoted by vt , is a “risk” variable, so
called because, as explained below, it governs all variation in bond risk premia. The second
unobservable is the central bank’s inflation target τt , which follows the autoregressive process


                                τt = (1 − ρτ )τ + ρτ τt−1 + στ ετ t ,                        (1)


where τ measures the average, or steady-state, value of the target, the persistence and
volatility parameters satisfy 0 ≤ ρτ < 1 and στ > 0, and the serially uncorrelated innovation
ετ t has the standard normal distribution. The observable state variables are the short-term
(one-period) nominal interest rate rt , the inflation rate πt , and the output gap gty .

                                                 5
   Although the equations of the model could be specified directly in terms of rt and πt , it
is more convenient to define the interest rate and inflation gap variables as


                                          gtr = rt − τt


and
                                         gtπ = πt − τt .

In Ireland’s (2007) extension of the New Keynesian macroeconomic model, a random walk
specification for the inflation target generates nonstationary behavior in nominal interest
rates and inflation, so that the transformations introduced in these definitions of the interest
rate and inflation gaps are needed to obtain an empirical model cast in terms of stationary
variables. Here, by contrast, the stationary autoregression (1) for the inflation target implies
that interest rates and inflation remain stationary as well. This change in specification
works to sidestep the technical problem, noted by Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997,
p.433) and discussed further by Spencer (2008), that asymptotically long-term bond yields
become undefined in models, like this one, with homoskedastic shocks when the short-term
interest rate follows a process containing a unit root. Of course, settings for the parameter
ρτ very close to one can – and will – allow the model to explain much of the persistence in
nominal variables seen in US data. However, the model also allows for serially correlated
movements in inflation πt away from the central bank’s target, implying that the one-step-
ahead expectation of inflation, Et πt+1 , will not generally coincide with τt and, by extension,
the nominal interest rate gap gtr will not generally equal the one-period real interest rate.
Instead, the definition gtr = rt − τt of the interest gap reflects the idea that when the central
bank raises its inflation target τt , it should eventually increase the short-term nominal rate
rt by an equal amount so as to leave the interest rate gap unchanged, but when the central
bank wishes to stabilize actual inflation πt around a given target τt , it should raise or lower
the nominal rate rt or, equivalently, increase or decrease the interest rate gap itself.


                                               6
   More specifically, the central bank manages the interest rate gap according to the policy
rule
            gtr − g r = ρr (gt−1
                             r
                                 − g r ) + (1 − ρr )[ρπ gtπ + ρy (gty − g y ) + ρv vt ] + σr εrt .   (2)

In (2), ρr , satisfying 0 ≤ ρr < 1, governs the degree of interest rate smoothing and ρπ ≥ 0 and
ρy ≥ 0 measure the strength of the central bank’s policy response when inflation deviates
from target or an output gap opens up. The volatility parameter satisfies σr > 0, and
the serially uncorrelated monetary policy shock εrt has the standard normal distribution.
Different from those in previous studies, the rule in (2) also allows for a systematic response
of monetary policy to changes in the risk variable vt . While, in the estimation procedure
described below, the parameters ρπ and ρy are constrained to be nonnegative, as they are in
more conventional Taylor (1993) rule specifications, the response coefficient ρv attached to
the risk variable is left unconstrained in sign. Thus, the estimate of ρv – positive, zero, or
negative – will summarize both whether and how the Federal Reserve has reacted to changes
in bond risk premia by adjusting its short-term policy rate. Finally, in (2), g r and g y denote
the steady-state values of the interest rate and output gaps. The inflation gap is assumed to
have zero mean, so that actual inflation πt equals the central bank’s target on average, and
the risk variable vt is normalized to have zero mean as well. Thus, the policy rule implies that
when inflation equals the central bank’s target and the output gap and risk variable equal
their own steady-state values, the interest rate gap will gradually converge to its steady-state
value, with the speed of convergence determined by the smoothing parameter ρr .
   Given (1) and (2), describing the conduct of monetary policy, the inflation and output
gaps are allowed to depend on their own lagged values and lagged values of the model’s other
variables, as they would in a more conventional macroeconomic vector autoregression, with


                                                   y
        gtπ = ρπr (gt−1
                    r
                        − g r ) + ρππ gt−1
                                       π
                                           + ρπy (gt−1 − g y ) + ρπv vt−1 + σπτ στ ετ t + σπ επt ,   (3)




                                                      7
and


 gty − g y = ρyr (gt−1
                   r
                       − g r ) + ρyπ gt−1
                                      π           y
                                          + ρyy (gt−1 − g y ) + ρyv vt−1 + σyπ σπ επt + σyτ στ ετ t + σy εyt , (4)


where the volatility parameters satisfy σπ > 0 and σy > 0 and the serially and mutually
uncorrelated innovations επt and εyt both have standard normal distributions. Although
(3) and (4) allow for considerable flexibility in the behavior of the macroeconomic state
variables, they do, nevertheless, impose some restrictions and identifying assumptions. In
particular, (3) and (4) permit innovations in the inflation target τt to impact immediately
on the inflation and output gaps, but allow for further effects of changes in the inflation
target only to the extent that they are not met by proportional changes in the nominal
interest rate and inflation rate and therefore affect the interest rate and inflation gaps; these
restrictions are meant to impose a form of long-run monetary neutrality that limits the extent
to which changes in the inflation target influence the other variables. Equations (3) and
(4) also impose the timing restrictions typically incorporated into the specification of more
conventional macroeconomic vector autoregressions: they assume, in particular, that shocks
to monetary policy and bond risk premia have no contemporaneous effects on the inflation
and output gaps and that the innovation εyt to the output gap has no contemporaneous effect
on the inflation gap. These assumptions, similar to those invoked by Bekaert, Hoerova, and
Lo Duca (2013), for example, help disentangle the effects of changes in monetary policy
and bond risk premia on inflation and output from the effects of changes in inflation and
output on monetary policy and bond risk premia. Importantly, however, (3) and (4) allow
movements in the risk variable vt to affect inflation and output with a lag; the signs and
magnitudes of the key parameters ρπv and ρyv from these equations will measure the direction
and strength of the macroeconomic effects of shifts in bond risk premia.
   Finally, the risk variable vt ’s own dynamics are described by


                vt = ρvv vt−1 + σvr σr εrt + σvπ σπ επt + σvy σy εyt + σvτ στ ετ t + σv εvt ,                 (5)

                                                        8
where the persistence and volatility parameters satisfy 0 ≤ ρvv < 1 and σv > 0 and the
serially uncorrelated innovation εvt has the standard normal distribution. Though inspired
by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), Dewacher and Iania (2011), and Dewachter, Iania, and
Lyrio’s (2014) success in attributing movements in bond risk premia to a single variable, the
specific form of (5) resembles most closely Cieslak and Povala’s (2015) purely autoregressive
specification for this term-structure factor. Equation (5) adds flexibility to Cieslak and
Povala’s (2015) specification, however, by allowing all of the model’s other shocks – to
monetary policy, inflation, output, and the inflation target – to have immediate effects
on bond risk premia, as they should if asset prices react quickly to all developments in
the economy. But (5) merely permits, and does not require, movements in risk premia
to have policy or macroeconomic origins, since variations in vt may also be triggered by
the exogenous shock εvt . Thus, estimates of the correlation and volatility parameters σvr ,
σvπ , σvy , σvτ , and σv , together with an analysis of the impulse responses and forecast error
variance decompositions implied by those estimates, will be used below to assess the extent
to which movements in bond risk premia are driven by monetary policy and macroeconomic
shocks or whether they reflect, instead, disturbances that appear purely financial in origin.
   Part one of the appendix shows that (1)-(5) can be written more compactly as


                                   Xt = µ + P Xt−1 + Σεt ,                                  (6)


by collecting the five state variables into the vector

                                                                    0
                                  Xt =     gtr   gtπ   gty   τt vt


and the five innovations into the vector

                                                                    0
                                εt = εrt επt εyt ετ t εvt .




                                                   9
The short-term nominal interest rate rt anchoring the yield curve can be expressed as a linear
function of the state vector by inverting the transformation defining the interest rate gap:


                                            rt = δ 0 Xt ,                                   (7)


where
                                                           0
                                    δ= 1 0 0 1 0 .

   Prices of risk are assigned to each of the state variables, but are allowed to vary over time
only in response to movements in the single unobserved factor vt . Inspired by the work of
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008), which attributes the bulk of all movements in long-term
bond risk premia to variation in a single combination of forward rates, this assumption implies
that all variation in risk premia implied by this model will, likewise, be driven by changes in
vt . Unlike the return forecasting factor that Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) incorporate into
their affine term structure model, but similar to the ones used by Dewachter and Iania (2011),
Dewachter, Iania, and Lyrio (2014), and Cieslak and Povala (2015) in theirs, the risk-driving
variable vt is treated here as being unobservable in the data. This specification, therefore, is
designed to reflect the observation, made implicitly by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008)
and more explicitly by Bauer (2015), that the large number of parameters included in less
highly constrained affine term structure models more frequently lead to overfitting that blurs,
rather than sharpens, their interpretation of movements in bond risk premia. At the same
time, however, treating the single risk factor vt as unobservable permits it to move in line
with Cochrane and Piazzesi’s observable combination of forward rates, but also leaves the
estimation procedure free to account for the links, if any, not only between this risk variable
and long-term interest rates, but also between bond risk premia, monetary policy, and the
behavior of output and inflation.
   Thus, in this specification, as in other members of Duffee’s (2002) essentially affine class




                                                10
of dynamic term structure models, the log nominal asset pricing kernel takes the form

                                           1
                               mt+1 = −rt − λ0t λt − λ0t εt+1 ,                             (8)
                                           2

where the time-varying prices of risk

                                                                                  0
                                λt = λrt λπt             λyt     λτt λvt


satisfy
                                            λt = λ + ΛXt .                                  (9)

But while the vector of constant terms in (9),

                                                                                 0
                                λ= λ        r
                                                λ   π
                                                         λ   y
                                                                 λ   τ
                                                                          λ   v        ,   (10)


is left unconstrained, the assumption that the unobserved variable vt is the exclusive source
of time-variation in risk premia requires that all but the final column of the matrix

                                                                             
                                                                          r
                                      0             0 0 0 Λ
                                                                            
                                                                         π
                                                                             
                                     0             0 0 0                Λ 
                                     
                                                                            
                                   Λ=
                                     0             0 0 0                Λy              (11)
                                                                            
                                                                          τ
                                     0             0 0 0                Λ 
                                     
                                                                            
                                                                           v
                                      0             0 0 0                Λ


consist entirely of zeros.
   Equations (6)-(11) imply that the log price pnt of an n-period discount bond at time t is
determined as an affine function
                                        pnt = Ān + B̄n0 Xt                                (12)




                                                        11
of the state vector by the no-arbitrage condition


                            exp(pn+1
                                 t   ) = Et [exp(mt+1 ) exp(pnt+1 )],                      (13)


where the scalars Ān and 5 × 1 vectors B̄n for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . can be generated recursively,
starting from the initial conditions Ā1 = 0 and B̄10 = −δ 0 required to make (12) for n = 1
consistent with (7) for rt = −p1t , using the difference equations

                                                        1
                           Ān+1 = Ān + B̄n0 (µ − Σλ) + B̄n0 ΣΣ0 B̄n                      (14)
                                                        2

and
                                     0
                                   B̄n+1 = B̄n0 (P − ΣΛ) − δ 0                             (15)

obtained, as shown in part two of the appendix, by substituting (7), (8), and (12) into the
right-hand side of (13), taking expectations, and matching coefficients after substituting (12)
into the left-hand side of the same expression. Once bond prices are found using (14)-(15),
the yield ytn on an n-period discount bond at time t is easily computed as

                                              pnt
                                   ytn = −        = An + Bn0 Xt ,                          (16)
                                              n

where An = −Ān /n and Bn = −B̄n /n for all values of n = 1, 2, 3, . . ..
   Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) define and discuss various measures of the risk premia
incorporated into long-term interest rates. The most familiar, and the one preferred by
Rudebusch, Sack, and Swanson (2007) as well, is given by the yield on a long-term bond,
minus the average of the short-term rates expected to prevail over the lifetime of that long-
term bond:
                                         1
                           qtn = ytn −     Et (rt + rt+1 + . . . + rt+n−1 ).               (17)
                                         n

The n-period bond yield implied by the model used here has already been found using (16).


                                                  12
To compute the expected future short-term rates, use (6) and (7) to obtain


                            Et rt+j = δ 0 Et Xt+j = δ 0 µ̄ + δ 0 P j (Xt − µ̄).                 (18)


where µ̄ = (I − P )−1 µ. Combining (16)-(18) yields

                                         n−1
                                                    !                    n−1
                                                                                  !
                                       1X j                           01
                                                                         X
                  qtn = An − δ 0    I−       P          µ̄ +    0
                                                               Bn − δ        Pj       Xt .      (19)
                                       n j=0                           n j=0


When even the last column of (11) consists of zeros, so that Λ = 0, (15) implies that the
term multiplying Xt on the right-hand side of (19) vanishes and the bond risk premium is
constant. Similarly, without variation in the risk variable vt , the restricted form of Λ in
(11) will imply that bond risk premia are constant. Thus, to the extent that evidence of
time-variation in bond risk premia does appear in the data, this variation will be attributed
by the estimated model to variation in the otherwise unobservable variable vt .



3     Estimation

Interpreting each of the model’s periods as a quarter year in real time, its parameters can
be estimated with US data on the short-term nominal interest rate rt , the inflation rate πt ,
the output gap gty , and yields yt4 , yt8 , yt12 , yt16 , and yt20 on discount bonds with one through
five years to maturity. Figures for inflation and the output gap are drawn from the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis’ FRED database, with inflation measured by quarter-to-quarter
changes in the GDP deflator as reported by the US Department of Commerce and the output
gap as the percentage (logarithmic) deviation of the Commerce Department’s index of real
GDP from the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate of potential GDP. The interest rate
data are those most commonly used in empirical studies of the term structure. The short-
term interest rate is the three-month rate from the Center for Research on Security Prices’
Monthly Treasury/Fama Risk Free Rate Files and the long-term discount bond rates are


                                                    13
from the CRSP Monthly Treasury/Fama-Bliss Discount Bond Yield Files. To match the
quarterly frequency of the inflation and output gap series, quarterly averages of the monthly
interest rate observations from the CRSP files are taken.
   The dataset begins in 1959:1. Since the model does not impose the zero lower bound on
short-term nominal interest rates that has constrained the Federal Reserve since 2008, most
of the results are obtained with data running through 2007:4. Thus, the estimation exercise
sheds light mainly on the interlinkages between monetary policy, bond risk premia, and
the economy as they have appeared during more normal periods of expansion and recession.
Nevertheless, some of the model’s implications when estimated with data continuing through
2014:4 are discussed below, and a full set of results obtained from data spanning 1959 through
2014 are provided at the end of the appendix.
   With eight variables treated as observable and only five fundamental disturbances, at
least three of the observables must be interpreted as being measured with error in order to
avoid the problem of stochastic singularity discussed by Ireland (2004) for macroeconomic
models and Piazzesi (2010, pp.726-727) for affine models of the term structure. Thus, the
analysis here follows the general approach first used by Chen and Scott (1993), treating
exactly three of the longer-term interest rates as being subject to measurement error, so as
to obtain a variant of the model with the same number of observables as shocks. The choice
of exactly which rates to view as error-ridden instead of perfectly observed is, admittedly,
somewhat arbitrary, but attaching measurement errors to the one, two, and four-year rates
forces the estimation procedure to track the three and five-year rates without error; since
the short-term interest rate is also taken as perfectly measured, the model’s fundamental
shocks must then account for most broad movements along the yield curve.
   The model can be made to match the average values of the macroeconomic variables
together with the average slope of the yield curve, and the estimation exercise can thereby
be simplified by using de-meaned data and dropping the constant terms that appear in (6)
and (9). To accomplish this, the steady-state value of τ is set equal to the mean inflation rate


                                              14
π over the sample period, reflecting the assumption made previously that actual inflation
equals the central bank’s target on average. The steady-state value of the interest rate gap
g r is pinned down by subtracting τ = π from the average value of the short-term nominal
interest rate, and the steady-state value g y is set equal to the average value of the output gap
in the data. Part three of the appendix shows that, likewise, steady-state values for the five
long-term bond yields can be pinned down through appropriate choices of the five elements
of the vector λ that appears in (9) and (10), so as to match the average yields in the data.
   Thus, the empirical model consists of (6) with µ set to zero for the state and


                                       dt = U Xt + V ηt ,                                        (20)


for the observables, where

                                                                                           0
                          dt = rt πt     gty      yt4       yt8    yt12       yt16   yt20


keeps track of the now de-meaned data and

                                                                        0
                                      ηt =       ηt4    ηt8       ηt16


is the vector of measurement errors in the one, two, and four-year rates, assumed to be
mutually and serially uncorrelated with standard normal distributions. In (20), the matrix
U links the observables in dt to the state vector Xt and imposes the cross-equation restrictions
implied by the bond-pricing recursion (15), and the matrix V picks out the three yields that
are subject to measurement error and contains the parameters σ4 > 0, σ8 > 0, and σ16 > 0
measuring the volatility of those errors. Part four of the appendix describes the construction
of U and V in more detail.
   Equations (6) and (20) are in state-space form, allowing maximum likelihood estimates of
model’s parameters to be obtained using the Kalman filtering methods outlined by Hamilton


                                                       15
(1994, Ch.13). Two sets of parameter constraints are imposed during estimation. First, for
the unobserved variable vt that, as explained above, is responsible in the model for driving
all fluctuations in bond risk premia, if the value of σv in its law of motion (5) is scaled up or
down by multiplying by some number α > 0, then multiplying the parameters σvr , σvπ , σvy ,
and σvτ in (5) by α and dividing the parameters ρv , ρπv , ρyv , Λr , Λπ , Λy , Λτ , and Λv in (2)-(4),
(9), and (11) by α leaves the model’s implications for the dynamic behavior of all observable
variables unchanged. Hence, the constraint σv = 0.01 is imposed as a normalization, to pin
down the scale of movements in vt . Likewise, the sign restriction Λπ < 0 is imposed during
the estimation since no other feature of the model works to determine the direction, positive
or negative, in which an increase in vt changes bond risk premia and all other variables. And
while this additional restriction is not needed for normalization, imposing the constraint
Λv = 0 implies that the variable vt works solely, as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) and
Cieslak and Povala (2015), to move prices of risk associated with the model’s remaining four
factors and is not itself a source of time-varying priced risk.
   Second, for the inflation target, when the persistence parameter ρτ in (1) is left uncon-
strained, the estimation procedure pushes the value of this parameter very close to its upper
bound of one, leading to convergence problems when numerically maximizing the likelihood
function. While this result is suggestive of possible specification error, the random walk for-
mulation for the inflation target in Ireland’s (2007) New Keynesian model would, as noted
above, result in undefined asymptotically long-term bond yields in the affine term structure
model used here. In practice, imposing the restriction ρτ = 0.999 avoids these problems
while remaining consistent with the observation that data strongly prefer an extremely high
degree of persistence in the inflation target. Related, but more generally, the estimation
procedure also constrains the eigenvalues of the matrix P in (6), governing the “physical”
persistence of the state variables, and P − ΣΛ in (15), governing the ”risk neutral” dynamics
and hence the pricing of long-term bonds, to be less than one in absolute value, so that the
entire system of macroeconomic and bond-pricing equations remains dynamically stable.


                                                  16
    Thus, with these normalizations made and restrictions imposed, estimates are obtained
for the model’s remaining 31 parameters: the coefficients ρr , ρπ , ρy , and ρv from the monetary
policy rule (2), the coefficients ρπr , ρππ , ρπy , ρπv , ρyr , ρyπ , ρyy , ρyv , ρvv , στ , σr , σπ , σy , σπτ ,
σyπ , σyτ , σvr , σvπ , σvy , and σvτ governing the persistence, volatility, and comovement between
the inflation gap, output gap, and risk variable vt in (3)-(5), the coefficients Λr , Λπ , Λy , Λτ
describing time-variation in the prices of risk in (9) and (11), and the coefficients σ4 , σ8 , and
σ16 measuring the volatility of the measurement errors in (20).



4      Results

Table 1 displays the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters just listed, together
with their standard errors, computed using a boostrapping method outlined by Efron and
Tibshirani (1993, Ch.6), according to which the model, with its parameters fixed at their
estimated values, is used to generate 1,000 samples of artificial data on the same eight
variables found in the actual US data. These artificial series then get used to re-estimate
the 31 parameters 1,000 times; the standard errors reported in table 1 correspond to the
standard deviations of the parameter estimates taken over the 1,000 replications. This
bootstrapping procedure thereby accounts for the finite-sample properties of the maximum
likelihood estimates as well as all constraints that are imposed during estimation.
    Most notable in the table are the estimated parameters from the interest rate rule (2) for
monetary policy. The estimate of ρr = 0.62 implies a considerable amount of interest rate
smoothing, a finding that is consistent with many other studies that estimate Taylor (1993)
rules in various ways. The point estimates of ρπ = 0.19 and ρy = 0.16 measure monetary
policy responses to changes in inflation and the output gap that are roughly balanced,
though slightly stronger for prices than output. Both of these policy response coefficients
are considerably smaller than estimates reported in studies that use macroeconomic data
alone. Ang, Dong, and Piazzesi (2007), on the other hand, estimate values for Taylor rule



                                                       17
coefficients in an affine term structure model that are more similar to those found here.
   In New Keynesian models, the forward-looking “IS curve” is a log-linearized Euler equa-
tion implied by the assumption that consumers have additively-time separable utility func-
tions of the constant relative risk aversion form. Here, the no-arbitrage condition (13), with
the more flexible specification for the nominal asset pricing kernel given by (8)-(11), takes
the place of the New Keynesian IS curve and the parameters of the modified Taylor rule (2)
are identified, in part, by the timing assumptions, reflected in (3) and (4), that monetary
policy shocks affect the output gap and inflation with a one-quarter lag. Thus, the compar-
ison between the estimated coefficients of the Taylor rule obtained here and those reported
in previous studies speaks directly to the practical importance of issues examined from a
variety of different angles by Sims and Zha (2006), Ang, Dong, and Piazzesi (2007), Atkeson
and Kehoe (2008), Cochrane (2011), Joslin, Le, and Singleton (2013), and Backus, Chernov,
and Zin (2015), each of which finds that the identification of the parameters of interest rate
rules for monetary policy is complicated by the similarities between the Taylor (1993) rule,
which links the nominal interest rate to output and inflation, and the Euler equation, which
in models without investment does much the same thing. Changes in the specification of
one of these equations, therefore, can easily change the estimated values of coefficients in
the other, implying vastly different behavior on the part of consumers and the central bank.
   Of course, (2) differs from the standard Taylor (1993) rule by including the risk variable vt
among those to which the Federal Reserve can respond by adjusting the short-term nominal
interest rate. In fact, the positive and statistically significant estimate of ρv = 0.09 reveals
that the Fed has consistently tightened monetary policy in response to shocks that increase
bond risk premia. McCallum (2005) embeds a monetary policy rule that moves short-term
rates higher after a positive shock to bond risk premia into a model designed to account for
the pattern of regression coefficients that Campbell and Shiller (1991), among many others,
have obtained when testing the expectations hypothesis of the term structure, by assuming
that the Fed responds more directly to the slope of the yield curve when adjusting its policy


                                              18
rate. The rationale for this policy response remains hazy – McCallum speculates that it
could arise if policymakers view a steepening yield curve as an indicator that inflation and
output growth are due to accelerate and tighten policy as a result – but the positive estimate
of ρv obtained here provides evidence that the Fed has operated in this way.
   Other noteworthy estimates from table 1 are those of ρπv and ρyv from (3) and (4),
measuring the effects of changes in bond risk premia on inflation and the output gap, and
σvr , σvπ , σvy , and σvτ from (5), capturing the effects of macroeconomic disturbances on bond
risk premia. The former appear small, both in absolute terms and relative to their standard
errors, but the latter are more sizable, pointing to statistically significant interactions, in
particular, between monetary policy shocks and shocks to output on bond risk premia.
The implied relationships, however, can be seen more clearly by plotting impulse response
functions and tabulating forecast error variance decompositions than by trying to interpret
each coefficient individually. Hence, figures 1 through 5 plot impulse responses to each of
the model’s five shocks, and tables 2 and 3 report on the variance decompositions. In the
graphs, the output gap is shown as a percentage deviation from its steady state, while the
inflation and interest rates are all expressed in annualized, percentage-point terms.
   The left-hand column of figure 1 shows how a one-standard deviation monetary policy
shock εr raises the short-term nominal interest rate by slightly less than 60 basis points
on impact; the short rate then converges back to its initial value over the following six
quarters. The output gap falls and, after a brief and very small increase that resembles the
“price puzzle” that frequently appears in more conventional vector autoregressive models of
monetary policy shocks and their effects, inflation declines persistently. The risk variable vt
rises in response to the monetary policy shock, so that the long-term interest rates shown
in the figure’s middle column rise by more than the average of expected future short rates.
The right-hand column of the figure confirms, therefore, that the rise in vt is mirrored by a
rise in risk premia built into all five of the longer-term bond rates. Thus, monetary policy
shifts the yield curve by affecting risk premia as well as the expected path of short rates.


                                              19
   Figure 2 displays impulse responses to a one-standard deviation shock to vt , which as
shown in the right-hand column, gives rise to increases in all bond risk premia. The output
gap and inflation both fall quite persistently in response to this shock, providing evidence
consistent with the “practitioner view” described by Rudebusch, Sack, and Swanson (2007)
that higher long-term interest rates, reflecting larger bond risk premia, work to slow aggregate
economic activity in the same way that more traditional aggregate demand shocks do. As
noted above, the positive estimate of ρv in the policy rule (2) causes monetary policy to
tighten when bond risk premia rise.
   Figure 3 plots impulse responses to shocks to the inflation target τt . With the persis-
tence parameter ρτ in (1) fixed at 0.999, this is the model’s most persistent shock, and the
simultaneous and roughly equal upward movements in interest rates on bonds of all ma-
turities shown in the figure’s middle column indicate that this shock plays the role of the
“level factor” that appears in more traditional, affine models of the term structure without
macroeconomic variables. The figure’s left-hand column shows how actual inflation rises
gradually to meet the new, higher target that results from this shock, while the output gap
increases, reflecting the implied monetary expansion. The risk variable vt falls, but only
by a small amount, so that changes in the inflation target affect long-term rates mainly by
revising the expected future path of short rates; bond risk premia remain nearly unchanged.
   In figure 4, the shock επ to inflation has small effects on the model’s other variables: its
effect are mainly on inflation itself although, consistent with the interpretation of this as a
“cost-push” shock, the disturbance works as well to decrease the output gap. In figure 5,
meanwhile, the shock εy to output has effects that might be expected from a non-monetary
shock to aggregate demand: it increases both the output gap and inflation and causes interest
rates to rise. The risk variable vt declines following this shock, however, so that bond risk
premia fall. Taken together, all these impulse responses are indicative of important multi-
directional effects running between monetary policy, bond risk premia, output, and inflation.
   Table 2 decomposes the k-quarter-ahead forecast error variance in the output gap, in-


                                              20
flation, the short-term interest rate, and bond risk premia into components attributable to
each of the model’s five fundamental shocks. Since (1) makes the inflation target evolve
as an exogenous process, unrelated to any of the model’s other shocks or variables, all of
its forecast error variance is by assumption allocated to the shock ετ ; hence, it is excluded
from the table. In addition, the law of motion (5) for the risk variable vt , coupled with the
restrictions imposed on the matrix Λ in (11), imply that the forecast error variance for bond
risk premia is invariant both to the specific maturity of the bond and the forecast horizon.
   The various panels of table 2 show that the monetary policy shock εr accounts for sizable
components of the variation in the output gap, the short-term interest rate, and bond risk
premia. According to the estimated model, in fact, nearly one fifth of all historical movements
in bond risk premia are related to monetary policy shocks. Meanwhile, the “practitioner
view” referred to by Rudebusch, Sack, and Swanson (2007) is still reflected, but less strongly
so, in the variance decompositions: exogenous shocks to bond risk premia account for between
4.9 and 7.7 percent of the variance in the output gap and between 3.7 and 5.1 percent of the
variance in inflation at forecast horizons between 3 and 5 years. On the other hand, stronger
effects run from the shock εy , which, as noted above, acts in the model like a non-monetary
aggregate demand disturbance, to bond risk premia: accounting for one quarter of their
variance, this shock is even more important than monetary policy in driving movements in
risk premia. In total, about 46 percent of all variation in bond risk premia are attributed
by the estimates to macroeconomic disturbances, with the remaining 54 percent allocated
to purely financial factors, modeled here as exogenous shocks to the risk variable vt .
   Table 3 breaks down, in a similar manner, the forecast error variance in bond yields into
components attributable to the five fundamental shocks and, in the cases of the one, two,
and four-year bonds, to the measurement errors added to the empirical model to facilitate
maximum likelihood estimation. Reassuringly, those tables reveal that measurement errors
are quite small, soaking up 4 percent of the one-quarter-ahead variance in the one-year rate,
slightly more than 2 percent of the one-quarter-ahead variance in the two-year rate, and


                                              21
only 1 percent of the one-quarter-ahead variance in the four-year rate. Consistent with the
association, made through the impulse response analysis, of the model’s inflation target with
the level factor in more traditional affine models, shocks to the inflation target are shown in
table 3 to account for the largest movements in interest rates up and down the yield curve.
The monetary policy shock also plays an important role in affecting bond rates, particularly
at shorter horizons and for the bonds with shorter terms to maturity. The shock εv to bond
risk premia, meanwhile, also appears as a key factor in driving sizable movements, especially
in the two through four year bond rates, over horizons extending out one to two years.
   Returning to table 1, it is also of interest to make note of the estimated parameters from
the matrix Λ in (11), governing how movements in the variable vt translate into changes in
the prices of risk attached to the model’s fundamental shocks. While Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2008) find that the single, observable factor that they associate with time-variation in bond
risk premia works to change the pricing of their model’s level factor – which, as already
noted, seems to resemble most closely the inflation target in the model used here – table 1
shows that the estimate of Λτ is small and statistically insignificant. Instead, time variation
appears most important in the prices of risk attached to the monetary policy shock εr and
the inflation and output shocks επ and εy . Again, the impulse response analysis makes
both of these shocks look like traditional, monetary, cost-push, and non-monetary aggregate
demand disturbances. These results join with others from above, therefore, to suggest that
macroeconomic shocks feed through financial markets and the economy as a whole through
multiple channels, most of which are simply not present in existing theoretical models.
   Figure 6 provides another view of the model’s implications, by plotting estimates of the
inflation target τt and the five-year risk premium qt20 , obtained using the Kalman smoothing
algorithm that is also described by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13). After remaining stable at an
annualized rate of about one percent through the mid-1960s, the inflation target rises to a
peak of 10 percent in 1981. Comparing the top and bottom panels of the left-hand column
shows how the inflation target remains elevated through the end of 1984, even as actual


                                              22
inflation declines. Hence, the model attributes the persistence of high bond yields into
the early to mid-1980s in large part to continued high expected inflation during that period,
indicative of credibility problems associated with the Federal Reserve’s fight against inflation.
The inflation target begins its long-run trend downward in 1985 and stabilizes back at a rate
of one percent by the end of the sample.
   The two panels on the right-hand side of figure 6, meanwhile, exhibit evidence of shifting
cyclical patterns in bond risk premia, with the estimated risk premium in the five-year
bond rate appearing as highly countercyclical (correlation −0.86 with the output gap) from
1959 through 1989, approximately acyclical (correlation −0.14) from 1990 through 1999,
and procyclical (correlation 0.40) from 2000 through 2007. The model can account for
these shifting correlations since, as shown in figures 1-5, different shocks give rise to different
patterns of comovement between the output gap and bond risk premia, with monetary policy
shocks, shocks to the risk variable vt itself, and shocks to output pushing these variables in
opposite directions and shocks to inflation moving them in the same direction.
   Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2013) focus on similarly shifting patterns of nominal
and real correlations evident in data on nominal and real bond yields and stock returns
over the same time periods, suggesting that the preponderance of supply-side shocks hitting
the economy during the 1970s and 1980s may explain the positive comovement between
bond and stock returns during those decades and the prevalence of demand-side shocks
may explain the negative comovement across bond and stock returns in more recent years.
Compared to Campbell, Sunderman, and Viceira’s, the empirical analysis here excludes
data on stock prices and inflation-indexed bond yields but includes data on output itself;
moreover, the analysis here uses restrictions on the empirical model to identify shocks with
specific, structural interpretations. It is of interest to note, therefore, that the results here
seem to point to aggregate demand shocks as drivers of countercyclical bond risk premia
both during the inflationary period of the 1960s and 1970s and the disinflationary episode
of the 1980s and to shocks to inflation itself and therefore to aggregate supply as a source


                                                23
of procyclical bond risk premia since 2000. Clearly, more detailed structural modeling, both
theoretical and empirical, is needed to better understand and reconcile these findings.
    Finally, figure 7 repeats the analysis from figure 6 after the model is re-estimated with
data running all the way through 2014:4. These additional results need to be interpreted
with caution: since the model does not account for the zero lower bound on the short-
term nominal interest rate, forecasts of future short rates implied by (18) may differ from
expectations of future short rates held by financial market participants over the period since
2008 when this constraint has been a binding one for the Fed. The figure’s top two panels
reveal, however, that the model attributes the very low long-term bond yields observed over
the last eight years of the sample period not to unusually low risk premia but instead to
further reductions in the inflation target, which is estimated to be negative from the end of
2011 through the middle of 2013 and close to zero thereafter. Again, more detailed modeling,
to account for both the effects of the zero lower bound on expectations of future short rates
and the effects of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase programs on bond risk
premia, seems needed to interpret these movements more fully.



5     Conclusion

The Federal Reserve’s recent policies of large scale asset purchases, more popularly known
as “quantitative easing,” rely on the widely-held view that monetary policy actions can in-
fluence the risk premia built into long-term bond rates and that changes in bond risk premia
can then have impacts, working through aggregate demand channels, on output and infla-
tion as well. As Rudebusch, Sack, and Swanson (2007) explain, however, surprisingly little
evidence has been compiled to support this “practitioner view,” even in data from more
normal times. Using an affine model of the term structure with observable and unobserv-
able macroeconomic factors, the empirical analysis here looks for – and finds – such evidence.
Monetary policy shocks, identified using restrictions borrowed from the literature that works



                                             24
with more conventional, macroeconomic vector autoregressions but imposed here, instead,
on the driving processes for the macroeconomic state variables in a term structure model, do
appear to influence bond risk premia, with monetary policy tightenings working to increase
those premia and, consistent with the goals of quantitative easing, monetary policy easings
working to decrease them. In addition, purely exogenous shocks to bond risk premia, identi-
fied by restricting the determinants of those risk premia in a manner that is inspired by the
work of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2006, 2008), Dewachter and Iania (2011), Dewachter, Iania,
and Lyrio (2014), and Cieslak and Povala (2015), do appear to work like aggregate demand
disturbances, with higher risk premia associated with slower output growth and inflation
and, again consistent with the intended workings of quantitative easing, lower risk premia
associated with faster output growth and inflation.
   The estimated model, however, also allows for and provides evidence of other channels
through which monetary policy, bond risk premia, and the macroeconomy interact. The
extended version of the Taylor (1993) rule, for example, that is included in the estimated
model indicates that, historically, the Federal Reserve has moved to raise the short-term
interest rate, not only in response to shocks that increase output and inflation, but also
when bond risk premia rise, in a manner that is consistent with McCallum’s (2005) earlier
analysis. In addition, different structural disturbances identified by the model move output,
inflation, and bond risk premia in a variety of directions, helping to account for the shifting
correlations between these variables seen in the data.
   Thus, monetary policy affects bond risk premia and the economy; bond risk premia affect
monetary policy and the economy, and the economy affects monetary policy and bond risk
premia. Standard, textbook New Keynesian models like Woodford (2003) and Galı́’s (2008)
do not even begin to consider the channels through which all of these connections are made;
and even the most ambitious extensions thus far, such as Andrés, López-Salido, and Nelson’s
(2004), account only for a small subset. Much more research along these lines is needed, to
fully understand how the workings of monetary policy and financial markets have and will


                                              25
continue to interact to shape the performance of the American economy.



6    References

 Andrés, Javier, J. David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson. “Tobin’s Imperfect Asset Sub-
     stitution in Optimizing General Equilibrium.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
     36 (August 2004): 665-690.

 Ang, Andrew and Monika Piazzesi. “A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Struc-
     ture Dynamics and Macroeconomic and Latent Variables.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics 50 (May 2003): 745-787.

 Ang, Andrew, Sen Dong, and Monika Piazzesi. “No-Arbitrage Taylor Rules.” Working
     Paper 13448. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2007.

 Ang, Andrew, Monika Piazzesi, and Min Wei. “What Does the Yield Curve Tell Us About
     GDP Growth?” Journal of Econometrics 131 (March/April 2006): 359-403.

 Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe. “On the Need for a New Approach to Analyzing
     Monetary Policy.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23 (2008): 389-425.

 Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Stanley E. Zin. “Identifying Taylor Rules in Macro-
     Finance Models.” Manuscript. New York: New York University, June 2015.

 Bauer, Michael D. “Restrictions on Risk Prices in Dynamic Term Structure Models.”
     Manuscript. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 2015.

 Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca. “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary
     Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (October 2013): 771-788.

 Bernanke, Ben S. “Long-Term Interest Rates.” Speech Given at the Annual Macroeco-
     nomics Conference: The Past and Future of Monetary Policy. San Francisco: Federal


                                           26
    Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 1 March 2013. http://www.federalreserve.gov/
    newsevents/speech/bernanke20130301a.pdf.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A
    Bird’s Eye View.” Review of Economic Studies 58 (May 1991): 495-514.

Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay. The Econometrics of Finan-
    cial Markets. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.

Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira. “Inflation Bets or Deflation
    Hedges? The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds.” Manuscript. Cambridge: Harvard
    University, January 2013.

Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale
    Asset Purchase Programmes.” Economic Journal 122 (November 2012): F289-F315.

Chen, Ren-Raw and Louis Scott. “Maximum Likelihood Estimation for a Multifactor
    Equilibrium Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” Journal of Fixed Income
    3 (December 1993): 14-31.

Cieslak, Anna and Pavol Povala. “Expected Returns in Treasury Bonds.” Manuscript
    Evanston: Northwestern University, February 2015.

Cochrane, John H. “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules.” Journal of Political
    Economy 119 (June 2011): 565-615.

Cochrane, John H. and Monika Piazzesi. “Bond Risk Premia.” American Economic Review
    95 (March 2005): 138-160.

Cochrane, John H. and Monika Piazzesi. “Decomposing the Yield Curve.” Manuscript.
    Chicago: University of Chicago, March 2008.




                                           27
Diebold, Francis X., Glenn D. Rudebusch, and S. Borağan Aruoba. “The Macroeconomy
    and the Yield Curve: A Dynamic Latent Factor Approach.” Journal of Econometrics
    131 (March/April 2006): 309-338.

Dewachter, Hans and Leonardo Iania. “An Extended Macro-Finance Model with Financial
    Factors.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46 (December 2011): 1893-
    1916.

Dewachter, Hans and Marco Lyrio. “Macro Factors and the Term Structure of Interest
    Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (February 2006): 119-140.

Dewachter, Hans, Leonardo Iania, and Marco Lyrio. “Information in the Yield Curve: A
    Macro-Finance Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (January/February
    2014): 42-64.

Doh, Taeyoung. “What Does the Yield Curve Tell Us About the Federal Reserve’s Implicit
    Inflation Target?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44 (March/April 2012):
    469-486.

Duffee, Gregory R. “Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Affine Models.” Journal
    of Finance 57 (February 2002): 405-443.

Efron, Bradley and Robert J. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Boca Raton:
    Chapman and Hall, 1993.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
    Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2003, Issue 1):
    139-211.

Favero, Carlo, Iryna Kaminska, and Ulf Söderström. “The Predictive Power of the Yield
    Spread: Further Evidence and a Structural Interpretation.” Working Paper 280. Mi-
    lan: Bocconi University, January 2005.


                                             28
Galı́, Jordi. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
    New Keynesian Framework. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008.

Hamilton, James D. Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.

Hamilton, James D. and Dong Heon Kim. “A Reexamination of the Predictability of
    Economic Activity Using the Yield Spread.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
    34 (May 2002): 340-360.

Hördahl, Peter and Oreste Tristani. “Inflation Risk Premia in the Term Structure of Interest
    Rates.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (June 2012): 634-657.

Hördahl, Peter, Oreste Tristani, and David Vestin. “A Joint Econometric Model of Macroe-
    conomic and Term-Structure Dynamics.” Journal of Econometrics 131 (March/April
    2006): 405-444.

Ireland, Peter N. “A Method for Taking Models to the Data.” Journal of Economic Dy-
    namics and Control 28 (March 2004): 1205-1226.

Ireland, Peter N. “Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Conse-
    quences.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39 (December 2007): 1851-1882.

Jardet, Caroline, Alain Monfort, and Fulvio Pegoraro. “No-Arbitrage Near Cointegrated
    VAR(p) Term Structure Models, Term Premia and GDP Growth.” Journal of Banking
    and Finance 37 (February 2013): 389-402.

Joslin, Scott, Anh Le, and Kenneth J. Singleton. “Gaussian Macro-Finance Term Structure
    Models with Lags.” Journal of Financial Econometrics 11 (Fall 2013): 581-609.

Kiley, Michael T. “The Aggregate Demand Effects of Short- and Long-Term Interest Rates.”
    International Journal of Central Banking 10 (December 2014): 69-104.




                                            29
Kozicki, Sharon and P.A. Tinsley. “Term Structure Views of Monetary Policy Under Alter-
    native Models of Agent Expectations.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
    25 (January 2001a): 149-184.

Kozicki, Sharon and P.A. Tinsley. “Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of Interest
    Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (June 2001b): 613-652.

McCallum, Bennett T. “Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” Fed-
    eral Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 91 (Fall 2005): 1-21.

Pericoli, Marcello and Marco Taboga. “Canonical Term-Structure Models with Observable
    Factors and the Dynamics of Bond Risk Premia.” Journal of Money, Credit, and
    Banking 40 (October 2008): 1471-1488.

Piazzesi, Monika. “Affine Term Structure Models.” In Yacine Ait-Sahalia and Lars Peter
    Hansen, Eds. Handbook of Financial Econometrics: Volume 1 – Tools and Techniques.
    Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010, pp.691-766.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Eric T. Swanson. “The Bond Premium in a DSGE Model with
    Long-Run Real and Nominal Risks.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4
    (January 2012): 105-143.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., Brian P. Sack, and Eric T. Swanson. “Macroeconomic Implications
    of Changes in the Term Premium.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 89
    (July/August 2007): 241-269.

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Pol-
    icy?” American Economic Review 96 (March 2006): 54-81.

Spencer, Peter D. “Stochastic Volatility in a Macro-Finance Model of the U.S. Term Struc-
    ture of Interest Rates 1961-2004.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 40 (Septem-
    ber 2008): 1177-1215.


                                          30
Taylor, John B. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Confer-
    ence Series on Public Policy 39 (December 1993): 195-214.

Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
    Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

Wright, Jonathan H. “The Yield Curve and Predicting Recessions.” Finance and Economics
    Discussion Series 2006-07. Washington: Federal Reserve Board, February 2006.




                                          31
Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors

Parameter                   ML Estimate                   Std Error
    ρr                        0.6211                       0.0433
   ρπ                         0.1922                       0.0894
   ρy                         0.1563                       0.0301
   ρv                         0.0874                       0.0161
   ρπr                        0.1325                       0.1301
   ρππ                        0.8537                       0.0490
   ρπy                       −0.0010                       0.0221
   ρπv                       −0.0213                       0.0165
   ρyr                       −0.9646                       0.4151
   ρyπ                        0.0459                       0.1690
   ρyy                        1.0128                       0.0722
   ρyv                        0.0250                       0.0492
   ρvv                        0.9001                       0.0341
   στ                         0.0012                       0.0001
   σr                         0.0013                       0.0001
   σπ                         0.0026                       0.0001
   σy                         0.0077                       0.0004
   σπτ                       −0.4437                       0.1868
   σyπ                       −0.2267                       0.2206
   σyτ                        0.9585                       0.5964
   σvr                        4.6064                       1.7366
   σvπ                       −0.9421                       0.7623
   σvy                       −0.8876                       0.2814
   σvτ                       −0.0945                       1.4534
   Λr                        −7.2018                       3.6793
   Λπ                       −16.7834                       8.6905
   Λy                       −26.3763                      10.3782
   Λτ                        −0.0103                       3.1824
   σ4                         0.0004                       0.0000
   σ8                         0.0002                       0.0000
   σ16                        0.0001                       0.0000

Note: The table reports the maximum likelihood estimate and boot-
strapped standard error of each parameter listed.
   Table 2. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions

                         Output Gap
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1          0.0      0.0     2.0              0.6       97.4
   4          5.8      0.2     2.0              0.7       91.3
  12         16.6      4.9     1.7              1.6       75.2
  20         18.1      7.7     1.6              1.9       70.7
  ∞          18.1      8.1     1.6              1.9       70.2
                           Inflation
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         0.0       0.0     6.0             94.0       0.0
   4         0.1       1.0    10.7             86.7        1.5
  12         0.7       3.7    23.8             61.6       10.2
  20         2.1       5.1    33.9             46.0       12.8
  ∞          0.3       0.6    93.7              4.1       1.3
                 Short-Term Interest Rate
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         57.2      3.0    38.2              0.1        1.4
   4         33.0      7.9    52.0              0.3        6.8
  12         15.1      5.2    68.2              0.2       11.3
  20         11.1      3.8    75.9              0.2        8.9
  ∞           0.6      0.2    98.6              0.0       0.5
                     Bond Risk Premia
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         18.1     53.7     0.0              3.1       25.1
   4         18.1     53.7     0.0              3.1       25.1
  12         18.1     53.7     0.0              3.1       25.1
  20         18.1     53.7     0.0              3.1       25.1
  ∞          18.1     53.7     0.0              3.1       25.1
Note: Each row decomposes the forecast error variance in the
indicated variable at the indicated horizon into percentages at-
tributable to each of the model’s five shocks.
           Table 3. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions

                           One-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         32.5       15.3       46.0         0.0       2.1         4.0
   4         17.2       17.0       58.6         0.0       5.9         1.2
  12          7.9        9.4       74.1         0.1       7.9         0.5
  20          5.8        6.5       81.2         0.2       5.9         0.4
  ∞          0.3         0.3       99.0         0.0       0.3         0.0
                           Two-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         16.9       22.9       55.8         0.0       2.1         2.2
   4          8.3       20.1       66.7         0.1       4.2         0.6
  12          3.8       10.3       80.8         0.3       4.5         0.3
  20          2.7        6.9       86.7         0.3       3.2         0.2
  ∞          0.1         0.3       99.4         0.0       0.2         0.0
                          Three-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         9.9        21.8       66.3         0.2       1.8         0.0
   4         4.5        17.3       75.0         0.3       2.9         0.0
  12         2.0         8.4       86.5         0.4       2.7         0.0
  20         1.4         5.5       90.9         0.4       1.8         0.0
  ∞          0.1         0.3       99.6         0.0       0.1         0.0
                          Four-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         6.0        17.1       74.1         0.4       1.4         1.0
   4         2.6        13.0       81.7         0.4       2.0         0.3
  12         1.1         6.1       90.6         0.5       1.6         0.1
  20         0.8         3.9       93.8         0.4       1.1         0.1
  ∞          0.0         0.2       99.7         0.0       0.0         0.0
                           Five-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         4.0        12.8       81.6         0.5       1.1         0.0
   4         1.6         9.4       87.0         0.5       1.5         0.0
  12         0.7         4.2       93.5         0.5       1.1         0.0
  20         0.5         2.7       95.8         0.4       0.7         0.0
  ∞          0.0         0.1       99.8         0.0       0.0         0.0
Note: Each row decomposes the forecast error variance in the indicated bond
yield at the indicated horizon into percentages attributable to each of the
model’s shocks and measurement error.
Figure 1. Impulse Responses to a Monetary Policy Shock




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation monetary policy shock εr . The inflation and interest rates are in annu-
alized terms.
Figure 2. Impulse Responses to a Risk Premium Shock




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation risk premium shock εv . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized
terms.
Figure 3. Impulse Responses to an Inflation Target Shock




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation inflation target shock ετ . The inflation and interest rates are in annual-
ized terms.
Figure 4. Impulse Responses to an Inflation Shock




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation inflation shock επ . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized
terms.
Figure 5. Impulse Responses to an Output Shock




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation output shock εy . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized terms.
Figure 6. Smoothed Estimates of the Inflation Target and the Five-Year Bond
Risk Premium




The left-hand column compares smoothed estimates of the inflation target from the model
to the actual series for the inflation rate, when both measures are expressed in annualized
terms. The right-hand column compares the smoothed estimates of the risk premium in
the five-year bond yield to the actual series for the output gap, when the risk premium is
expressed in annualized terms and the output gap in percentage points.
Figure 7. Smoothed Estimates of the Inflation Target and the Five-Year Bond
Risk Premium, Extended Sample Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4




The left-hand column compares smoothed estimates of the inflation target from the model
to the actual series for the inflation rate, when both measures are expressed in annualized
terms. The right-hand column compares the smoothed estimates of the risk premium in
the five-year bond yield to the actual series for the output gap, when the risk premium is
expressed in annualized terms and the output gap in percentage points.
7     Appendix

7.1     Putting the Macroeconomic Model in Matrix Form

Rewriting the individual equations (1)-(5) in matrix form as (6) involves stacking them
together, first, as
                                  P0 Xt = µ0 + P1 Xt−1 + Σ0 εt ,

where the state and innovation vectors Xt and εt are as defined in the text and where the
matrices P0 , P1 , and Σ0 and the vector µ0 are given by

                                                                                      
                            0      0            0                  1               0
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                           1 −(1 − ρr )ρπ −(1 − ρr )ρy            0       −(1 − ρr )ρv 
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                      P0 = 
                           0      1            0                  0            0       ,
                                                                                        
                                                                                       
                           0      0            1                  0            0
                                                                                       
                                                                                        
                                                                                       
                            0      0            0                  0            1

                                                                          
                                         0       0        0   ρτ       0
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                      ρr  0   0              0     0 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                P1 = 
                                     ρπr ρππ ρπy             0        ,
                                                                   ρπv 
                                                                      
                                     ρyr ρyπ ρyy             0    ρyv 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                       0   0   0              0    ρvv
                                                                                  
                                     0       0            0        στ          0
                                                                
                                                                
                                  σr      0      0       0   0
                                                                
                                                                
                            Σ0 = 
                                   0     σ π     0    σ   σ
                                                         πτ τ 0  ,
                                                                 
                                                                
                                  0     σyπ σπ  σy    σyτ στ 0 
                                                                
                                                                
                                  σvr σr σvπ σπ σvy σy σvτ στ σv




                                                     32
and                                                            
                                            (1 − ρτ )τ
                                                              
                                                              
                                      (1 − ρr )(g r − ρy g y )
                                                              
                                                              
                                 µ0 = 
                                       −ρπr g − ρπy g  .
                                                r         y 
                                                              
                                                   y          r
                                      (1 − ρyy )g − ρyr g 
                                      
                                                              
                                                  0

Multiplying this equation through by P0−1 and defining µ = P0−1 µ0 , P = P0−1 P1 , and Σ =
P0−1 Σ0 then leads directly to (6).


7.2    Deriving the Bond Pricing Equations

To derive the bond pricing equations (14)-(15), start by setting n = 0 and substitute (8) and
p0t+1 = 0 (the price of at t + 1 of a claim to a dollar at t + 1 equals one dollar, hence zero
after taking logs) into the right-hand side of (13) to obtain


                             exp(p1t ) = Et [exp(mt+1 )] = exp(−rt ).


Hence, consistency between (7) and (12) requires that


                                      Ā1 + B̄10 Xt = −δ 0 Xt


or, equivalently, that Ā1 = 0 and B̄10 = −δ 0 as noted in the text.
   Next, for an arbitrary value of n = 1, 2, 3, . . ., substitute (7), (8), and (12) into the




                                                33
right-hand side of (13) to obtain

                                                                       
                                   0     1 0      0                 0
  exp(pn+1
                                                                        
       t   )    =    Et exp −δ Xt − λt λt − λt εt+1 exp Ān + B̄n Xt+1
                                         2
                                             
                                    1 0
                              0
                     exp −δ Xt − λt λt + Ān Et exp −λ0t εt+1 + B̄n0 Xt+1
                                                                         
                =
                                    2
                                             
                                    1 0
                     exp −δ Xt − λt λt + Ān Et exp −λ0t εt+1 + B̄n0 (µ + P Xt + Σεt+1 )
                              0
                                                                                       
                =
                                    2
                                                            
                                                         1 0
                     exp Ān + B̄n µ + B̄n P − δ Xt − λt λt Et exp −(λ0t − B̄n0 Σ)εt+1
                                 0         0    0
                                                                                    
                =
                                                         2
                                                            
                                 0         0    0
                                                        1 0
                =    exp Ān + B̄n µ + B̄n P − δ Xt − λt λt
                                                         2
                                                                 
                             1 0       0               1 0    0
                     × exp λt λt − B̄n Σ (λ + ΛXt ) + B̄n ΣΣ B̄n
                             2                         2
                                                                                
                                 0            1 0     0         0     0      0
                                                                               
                =    exp Ān + B̄n (µ − Σλ) + B̄n ΣΣ B̄n + B̄n P − B̄n ΣΛ − δ Xt ,
                                              2

where the second equality simply moves objects that are known at t outside of the conditional
expectation, the third equality uses the law of motion (6) for the state vector, the fourth
equality again moves objects that are known outside the expectation, the fifth equality
uses the normality of εt+1 to compute the expectation of the exponential function involving
the vector of shocks, and the sixth equality simplifies the resulting expression. Matching
coefficients after (12) is substituted into the left-hand side of this equation then implies that
the difference equations (14) and (15) must hold as well.


7.3    Matching Average Long-Term Bond Yields

To see how the five elements of the vector λ in (9) and (10) can be calibrated to match
the average yields on one through five-year discount bonds, multiply both sides of (15) by
µ̄ = (1 − P )−1 µ, which by (6) keeps track of the steady-state values of the variables in the
state vector Xt , and add the results to (14), after replacing µ with (I − P )µ̄, to obtain


                         0                                 1
               Ān+1 + B̄n+1 µ̄ = Ān + B̄n0 µ̄ − B̄n0 Σλ + B̄n0 ΣΣ0 B̄n − B̄n0 ΣΛµ̄ − δ 0 µ̄.
                                                           2


                                                     34
From (16), each term of the form Ān + B̄n0 µ̄ that enters into this difference equation equals
−ny n , where y n denotes the steady-state yield on an n-period discount bond. Hence, the
difference equation can be written more compactly as


                                 (n + 1)y n+1 = ny n + zn + B̄n0 Σλ,


where
                                                         1
                                zn = B̄n0 ΣΛµ̄ + δ 0 µ̄ − B̄n0 ΣΣ0 B̄n .
                                                         2

Solving this difference equation forward starting from y1 = r, where r is the steady-state
value of the short-term nominal interest rate, yields

                                            n−1
                                                       !         n−1
                                                                         !
                                   1        X                  1X 0
                              yn =     r+         zj       +         B̄ Σ λ
                                   n        j=1
                                                               n j=1 n


for all n = 2, 3, 4, . . ..
    The average yield on an n-period bond can be used to measure y n , the average values
of the macroeconomic variables can be used to measure r and the elements of µ̄, and the
estimated values of the parameters governing the model’s dynamics can be used to compute
zn and B̄n0 Σ for all n = 2, 3, 4, . . .. Since observations on yields at five longer maturities are
used in the estimation, five versions of this last equation, with n = 4, n = 8, n = 12, n = 16,
and n = 20 can be stacked into a vector, and the 5 × 5 matrix formed from the partial sums
of the B̄n0 Σ terms on the right-hand side inverted, so as to solve uniquely for the elements of
the 5 × 1 vector λ that both accurately demean the data and allow the model to match the
average slope of the yield curve.




                                                   35
7.4    Constructing the State Space Model

The matrix U from the observation equation (20) in the state space model is given by

                                                 
                                             U
                                            r
                                            
                                            Uπ 
                                            
                                            
                                           U 
                                            y
                                            
                                            0
                                            B4 
                                            0 ,
                                        U =    
                                            B8 
                                            
                                            
                                           B 0 
                                            12 
                                            
                                            0 
                                           B16 
                                            
                                              0
                                            B20


where the first three rows, with

                                                      
                                   Ur = 1 0 0 1 0 ,

                                                      
                                   Uπ = 0 1 0 1 0 ,

and
                                                      
                                   Uy = 0 0 1 0 0 ,

recover the observable short-term interest rate, inflation, and output gap variables from the
state vector and the remaining rows are determined by the bond-pricing recursion (15) and
therefore reflect the cross-equation restrictions imposed by the affine term structure model.




                                             36
The form of the matrix V ,
                                                     
                                         0 0 0
                                                
                                                
                                       0 0 0 
                                                
                                                
                                       0 0 0 
                                                
                                                
                                        σ4 0 0 
                                                
                                    V =
                                                ,
                                                 
                                        0 σ8 0 
                                                
                                                
                                       0 0 0 
                                                
                                                
                                        0 0 σ16 
                                                
                                                
                                         0 0 0

reflects the assumption that the one, two, and four-year bond yields are measured with
errors, having standard deviations σ4 > 0, σ8 > 0, and σ16 > 0.


7.5    Extending the Sample Period

Table 4 displays maximum likelihood estimates of and standard errors for the model’s 31
parameters obtained when the sample period is extended to run through 2014:4; in general,
these estimates are similar to those reported in table 1 for the sample period that ends in
2007:4. Likewise, the forecast error variance decompositions in tables 5 and 6 and the impulse
response functions in figures 8-12 for the extended sample period mostly resemble those from
tables 2 and 3 and figures 1-5 for the period ending in 2007:4. One exception is that the
shock to the inflation target appears somewhat more important when the model is estimated
with the longer sample reflecting, perhaps, the model’s attempt, shown most clearly in figure
7, to attribute low long-term bond yields to a negative inflation target beginning in 2011.




                                             37
Table 4. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors
              Extended Sample Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4

Parameter                   ML Estimate                   Std Error
    ρr                        0.6705                       0.0392
   ρπ                         0.1897                       0.0796
   ρy                         0.1279                       0.0205
   ρv                         0.0709                       0.0164
   ρπr                        0.1994                       0.1009
   ρππ                        0.8313                       0.0431
   ρπy                       −0.0126                       0.0146
   ρπv                       −0.0318                       0.0131
   ρyr                       −1.1288                       0.3716
   ρyπ                       −0.0369                       0.1551
   ρyy                        1.0450                       0.0522
   ρyv                        0.0436                       0.0411
   ρvv                        0.8847                       0.0336
   στ                         0.0012                       0.0001
   σr                         0.0013                       0.0001
   σπ                         0.0025                       0.0001
   σy                         0.0078                       0.0004
   σπτ                       −0.2578                       0.1901
   σyπ                       −0.1670                       0.2241
   σyτ                        0.7065                       0.5886
   σvr                        4.3681                       1.5903
   σvπ                       −0.9491                       0.6190
   σvy                       −0.6878                       0.2097
   σvτ                       −1.2116                       1.3240
   Λr                        −9.6260                       4.1114
   Λπ                       −18.8791                       9.3501
   Λy                       −19.7252                      14.2870
   Λτ                        −1.7198                       3.9688
   σ4                         0.0004                       0.0000
   σ8                         0.0002                       0.0000
   σ16                        0.0001                       0.0000

Note: The table reports the maximum likelihood estimate and boot-
strapped standard error of each parameter listed.
   Table 5. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions
           Extended Sample Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4

                         Output Gap
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1          0.0      0.0     1.1              0.3       98.7
   4          6.4      0.0     1.1              1.4       91.1
  12         20.4      0.2     1.3              6.9       71.2
  20         23.0      0.4     1.3             10.2       65.1
  ∞          22.9      0.5     1.3             10.8       64.5
                           Inflation
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         0.0       0.0    10.9             89.1       0.0
   4         0.2       2.6    17.4             78.9       0.8
  12         0.4       7.1    31.6             54.8       6.2
  20         1.3       7.2    41.9             41.1       8.6
  ∞          0.2       0.7    94.6              3.6       0.9
                 Short-Term Interest Rate
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         57.7      1.7    39.2              0.2        1.3
   4         35.4      5.0    52.3              0.4        6.9
  12         15.7      3.9    66.7              0.6       13.1
  20         11.8      2.6    74.0              1.3       10.3
  ∞           0.7      0.1    98.5              0.1       0.6
                     Bond Risk Premia
Quarters   Monetary   Risk  Inflation
 Ahead      Policy  Premium Target           Inflation   Output
   1         18.0     60.1     1.2              3.3       17.4
   4         18.0     60.1     1.2              3.3       17.4
  12         18.0     60.1     1.2              3.3       17.4
  20         18.0     60.1     1.2              3.3       17.4
  ∞          18.0     60.1     1.2              3.3       17.4
Note: Each row decomposes the forecast error variance in the
indicated variable at the indicated horizon into percentages at-
tributable to each of the model’s five shocks.
           Table 6. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions

                  Extended Sample Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4

                           One-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         36.4       13.3       43.1         0.0       2.2         5.0
   4         20.2       15.3       55.8         0.0       7.0         1.6
  12          9.1        9.0       70.0         1.0       10.3        0.6
  20          7.0        6.0       77.3         1.6        7.6        0.4
  ∞          0.4         0.3       98.8         0.1        0.4        0.0
                           Two-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         19.7       24.4       50.5         0.2       2.9         2.3
   4          9.5       22.0       61.2         0.4       6.2         0.7
  12          4.6       12.0       74.4         1.8       7.0         0.3
  20          3.6        7.9       81.3         2.1       4.9         0.2
  ∞          0.2         0.4       99.1         0.1       0.2         0.0
                          Three-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         10.6       25.9       59.4         0.9       3.1         0.0
   4          4.5       21.2       67.9         1.3       5.1         0.0
  12          2.5       11.1       79.3         2.5       4.7         0.0
  20          2.0        7.3       85.2         2.4       3.1         0.0
  ∞          0.1         0.3       99.3         0.1       0.2         0.0
                          Four-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         5.6        21.8       67.0         1.6       2.9         1.1
   4         2.2        17.2       74.3         2.0       3.9         0.3
  12         1.4         8.9       83.8         2.7       3.1         0.1
  20         1.1         5.8       88.6         2.4       2.0         0.1
  ∞          0.1         0.3       99.5         0.1       0.1         0.0
                           Five-Year Bond Rate
Quarters   Monetary     Risk     Inflation                        Measurement
 Ahead      Policy    Premium     Target     Inflation   Output      Error
   1         3.1        17.2       75.2         2.1       2.5         0.0
   4         1.1        13.1       80.5         2.3       3.0         0.0
  12         0.9         6.7       87.8         2.6       2.1         0.0
  20         0.7         4.3       91.5         2.1       1.3         0.0
  ∞          0.0         0.2       99.6         0.1       0.1         0.0
Note: Each row decomposes the forecast error variance in the indicated bond
yield at the indicated horizon into percentages attributable to each of the
model’s five shocks and measurement error.
Figure 8. Impulse Responses to a Monetary Policy Shock, Extended Sample
Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation monetary policy shock εr . The inflation and interest rates are in annu-
alized terms.
Figure 9. Impulse Responses to a Risk Premium Shock, Extended Sample Pe-
riod: 1959:1 - 2014:4




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation risk premium shock εv . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized
terms.
Figure 10. Impulse Responses to an Inflation Target Shock, Extended Sample
Period: 1959:1 - 2014:4




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation inflation target shock ετ . The inflation and interest rates are in annual-
ized terms.
Figure 11. Impulse Responses to an Inflation Shock, Extended Sample Period:
1959:1 - 2014:4




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation inflation shock επ . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized
terms.
Figure 12. Impulse Responses to an Output Shock, Extended Sample Period:
1959:1 - 2014:4




Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model’s variables to a one-
standard-deviation output shock εy . The inflation and interest rates are in annualized terms.
