                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BANKS, POLITICS, AND POLITICAL PARTIES:
     FROM PARTISAN BANKING TO OPEN ACCESS IN EARLY MASSACHUSETTS

                                                Qian Lu
                                              John Wallis

                                         Working Paper 21572
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21572


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2015




We thank Howard Bodenhorn, Eric Hilt, Ethan Kaplan, Naomi Lamoreaux, Peter Murrell, William
Novak, James Snyder, Richard Sylla, Robert Wright, and seminar participants at the University of
Maryland and the 2013 Cliometric Society meeting for their comments and suggestions on an earlier
related paper. Qian Lu thanks Yiqing Xu and the staffs at the Massachusetts State Library and Massachusetts
State Archives. Special thanks to Alix Quan of Massachusetts State Library for providing valuable
data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Qian Lu and John Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Banks, Politics, and Political Parties: ¸˛From Partisan Banking to Open Access in Early Massachusetts
Qian Lu and John Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 21572
September 2015
JEL No. G2,G28,N0,N11,O1,O5

                                             ABSTRACT

The United States was the first nation to allow open access to the corporate form to its citizens. The
state of Massachusetts was not only one of the first states to provide its members with legally sanctioned
tools to create organizations and enable open access but, on a per capita basis, had many more banks
and other corporations than other states as early as the 1820s. Nonetheless, Massachusetts did not
open access easily. This paper documents that until 1812, bank charters were only available to members
of the Federalist Party in Massachusetts. When the Democratic-Republicans gained control of the
state legislature and governor’s mansion in 1811-12, they chartered two new Democratic-Republican
banks and threatened to eliminate most of the Federalist bank. The paper documents the close association
of politicians and bankers. Before 1811, close to three-quarters of all the bankers we can identify had
been or would eventually become a state legislator. The evolving relationships between politics and
banking, the eventual opening of banking, and the wealth of bankers are tracked into the 1850s.


Qian Lu
Central University of Finance and Economics
lu@econ.umd.edu

John Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu
                                                                                                                     2


         The United States was the first nation to allow open access to the corporate form to its

citizens. The state of Massachusetts was not only one of the first states to provide its members

with legally sanctioned tools to create organizations and enable open access but, on a per capita

basis, had many more banks and other corporations than other states as early as the 1820s. Early

nineteenth century Massachusetts is a natural place to look for the social processes that enabled

societies to create large numbers of independent organizations, the central question of this

volume. A large literature describes what happened in Massachusetts as well as explanations for

why it happened. The title of Pauline Maier’s article “The Revolutionary Origins of the

American Corporation” gives the flavor of answers: political events in the revolution created the

conditions under which democracy emerged and the movement toward modern corporations and

open access to those corporate forms almost inevitably followed. The Handlin’s classic

Commonwealth: A Study of the Role of Government in the American Economy, 1774-1861 has

much the same tone and analysis. The state found itself confronted with political demands for

corporate charters from a wide variety of citizens that it simply could not deny.1

      Viewed from a narrow perspective, the Handlins’ and Maier’s explanation that Americans

adopted open access for organizations because of the political and economic dynamics set in

motion by the movements towards democracy in the colonial experience and the revolution is

certainly correct. Something definitely happened to political and economic institutions in

Massachusetts that led to open organizational access. A similar adoption of democratic political

institutions in other societies, however, did not lead to open organizational access, for example,


1
  “The public purpose which justified extension of government powers to a bank, to a bridge, and to a factory soon
comprehended a wide and ever widening circle of enterprises. The Commonwealth’s concern with the entire
productive system, its solicitude for the welfare of many diverse activities, all interdependent and all adding to the
strength of Massachusetts, quickly put the corporate form to the use of many new ventures. The political balance
deflated any notion of keeping the device exclusive; the expansive thinking, the excited spirits of the young state,
brooked no casual denial. Charters in steadily mounting volume clothed with living tissues the skeletal hopes for an
economy to serve the common interest.” (Handlin and Handlin, 1969, p. 106)
                                                                                                                 3


in Latin American after independence. Those societies tried democracy, repeatedly, but elites

persistently frustrated attempts to open political and economic organizations to a wider spectrum

of the population.

      Intra-elite conflict does not play a central role in early American history. The Handlins,

Maier, and many others focus on the emergence of an inclusive political democracy, contested

but nonetheless ultimately triumphant.2 These histories subsume intra-elite conflict into intra-

party competition in the new American democracies (national and state), which can lead us to

miss an important set of institutional changes that made inclusive democracy feasible. If most

societies fail to develop politically and economically because they cannot solve the problem of

intra-elite conflicts, including conflicts about the formation of organizations, then we would like

to know how the United States managed to solve the problem. An American history that passes

over the intense conflicts between elites in the early 19th century hamstrings our ability to

understand what happened in Massachusetts as well as why it happened. If intra-elite conflict in

Massachusetts produced a political crisis that was resolved by allowing all elites to form

organizations, in effect moving from limited to open access to organizational tools, then learning

that history should help us understand some of the dynamics involved in opening access.

      To be clear, we are not arguing that a competitive electoral democracy was not an

important element of what happened in Massachusetts: it was. We are arguing that a competitive

electoral democracy was neither self-implementing nor did it produce open access.

Massachusetts began its history as a state with a Federalist political party that dominated the

highly profitable banking industry by actively suppressing the entry of banks associated with

political competitors. When the opposition party, the Democratic-Republicans, finally got in


2
 For recent general histories see Wilentz (2000) and Howe (2004). Inclusive political systems are a key element in
Acemoglu and Robinson’s (2012) concept of modern development.
                                                                                                       4


power, they threatened to destroy the Federalist banks and create new Democratic-Republican

banks in 1812. In simple terms, if competitive democracy meant periodic alternations of the

party in power, and party shifts signaled the destruction of valuable existing economic

organizations like banks, then there were two basic ways to protect valuable economic

organizations. One alternative was to restrict the scope of competitive democracy, reducing or

eliminating the possibility of changes in party control of government. The other alternative was

to put in place institutions that allowed all elites to form economic organizations at will, so that

when governments changed there would be no threat to existing or potential economic

organizations.

     The second alternative offers the possibility of a more subtle explanation of how the intra-

elite competition that characterized early 19th century Massachusetts, and the rest of the United

States, may have led to open access. North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) argue that, in most

societies, intra-elite competition and violence is moderated by the creation of elite economic

rents which sustain coordination within the elite coalition. Under the right conditions,

competition within and between elites can lead elites to move towards rules that allow all of

them to form organizations. In order to bring those ideas down from an abstract conceptual level

to a concrete historical sequence we need to establish historical corollaries for the conceptual

ideas. First, the idea of “elites” must be made operational. We do that by identifying elites as

individuals who were both a state legislator and a bank president or director sometime in their

lives. Next, competition between the elites must be identified, which we do by examining the

pattern of bank chartering across the two major political parties between 1790 and 1815. Then a

crisis in which one faction of elites credibly threatens to harm the organizations of the other

faction’s must be detailed, which happens in Massachusetts in 1812 when the Democratic-
                                                                                                                   5


Republicans threaten to allow the charters of all the Federalist banks to lapse. Finally it must be

shown that elites move toward open access for all elite factions, which we show by looking at the

association between bankers, legislators, and parties after 1815.

      Banking offers a particularly rich area to explore the economic and political dynamics of

elite competition because of the close connection between politics and banking. We show that

despite its democratic origins and active political competition from the 1780s onward,

Massachusetts did not open access easily. Entry into banking was limited and highly partisan in

the first thirty years of statehood. Citizen demands for bank charters were often not met.

Despite two competitive dominant political parties, the Federalists and Democratic-Republicans,

which were roughly balanced politically in numbers, a large percentage of banks and bankers

were Federalists until 1811 and Democratic-Republicans were denied charters.3

      When the Democratic-Republicans gained simultaneous control of the House, Senate, and

Governor’s office for the first time in 1811, they threatened to disband the Federalist banks and

chartered two new banks dominated by Democratic-Republicans. In the wake of the political

crisis of 1811 and 1812, Massachusetts made a permanent change to open access banking.

Banking was still dominated by elites, but access to banking was no longer limited.

      While the connection between political parties and banking seems to have been broken

after 1813, the close connection between politics and banking continued. From 1813 to 1860,

between 40 and 50 percent of all bank presidents and bank directors also served in the state

legislature at some point in time. Unlike the earlier period, however, no political party

dominated banking the way the Federalists had before 1811, and no groups complained about

systematic exclusion from bank chartering. Banking remained an elite occupation throughout

3
 In the late 18th and early 19th century the “Democratic-Republicans” were also often called either “Republicans” or
“Democrats.” Because the paper goes to 1860, a period in which the National Republicans, the Democrats, and the
Republicans formed parties, we stick with the lengthy “Democratic-Republican” name.
                                                                                                      6


the entire period, but it ceased to be an occupation only available to politically connected elites

as evidenced by their party affiliations. Control of bank entry ceased to be a mode of intra-elite

competition.

     Massachusetts matters for the larger questions posed in this volume. The revolutionary

experience and early American experiments with democracy did not immediately or inevitably

produce open access to the corporate form. The partisan political competition unleashed by the

adoption of competitive electoral democracy initially resulted in partisan control of banking and

limited entry. Equally important, open access banking did not result from a divorce of

economics and politics in Massachusetts. Massachusetts did not eliminate, or try to eliminate,

elites. The state did not miraculously discover that politics should no longer be involved in

banking. What changed was the government’s role as coordinator and arbitrator of elite factions

or coalitions. In the early years of the Commonwealth government was systematically used by

the dominant elite faction, the Federalists, to create banks that favored the Federalists.

Eventually elites came to see that the interests of all the dominant political factions would be

better served if the government coordinated access to the privileges of corporate banking by

making charters available to all individuals who met impersonal criteria. This was not the result

of a Jacksonian democracy levelling process, bankers remained elites and closely connected to

the political process, but the manipulation of economic privileges by organized political parties

stopped. We show that despite opening access in banking, bankers as a group did not lose their

privileged economic status as measured by their assessed property income.

     We begin with the history, both a general overview and then detailed consideration of four

different periods and the connections between bankers, legislators, and parties as well as state
                                                                                                    7


banking policy in each period. We present more evidence on bankers and legislators as elites,

and close with some lessons for the larger questions.



III. History

       We divide the history of banking policy in Massachusetts into four periods. The first,

from statehood until 1811, banking was dominated by the Federalist party. Of the 23 banks that

were chartered, all but a handful were connected directly with the Federalist party. At one point,

80 percent of the bankers that we can identify, either bank presidents or directors, were state

legislators at some point in their life. This was a well integrated political and economic elite.

The second period was the brief interlude between 1811 and 1815. In 1811 and 1812,

Democratic-Republican Elbridge Gerry, of gerrymandering fame, was governor and, in his

second term, the Democratic-Republicans controlled a majority in the House and Senate for the

only time between 1790 and 1830. In that narrow window the Democratic-Republicans

chartered two new Democratic-Republican banks and threatened to close all but one of the

existing Federalist banks. The third period from 1815 to 1829, saw continued political

competition between the two parties, but a gradual opening of access to banking. This

culminated in a general regulatory act for banks in 1829. The Act required that all bank charters

be identical, and that any new privilege granted to one bank must apply to all banks. The last

period from 1830 to 1860 was essentially a period of open access, without strong party ties to

bank entry. The sections that follow track the number of bankers and their association with

legislators and political parties. Before doing so, a general overview lays out the ground.

       From the early 1780s on, Massachusetts had an elected government comprised of a

Governor, a Senate, and a House. Annual elections for all three were held in May, with terms
                                                                                                                  8


that ran until the next election (so, for example the legislature elected in the spring of 1811 held

sessions in both 1811 and 1812, and the Governor served in both years as well).4 Towns had the

opportunity to send representatives or not, so the number of legislators fluctuated, sometimes

wildly. Figure 1 gives the number of legislators by legislative year.

        The early years of the 19th century, from 1792 to 1824, the first national party regime,

was dominated by Federalists and Democratic-Republicans. The second national party regime

from 1829 to 1859 included National Republicans, Whigs, Democrats, Americans, Know

Nothings and other parties. In the first national party system, two parties dominated for roughly

thirty years. In the second party system, multiple parties competed with each other, both over

time and at any point in time.

        The fortunes of the parties in Massachusetts can be followed in Figures 2 – 5. We take

the overall party composition of the each legislature from Dubin (2007).5 Figure 2 gives the

party composition of the Senate for the first period, 1797 to 1824, and Figure 3 gives the party

composition of the Senate for the second period. Figures 4 and 5 show the party composition of

the House for the two periods as well. We take the party identification of individual legislators

from the Massachusetts Legislative Biographies. There are no party IDs before 1787, which is

when Dubin’s data start.

        While Federalists dominated the Senate in the earliest years, the Democratic-Republicans

were able to compete effectively from roughly 1805 on and controlled a majority in six

legislatures from 1808 to 1824. The House follows roughly the same pattern as the Senate.



4
  The 1820 Constitutional Convention proposed an amendment that would have moved the beginning of the political
year to the first Wednesday in January, but it was rejected by the voters. Ten years later, the voters ratified
Amendment X of the constitution making January the start of the political year. After 1832, the legislative sessions
start in early January and end in late March or April.
5
  Dubin’s data on party affiliations in Massachusetts begin in 1797.
                                                                                                       9


Federalists dominated the early in the period, but Democratic-Republicans were competitive

after 1805, controlling the majority in 4 sessions.

        In the second party system, a kaleidoscope of parties contended for control of the

Massachusetts Senate and House, Figures 3 and 5. The National Republicans and then the

Whigs usually controlled a majority of Senate seats, but in a much more competitive political

regime. National Republican, Whig, and then Republican domination of the House is also

apparent, again in the context of extensive party competition and entry.

        Massachusetts was an innovator in banking as well. Throughout the early 19th century

the state had more banks and more bank capital per capita than any other state (Wallis, Sylla, and

Legler, 1994.) The number of banks in operation each year is given in Figure 6. We take data on

banks, bank presidents, and bank directors from the Massachusetts Registers. Our count of

banks closely tracks the count of banks in operation of Warren Weber, except for the period

between 1837 and 1848 when the Register does not provide any information on banks outside of

Boston. The number of new banks entering the sample is shown in Figure 7. Our sample

matches closely the data on bank charters collected by Richard Sylla and Robert Wright, shown

in the figure.

        Tabular data on banks and bankers in presented in Tables 1, 2, and 3. The Massachusetts

Registers report information in every year on banks in operation, bank presidents, and bank

directors. In most years, bank directors are only available for banks in Boston. No data was

collected on banks outside of Boston, the “country” banks, between 1837 and 1848, as shown in

Figure 6. After 1852, the Registers contain a list of all bank directors for all banks in the state.

We matched individual bankers from the Registers to the complete biographies of Massachusetts

state legislators.
                                                                                                   10


        Table 1 shows the number of bankers in the Registers for roughly decade intervals. The

numbers are banker years, since a banker can appear in more than one year. The total number of

banker years are in column (1), the number of those bankers who were a legislator at some point

in their life in column (2), the number of bankers who were legislators whose party ID was

reported in the legislative biographies in column (3), and the share of those in the total sample of

bankers. The signal feature of the table is that over 70 percent of all banker years were for

individuals who were also legislators at some point in their lives before 1819. After 1820 that

share falls steadily to 44 percent in the 1850s. The dramatic increase in the number of bankers in

the last row of the table reflects a growth in banking and in the fact that the Registers reported all

of the bank directors of all the banks after 1852. The full population of bankers after 1852 has

the same proportion of bankers who were also legislators than the preceding decades: the under

count of country banks does not appear to bias the estimated relationship between bankers and

legislators.

        The Registers provide information on bankers each year, and since some bankers appear

in multiple years, the data in Table 1 give heavier weight to bankers who served longer terms.

Table 2 includes each banker only once, the year that they first appear in the Registers and enter

the banker sample. The table lists the number of bankers who entered the sample in each time

period, column (1), and whether they were only a banker, column (2), or had been or became a

state legislator, column (3), and the shares of those measures in columns (4) and (5). The same

time pattern appears in Table 2 and in Table 1, but is less marked. Bankers who were also

legislators tended to be bankers for a longer period, and thus have a greater weight in Table 1,

column (5) than they do in Table 2, column (5).
                                                                                                      11


       Table 3 groups the bankers into three longer chronological periods, roughly

corresponding the four periods we discuss below, gives the numbers and share of bankers were

legislators, and for the bankers who were legislators and were identified with a party in the

legislative biographies, which parties the bankers belonged to.

       Because the sample of bankers reported in the Registers varies over time, we organize the

data in three ways. We have a complete count of banks, bank presidents, and bank directors for

Boston banks throughout the entire period. The number of Boston bankers is shown in Figure 8.

Sometimes we focus on all the banks in the Registers even though we usually only have the

names of bank presidents for those banks, and are missing many of them from 1837 to 1848.

After 1853 the Registers began reporting bank presidents and directors for all the banks in the

state. The number of all bankers in the state that appear in the Registers for the entire period is

given in Figure 9. The large movements in the figure are caused by changes in the banks

reported by the Registers. The conclusions we draw from the two samples are the same, but it is

often easier to see the continuity in the Boston bank sample. The third way to organize the data

is by banks rather than by bankers.

       The data and sources are described in more detail in the data appendix.



V. Politics, Parties, and Banks from 1784 to 1811

       Massachusetts chartered its first bank in 1784, the Massachusetts Bank. It gave out four

more charters before 1799, when the state changed the rules for private banks, prohibiting bank

note issue by unchartered private banks. What followed was an increase in chartering in 1801,

1802, and 1803, as shown in Figure 7. By 1810, 23 banks had been chartered and were in

operation.
                                                                                                     12


       The Federalist party controlled Massachusetts politics in the 1790s and 1800s showed in

the party composition of bankers. Figures 10, 11, 12 and 13 use Boston bankers, for which we

have all the bank presidents and directors, from 1790 to 1825 (Figure 11 covers 1790 to 1860).

Figure 10 shows the share of all bankers in a given year that either had been a legislator already

or would at some point in their life become a legislator. At it is peak, the share was 80 percent,

and before 1811 fell below 70 percent in only one year. Figure 11 divides the bankers into those

who became a legislator before they became a banker, and those who became a banker first and

legislator later in life. Initially, more than half of the bank presidents and directors in Boston had

been a state legislator before they became a banker. The legislature had been in existence longer

than the banks, of course, but it is remarkable that such a high percentage of bankers were drawn

from the ranks of the legislature. Beginning in 1790, over 20 percent of the bankers who were

not legislators when they became bankers eventually would become a legislator, a share which

grew through time.

     Figures 12 and 13 divide the bankers who were also legislators at some point in their lives

into their party affiliation in the legislature. Remember that we do not have party IDs for

legislators before 1797. In Figure 12, of the bankers before 1810, only 1 had already been a

Democratic-Republican legislator (out of roughly 50 bankers), while a significant number had

already been Federalist legislators. Even more striking, figure 13 shows that bankers who were

not legislators when they became bankers, were much more likely to become Federalist

legislators than Democratic-Republican legislators.

     Of the 68 bankers in the statewide sample in 1810, including the banks outside of Boston,

47, or 70%, had been (33%) or would become (37%) legislators. Of those 47 bankers, 4 had no

party affiliation, 38 were Federalists (81%), and 5 were Democratic-Republicans (11%). By
                                                                                                    13


1810, banking in Massachusetts was not quite a Federalist monopoly but it was close. Of the 23

banks in our sample in 1810, only 3 banks can be identified as Democratic-Republican banks

because they have presidents who were Democratic-Republican legislators. Two other

Democratic-Republican legislators were directors in banks dominated by Federalists. Perhaps

even more telling, of the 23 banks, only 4 did not have a state legislator as president or a director

in 1810. Even this is an underestimate, however, since we do not have directors for most country

banks. One of the 4, the Nantucket Bank, was a country bank. Directors were listed for the

Nantucket bank in just one year, 1803. In that year the bank was a Democratic-Republican bank,

it had 3 Democratic-Republican legislators on its board. The Berkshire Bank’s president in 1810

was Simon Larned. He was a legislator, but he was not identified with a party. While

representation in the House and Senate was roughly 60% Federalist, 40% Democratic-

Republican over these years, the Federalist banks outnumbered the Democratic-Republican

banks by roughly a 5 to 1 ratio.

        Democratic-Republicans complained bitterly about the Federalists’ exclusive control of

banking. “Monopolies of all kinds are odious in all countries; but they are more so in a free

country like ours; they are here directly opposed to the genius and spirit both of the people and

their government. And there can be no monopoly more invidious, than to give exclusive

privileges by the acts of government to a few very rich men for improving their money in Banks,

and to refuse the same privilege to the active merchants, and to the widows and orphans.”6 Banks

were “engines of oppression,” enabling Federalists to exploit enterprising merchants and

shopkeepers. Federalists monopolized “all the exclusive privileges . . . until the voice of private

citizens is lost in the overbearing influence of privileged companies.”7 As long as “combined


    6
        Columbian Centinel, February 16, 1803. Quoted in Lake (1937), p. 32.
    7
        Eastern Argus, April 2, 1807. Quoted in Goodman (1969), p. 176.
                                                                                                              14


court parties grant banks and other privileged corporations to favored companies, equal rights

cannot exist.”8 The purpose of chartering banks was to give exclusive privileges to Federal

friends and “every incorporation for wealth and profit is a bulwark to aristocracy.”9 As most

bank charters would expire in 1812, “incorporations should not be renewed unless the proprietors

of banks consent that every officer of their banks be appointed by the State Government.”10 In

1803, after the legislature refused a petition for a “Town and Country Bank,” Democratic-

Republicans blamed Federalists and painted them as the champions of bank monopoly, opposing

to “every measure calculated to promote the interest of the middling class of citizens.”11 “Will a

director of the Boston Bank, or a man, whose ‘projects’ gripe every monied institution within the

town, be advocates for such salutary measures as our situation calls for?” “Let the charters be

free for all, if they are granted to any.”12 Before 1811, Federalist elites dominated politics,

controlled banks, and excluded the Democratic-Republicans from banking. Democratic-

Republicans demanded reforms to allow them access to banking. They seized the chance in 1811.



III.2 The Massachusetts Bank War, 1811-1815

     What stands out in many of the figures, most clearly in Figure 12, is 1812. Although

Massachusetts had elected Democratic-Republican majorities to the Senate and House before, it

was only in the election of 1811 that the Democratic-Republicans held both houses and the

Governorship. Eldbridge Gerry was elected governor in both 1810 and 1811 and Vice-President

of the United States in 1813 and 1814.13 In his first term as governor, he sought to conciliate the

     8
       Eastern Argus, Dec. 13, 1805, and Feb. 22 Dec. 6, 1805; Salem Register, March 30, April 2, 1807. Quoted in
Goodman (1969), p. 176.
    9
      Eastern Argus, Nov. 15, 1805. Quoted in Robinson (1916), p. 103.
     10
        Eastern Argus, Dec. 13. 1805. Quoted in Robinson (1916), p. 104.
     11
        Republican Gazette, April 27, 1803. Quoted in Goodman (1969), p. 172.
     12
        Boston Democrat, May, 1804. Quoted in Goodman, p. 173.
    13
        Billias (1976).
                                                                                                             15


two parties and work out a compromise with Federalists over banking and a number of other

issues. He restrained radical Democratic-Republicans who hoped to remove Federalists from

office. While Democratic-Republicans held power in the House, the Senate was equally divided.

The Federalist leader Harrison Gray Otis was the Senate president and blocked every

Democratic-Republican reform. Since they were not threatened, Federalists also adopted a

moderate tone. 14

     In 1811, however, Gerry abandoned his conciliatory policy. The admission of Louisiana to

the Union had already aroused animosities against President Madison among Federalists, and

when Congress approved Madison’s Non-Intercourse Act to cease commerce with Britain in

March, Boston Federalists organized a mass meeting and protested against the law, denouncing it

as tyrannical and oppressive. They threatened to call for measures “short of force”, and to elect

officers who would “oppose by peaceable, but firm measures, the execution of the laws, which if

persisted in must and will be resisted.”15 Gerry denounced the Boston mass meeting, claiming it

advocated revolution. He was convinced that if Federalists returned to power, they would nullify

the Non-Intercourse Act or resist its enforcement. The result would be: “our constitutions are

nullities, our constituted authorities are usurpers, and we are reduced to a state of nature.”16 In

his second inaugural address in June 1811, Gerry publically accused Federalists who “excite the

spirit of the insurrection and rebellion to destroy our internal peace and tranquility.”17 In his

second term, he began to remove Federalists from state offices and appoint Democratic-

Republicans in their place.


     14
        On Gerry and the issues in 1811, see: Formisano (1983),p. 74-75; Billias (1976), p. 314-322. James T.
Austin (1829), p. 333-42, p. 346-347; Seaburg and Patterson (1971), p. 228. Goodman (1986), p. 154-181. Morrison
(1929).
    15
       “Governor’s Speech to the Representatives’ Chamber, June 7,” Massachusetts Acts and Resolves (1811),
p.184.
    16
       Ibid. 184
    17
       Ibid. 185
                                                                                                                 16


     In the elections of 1811, Democratic-Republicans captured both houses of the state

legislature. The Democratic-Republican legislature helped Gerry implement a series of reforms

to capture patronage in the state, to remove Federalists from the office, and to occupy Federalist-

controlled organizations.18 One of the most famous changes was the “gerrymander.” In February

1812, Democratic-Republicans passed a bill to divide the state into senatorial districts along

partisan lines. This change redistricted the state to make the Democratic-Republican votes count

as much as possible and the Federalist ones as little as possible. This practice was not new nor

was Gerry an active supporter of the plan, but has long since been associated with Gerry’s

name.19

     The legislature of 1811-12 changed the banking policy of the state. It chartered two new

banks: the State Bank and the Merchant’s Bank of Salem. The State Bank was a very large bank,

with three times the capital of any existing bank. All twelve directors and the bank president had

been or would be state legislators: 11 were Democratic-Republicans. The sharp jump in the

number of Democratic-Republican bankers who had been legislators in Figure 12 for 1812 was

the result of placing Democratic-Republicans legislators on the bank’s board of directors.

     The State Bank was also intended to be a reform bank. One-third of the $3 million capital

was subscribed by the state government, with an option to subscribe an additional $1 million.

The bank was to pay a tax to the state of ½ of 1 percent of its paid in capital each year. The

reform ideas behind both state ownership of stock and the capital tax was that the bank, rather

than being a source of private privilege to its owners, would be a source of revenue for the state

government. 20


    18
       For Republican reforms in other sectors, see Goodman (1965).
     19
        Griffith (1907), p. 17-21; Austin (1829), p. 322; Dean (1892), p.374-383.
20
   The charter of the State Bank can be found in Massachusetts, 1812, p. 501, June 26, 1811, “An act to incorporate
the President, Directors, and Company of the State Bank.”
                                                                                                   17


        The other aspect of the Democratic-Republican bank offensive resulted from the unusual

fact that the charters of all but one of the existing banks in Massachusetts expired in 1812.21 In

the 1811-1812 legislative session, the Democratic-Republicans refused to renew the charters of

any of the existing banks. It was, literally, an existential crisis for the Federalist bankers.

Without their charters they would not be able to issue bank notes, a basic function of their banks.

The Federalists regained the Governorship and the House, but the Democratic-Republicans had

redistricted the Senate (as a result of the “Gerrymander”) and retained control of it. In the fall of

1812 (the 1812-13) legislative session, the charters of the existing Federalist banks were renewed.

Significantly, all of the renewals contained the reform provisions included in the State Bank

charter, including the bank capital tax.

        The political dynamics unleashed by the events of 1811 and 1812 show clearly the intra-

elite nature of competition over banking. Before 1811, Salem already had two Federalist

banks— the Salem Bank and the Essex Bank. Unable to get loans from either bank a number of

Salem’s most prominent Democratic-Republicans, led by the Crowninshield family, decided to

start a new Democratic-Republican bank. Their petitions for bank charters, however, were

rejected by the Federalist legislature for many years. It was not until 1811 that they finally

secured a charter, as the minister William Bentley described in his diary, “To give weight to the

Republican Interest in Massachusetts, the last Legislature placed several banks into the hands of

their friends, and among others, one in Salem, which was completely organized this day, under

the name of Merchant’s Bank.”22

           The first two presidents of the Merchant’s Bank are good examples of the kind of

Democratic-Republican elites who were denied access to banking. Benjamin Crowinshield, the


21
     The original charter of the Massachusetts Bank had no termination date.
       22
          Dennis (1908), p. 7.
                                                                                                     18


first president, left the bank in 1814 to become Secretary of the Navy under Madison. He had

served in the state legislature eight times, three in the Senate and five in the House; would be a

national Congressman for four terms from 1823 to 1831; and candidate for Governor in 1818 and

1819. The man who replaced him, Joseph Story, was president of the bank for the next twenty

years. He had been appointed Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States in

November, 1811 and sat on the Supreme Court for thirty three years. Democratic-Republicans

did not bank charters because they lacked powerful elites.

         The reaction of the Federalists to the Merchants Bank mirrored the charges the

Democratic-Republicans levied against the Federalists. Even before it opened on September 10,

1811, the Federalist Salem Gazette gave grave censure of the “new bank:”

               It requires but little foresight to predict the influence which the institution
         will, and which the legislature intended it should have on the political
         circumstances of our Commonwealth, and particularly its elections. Viewing it in
         this light, it cannot be considered as an institution for the common benefit of our
         citizens, but on the contrary for the purpose of unblushing political corruption.
         Federalists will be excluded entirely from accommodation, as they were from the
         privilege of subscribing for shares, and Democrats only enjoy its benefits. We
         hesitate not to assert, that (until the Spring elections are over, at least) any
         Democrat (or “friend of the government” as the committee call them) who can
         bring good proofs of his attachment to the cause, will be furnished with what
         money he wishes from this Bank, while federalists, let them be never so competent,
         will be sedulously refused a discount, except perhaps a few, who will be held up
         as a mask to cover their gross, corrupt partially. Let every candid man consider
         this course of conduct, lay his hand on his heart, and say if he can call it by any
         other name than BRIBERY.23

     The State Bank was a much more ambitious project. Throughout its early history,

Democratic-Republicans directed the State Bank. Eleven of its first twelve bank directors had

been Democratic-Republican legislators. The first president was William Gray, a leader of the

Democratic-Republican Party, the lieutenant-governor of the State, as well as a rich merchant

ship-operator. In the circular of the bank, July 1811, the bank committee said, “the establishment
    23
         Salem Gazette, Sep. 10, 1811. Emphasis added.
                                                                                                  19


of the present institution should be so conducted that its benefits shall be diffused as extensively

as possible among the friends of the government throughout this Commonwealth.”24

     The State Bank drew even more criticism from the Federalists than the Merchant’s Bank.

They charged the State Bank with being “a powerful engine of bribery and corruption, and a

machine established for the purpose of creating Democrats and destroying Federalists.”25 The

Columbian Centinel of July, 1811, called the State Bank “the mammoth bank,” and denounced it

as a “party bank.” In the Boston Gazette of August 22, 1811, “A Massachusetts Yeoman”

addressed a letter to William Gray, “it was beyond all precedent, and wicked in the extreme, to

grant a set of men, who have always been borrowers, the whole control of the circulating

medium of the State.”

     In the Centinel, August 31, 1811, “A Constitutional Republican” said, “1st, That the grant of

a charter to the State Bank is a violation of the Constitution; 2d, that those who gave it

countenance and voted for it have acted corruptly.” The Worcester Spy said it was “a bill to

secure to Mr. Gray and his political associates, for twenty years, a stupendous monopoly of all

the banking privileges of the Commonwealth, or at least of the metropolis. The community

would suffer incalculable injury from the uncontrolled speculations of a bank without a rival, and

the total loss of confidence in the stability of corporations dependent upon the will of the

legislature.”

     The Salem Gazette denounced the bank: “The State Bank is managed as a powerful engine

of bribery and corrupt influence. … The constitutions and the principles of republican

government are derided and contemned. . . It is unblushingly avowed that the new bank is

intended as a machine to create Democrats and destroy Federalists. In this State there has been


    24
         Stetson (1891) p.13.
    25
         This and the following quotes are from Stetson (1891).
                                                                                                    20


so much clamor by this very party against banks, bank directors, and exclusive privileges, that

consistency required them to discountenance all. It appears that in each county an electioneering

committee has been appointed, who through the influence of the new bank are to act as almoners

of democratic bribes and commissioners of official corruption.”

     Such was the state of inter-elite conflict in Massachusetts in 1811 and 1812.



III.C Moving toward open access, 1815-1829

     The Democratic-Republican legislature seized the chance in 1811 to implement a series of

reforms. However, Madison’s unpopular foreign policy cost them lose subsequent state elections.

In 1812, Federalists won back a majority in the House, as well as the governorship, rechartered

the existing banks in 1812. Significantly, all the new charters included a provision specifying a

bank capital tax and allowing the state to make investments in the banks, just as in the State

Bank charter.26

     In 1813, when the Federalists again controlled the State and they denounced the State Bank:

“A monied institution was created, founded on the determination to abolish those already

existing, and its capital was apportioned to counties and towns, upon a digested scheme of

premiums for political corruption.”27 Under the Federalists, Massachusetts began chartering

more banks after 1812. According to the report of the Joint Committee on Banks in 1820, for

several years, the liberal policy had granted bank charters in “almost all cases of apparent utility,

leaving it to the actual wants of the community, and to the true perception of interest among its

members, to fix the limits of capital, which would thus be employed.”28 The rate of bank

formation was high in 1811, 1812, and 1813, when both Democratic-Republicans and Federalists

    26
       Handlin and Handlin (1969), p. 129; Dodd (1954), p. 210.
    27
       Dodd (1954), p. 209.
    28
       Columbian Centinel, June 17, 1820.
                                                                                                   21


became presidents and directors (Figure 12). The rate of bank formation slowed during the

active part of the war in 1814 and 1815, and the economic recession in 1818. The explosion of

banking occurred in the 1820s, as Figures 6 and 7 show. By 1830, Massachusetts had only 4.7

percent of the nation’s population, but 20 percent of the nation’s banks and 18.5 percent of the

nation’s banking capital (Wallis, Sylla, and Legler 1994). In his research on free banking of

different states, Sylla claimed, “After 1820, Massachusetts had essentially free banking in the

general sense of that term, and the state remained a leader in terms of numbers of incorporated

banks and capital invested in banking enterprises for several decades.” (Sylla, 1985, p. 111)

       This was the same period in which the proportion of bankers who had been or would

become legislators declined sharply, from roughly two thirds of all bankers to around 45 percent

of all bankers. Unfortunately, the increase in the number of banks occurs just at the time that

party identification became problematic. For much of the 1820s, many state legislators were not

identified with parties in the Legislative Biographies. Figure 14 gives the share of all legislators

identified in in each year with a party. The sharp drop in the late 1820s reflects that disarray of

the parties at the national level. Unfortunately, we cannot track the party association of the

bankers who became legislators in this important decade.

       Nonetheless, there was a distinct break in the connection between bankers and legislators

after 1815. Table 2 breaks down new bankers entering in five year intervals in the middle panel

of the table. Between 1810 and 1815, 61 bankers entered and 64 percent of them had been or

would become state legislators. In the next five year period, 1815 to 1819, 95 bankers entered

and 51 percent had been or would become state legislators. Between 1820 and 1825, 214 bankers

entered and only 42 percent had been or would become state legislators. In the decade of the
                                                                                                      22


1820s, when party identification was weakest, so too the association between bankers and state

legislators became permanently weakened.

       The 1820s also produced a significant and permanent change in the banking policies of

the state. The earliest indications were the rechartering of the existing Federalist banks in 1812,

which included the same provisions as the State Bank charter. When new banks were chartered

after 1813, their charters contained the provision that “That the rules, restrictions, limitations,

reservations and provisions, which are provided in and by the third section of an Act, entitled,

“An Act to incorporate the President, Directors, and Company of the State Bank,” shall be

binding on the bank hereby established…” 29 Rather than reverse the “reform” provisions of the

State Bank charter, the Federalists embraced them.

       This was clearly a shift in policy by the Federalists. Whether the move toward adopting

the same charter provisions for all banks played an important role in Federalist thinking is not

clear. Unlike the banks chartered up to the State Bank, which sometimes included special

provisions and often included implicit geographic monopolies, all the banks chartered after 1812

contained the same provisions. That part of the agreement was codified when new bank charters

formally became standardized on February 29, 1829 with the passage of the general regulatory

act: “An Act to Regulate Banks and Banking.” The Act required “That from and after the

passing of this Act, every Bank which shall receive a Charter, from or by the authority of this

Commonwealth, and every Bank whose Capital shall be increased, or whose Charter shall be

extended, shall be governed by the following rules, and subjected to all the duties, limitations,




29
  This is the language used in the charter of the Worcester Bank. Massachusetts, 1821, Chapter
26, “An Act to incorporate the President, Directors, and Company of the Worcester Bank,” p.
422
                                                                                                   23


restrictions, liabilities and provisions, contained in this Act.”30 The Act reconfirmed the bank

capital tax and the ability of the state to invest in any bank, as well as borrow from it. The

clincher was section 31: “Be it further enacted, That if, during the continuance of any Bank

Charter, granted or renewed under the provisions of this Act, any new or greater privileges shall

be granted to any other bank now in operation, or which may hereafter be created, each and

every Bank in operation at the time shall be entitled to the same.” (p. 161) The general

regulatory act not only guaranteed that all existing bank charters would have the same provisions,

but any new provisions introduced in the future would retroactively apply to all existing banks.

Massachusetts had adopted an “impersonal” rule for the creation and governance of banks: it was

a rule that treated all banks the same.

          Massachusetts did not adopt a general incorporation act for banking until the 1850s, but

essentially allowed de facto open entry after 1820. Significantly, the complaints by one party

that the other party was restricting access to bank charters effectively stopped. As the Handlins

noted, the compromise reached in 1812 seems to have signaled the end of banking competition.

“The settlement of 1812 had substantially stabilized the banking system, withdrawing it from the

grasping hands of a favored few. For a time thereafter, the question of currency was academic

only.”31 When the general incorporation act was passed in 1854, only 4 banks requested charters

under the general act.



III.D Politics, Parties, and Banks in the Second Party Regime: 1830 to 1860

          National party politics in the United States fragmented in the 1820s. In three of the four

national elections between 1824 and 1836, three or more candidates received electoral votes in
30
  Massachusetts, 1831, Chapter XCVI, “An Act to regulate Banks and Banking,” Section 1, pp.
145.
31
     Handlin and Handlin, p. 175.
                                                                                                                  24


the presidential elections. The exception was the election of 1828, featuring the John Quincy

Adams and Andrew Jackson rematch of their 1824 race. In 1824, Jackson won a popular and

electoral vote plurality, but Adams won the election in the House with the support of Henry

Clay. Elections from 1840 to 1852 resulted in electoral votes for only the Whig and the

Democrat candidates. But, a caldron of party formation and loyalties boiled away at the state

level. In 1856 and 1860, multiple parties and candidates won electoral votes, ending in the

election of Lincoln and the onset of Civil War.

         Figures 3 and 5 show the mix of parties that competed for dominance in Massachusetts

between 1830 and 1860. The dominant parties in succeeding elections were National

Republicans, Whigs, and Republicans, with a one brief period in which the Democrats

challenged, and a second brief ascendancy of the Know Nothing Party. The sequence of parties

was not one continuous coalition that simply changed its name over time. The National

Republicans, Whigs, and Republicans were reconfigurations of existing political alignments.32

         The lack of party ID’s for legislators before 1797 and in 1820s, Figure 14, and the

growing number of political parties makes it difficult to draw a neat comparison between the

period after 1830 and the period before 1815. We don’t have any party IDs for legislators before

1797, and as we saw earlier, many of the early bankers had been legislators before they became

bankers. In Table 3, of the 217 individual bankers in the Registers between 1790 and 1815, 137

were also legislators, but we only have party IDs for 87 of those. Most of the missing IDs are for

legislators who served in the 1790s and not later (we they served after 1797 we would be more



32
  The idea that the Whigs were a simple continuation of the Federalist party has a long history, but it appears to be
wrong. Holt summarizes the idea: “Even historians routinely echoed Democratic propaganda and described Whigs
as ex-Federalists. Experts now know better. Massive research in the past forty years has shown that the Whig Party
evolved not from the Federalists but from divisions within the Jeffersonian party.” (Holt, 1999, p. 2) Holt cites
Benson (1961) and McCormick (1966) as examples of a literature “too vast to list here.”
                                                                                                 25


likely to link them with a party). There were 49 legislator/bankers who appeared in the Registers

between 1790 and 1799.

           As shown in the lower panel of Table 3, legislators with Federalist Party IDs

accounted for 25 percent of all bankers between 1790 and 1815 and 39 percent of all bankers

who were legislators. The portion that were connected to the Federalists would surely be

significantly higher if we had party IDs for legislators before 1797.

           We can compare the pre-1815 banker-legislators to the post 1830 banker-legislators

by making an extreme assumption: take the Federalist, National Republican, Whig, and

Republican legislators as a continuation of the “dominant party” for the entire period between

1825 and 1859. This is a problematic assumption, but it gives us a way to compare magnitudes

in the two periods, since combining the four parties gives a biased over estimate of the number of

people in the dominant elite coalition. The combined party legislators account for 28 percent of

the bankers after 1825. This is significantly less than the proportion of Federalist

banker/legislators in the pre-1811 period. Entry into banking before 1811 was limited by the

need for political party connections, after 1830, much less so.

       Nonetheless, banks and politics, and bankers and politicians remained closely associated

into the 1850s. To see this more clearly, we need to dig deeper into the connection between

banks, bankers, and legislatures. Since the Registers usually report only the name of the Bank

president for the country banks we have only one banker associated with those banks. The fact

that the president is not a legislator does not mean that the bank is not associated with the

legislature through a director.

       Figure 15 shows the number of all banks that had no legislators in each year. Figure 16

excludes banks without directors reported in the Registers, that is, the banks where only the
                                                                                                   26


president’s name was listed. The picture is much different. Only one bank, the Bangor Bank in

1819 and 1820, reported the names of directors and had no directors who had been or would

become legislators among its president or directors. No bank in our sample before the late 1840s

that reported directors failed to have a legislator on the board, other than the Bangor Bank.33

       We cannot follow the share of all banks that have a legislator as a director, because the

Registers do not report bank directors for most of the country banks and there is missing data on

most of the country banks between 1837 and 1848. Beginning in 1852, however, the Registers

did begin reporting bank directors for all banks, Boston and country. The number of bankers that

we can identify increases significantly as shown in Figure 9. In 1852, the number of bankers we

can identify jumps from around 350 to almost 1,000. One might expect that the addition of over

600 directors of country banks would reduce the share of bankers that had been or would become

legislators, and increase the share of banks with no legislators on their boards. But Table 2

shows that is not the case. Indeed, after 1852 the share of all bankers who had been legislators

begins to rise. The country banks were just as likely to have a state legislator on their boards as

the Boston banks. In 1859, when we have information on over 150 banks, including all their

directors, there are only 4 banks without a legislator on their boards of directors or their president.




33
  This criterion is narrow. To include a legislator in the board of bank directors may not mean it
is an elite organization. For example, it may be that out of its 10 directors, 9 are ordinary people
but they need 1 famous person in the board to make the banks more influential, build more social
connections, or give people more confidence. Besides, if banks were mostly as a tool for rich
people to be able to channel funds to their family business, as claimed by Lamoreaux, it cannot
be a bank serving the ordinary people. These banks were commercial banks, not savings
institutions or saving banks. Its purpose is not to serve the ordinary people to save their money
and get good investment opportunity. It is not surprising that they were connected to some
legislator. One interesting question is after the saving banks became more important after the
Civil War, whether they were elite organizations or not. But it is beyond what we study in this
paper.
                                                                                                          27


        In 1842, the Washington Bank of Boston began operating without any legislators on its

board (it had been in operation with a legislator on its board earlier), and in 1845 the Eagle Bank

of Boston began doing the same. In 1852, five banks, the Cambridge Bank, the Chochituate

Bank, the Essex Bank, the Grocer’s Bank, and the Washington Bank were operating with no

legislators as their president or on their boards. Most of these banks had been in operation before

the General Incorporation Act for Banks passed in 1851. Few banks availed themselves of the

general banking procedure, most still obtained a special charter, even though because of the 1829

Act, the terms of the banks with special charters were the same exactly the same as the terms in

the general act.

        While the association of bankers with political parties weakened, their association with

state government did not. What can we say about their economic fortunes over this period? We

were able to link the names of Boston bankers to the Boston property tax assessments to get a

measure of their wealth. In 1826, the City of Boston published a “List of Persons, Co-
                                                           34
Partnerships, and Corporations who were taxed …”                There are a number of technical issues

about the property tax data, but the bottom line with respect to the relative wealth of bankers to

all other wealthy taxpayers is clear and robust to a series of adjustments (Lu, 2014). From 1829

to 1859, there were an average of 3,845 persons, partnerships, and corporations listed (ranging




34
  The title varied somewhat from year to year, as did the minimum amount of tax paid to qualify a person, co-
partnership, or corporation from inclusion in the list.The lists of wealthy taxpayers in the city of Boston—
from List of Persons, Copartnerships, and Corporations, Taxed in the City of Boston—
document a person’s or an organization’s real and personal holdings and taxes paid between 1829
and 1859 (1831, 1834, 1854, 1855, and 1856 are missing). Only wealthy taxpayers with wealth
above certain thresholds are included in the tax lists. From 1829 to 1848, the list includes wealth
for individuals taxed $25 and upwards (since the tax rate was roughly 0.8% of wealth, the
property cut-off was approximately $3,125); from 1849 to 1853, the list includes individuals
whose personal property was $6,000 and upwards, and from 1857 to 1859, $10,000 and upwards.
                                                                                                    28


from a low of 1,836 in 1830 to a high of 5,883 in 1848).35 We identified all the bankers in the

sample whose names we could match, then drew several random samples of non-bankers from

the tax lists to compare them to. Our largest random sample includes an average of 1,617

individuals (excluding partnerships and corporations), or a 42% sample on average (only in 1833

and 1839 does the sample size fall below 20%). The Registers identify and average of 244

bankers in Boston (from a low of 200 in 1829 to a high of 281 in 1859), of which we identify an

average of 102, or 42% (with identification share below 20% only in 1833, 1837, and 1839).

       Figure 17 shows the wealth of Boston bankers relative to the other wealthy individuals

included in the tax lists. There is no trend in the relative wealth of Boston bankers relative to the

rest of the wealthy population, it stayed steady around 150%. The wealth of bankers does not

appear to have declined relative to other wealthy groups. Steckel and Moehling (2001) match

the Massachusetts Census records to property tax lists for the entire population and show that

wealth distributions became increasingly unequal between 1820 and 1860. Given the stable

relative wealth of bankers to wealthiest taxpayers, we expect that bankers grew wealthier relative

to all taxpayers between 1830 and 1860. The wealth data gives us the same picture as the

banker-legislator data: banking remained a largely elite preserve from 1820 to 1860.36

IV. How and Why?




35
   We begin with the 1829 tax lists, as the first few years of the list exhibit too much variation in
names and assessments to warrant our confidence.
36
   Our results from the Boston tax lists paint a different picture of the relative wealth of bankers
in Boston than Lamoreaux and Glaisek, 1991, which show that in Rhode Island, that new
bankers were less wealthy than old bankers. In part, this is the result of different samples. We
do not have all the bankers in Boston, just the richest ones. Lamoreaux and Glaisek compare
two cross section of bankers in 1830 and 1845. Hilt and Valentine, 2012, analyze stock holding
and wealth in New York City from 1791 to 1826 and show that stock ownership was becoming
more diversely held by less wealthy households.
                                                                                                   29


        The defining question for this volume is how societies manage to provide open access to

organizational tools. Massachusetts banking provides a clear case of limited access before 1812,

opening access afterward, and full access by the 1850s. The introduction sketched a simple

sequence in which access to banking was initially limited to the Federalists. When the

Democratic-Republicans gained control of the state they privileged their own banks and moved

against the Federalist banks, and, shocked and concerned by what had happened, Massachusetts

moved to a set of arrangements that allowed all elite factions to establish banks and prevent a

repetition of 1812. While the story is historically and logically consistent with the Massachusetts

experience, it does not provide us with an answer to a deeper question: why were the reforms in

Massachusetts sustained? Why didn’t the dynamics of elite competition in an electoral

democracy produce attempt to manipulate access to organizations to create and cement a new

political coalition?

        The answer to that question lies in the dynamics of intra-elite competition and the way

elites structured institutions affecting the interaction of the government and economic

organizations. The conceptual ideas laid out in the introduction to the volume (Lamoreaux and

Wallis) and in NWW, suggest that the first move to impersonal rules for the formation of

organizations occurs within elites. Access to organizations is limited, and the formation of

political coalitions depends, in part, on the formation of economic organizations whose rents

make the political coalitions stable and coherent. Elite groups are not homogenous, and

competition between elites can threaten the fundamental arrangements underlying elite

agreements. The Democratic-Republican move to eliminate the Federalist banks might have

repeated itself over and over again, if control of the government brought with it the ability to

dismantle the economic organizations of opposing factions.
                                                                                                  30


        As we have shown, banking remained closely connected to state politics even after the

reforms of the 1810s and 1820s, using our narrow definition of elites. What changed was the

relationship between elites and political parties. This section examines the changes in

institutional arrangements that may have made the new intra-elite arrangement stable and

sustainable. Some of the institutional arrangement involved the relationship between banks and

the state government and, somewhat surprisingly, those arrangements grew out of the charter of

the State Bank in 1812. Surprising, because the State Bank was part of an attempt by the

Democratic-Republicans to turn the tables on the Federalists and take control of banking. The

other institutional arrangements were not codified in laws, but resulted in changing the dynamics

of political parties. All of these changes were endogenous. The new arrangements decoupled

banks and political parties, but not banks and state government, and made open access in

banking sustainable.

        No landmark political decisions embodied the change in arrangements. These changes

were not the result of overt crises, nor were they embodied in a single law, like the general laws

in the states Eric Hilt studies in his paper in this volume. As a result, this part of early

institutional change does not play a prominent role in the existing histories. For example, the

Handlins note that “…the critical decisions in 1812 had already implicitly circumscribed the

capacity to exercise that power [withholding bank charters],” (1969, p. 163) yet, their history of

1812, pp. 113 to 122, contains no discussion of what those critical decisions were. The decision

to decouple political connections and bank entry was not the outcome of a heated debate between

anti-elite Jacksonians and their opponents, but came quietly in the second decade of the century.

What followed 1812 makes much more sense if we conceive of what happened as a settlement

between elites, rather than a compromise between elites and masses.
                                                                                                    31


       The Democratic-Republicans put the State Bank model forward as a reform bank, but

was also an attempt to change shift the economic privileges that the Federalists had enjoyed to

the Democratic-Republicans by chartering a very large Democratic-Republican bank closely tied

to state finances, and denying the Federalists their banks. The power grab failed the next year,

when the Federalists recovered enough influence to recharter their banks. The reforms, however,

had lasting effects.

       Although all the details of the State Bank charter matter, perhaps none was more

important than the requirement that all future bank charters contain the same provisions. The tax

on bank capital, for example, was intended to return some of the profits of the bank to the state

and the state’s taxpayers persisted. “Provided however, That the same tax, payable in manner

aforesaid, shall be required by the Legislature of all banks that shall be hereafter incorporated

within this Commonwealth, from and after the said first Monday of October: And provided

further, That nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair the right of the Legislature to

lay a tax or excise upon any bank already incorporated, under the authority of the

Commonwealth, whenever they may think proper to do so.”37 The capital tax provision could

have been reversed by the Federalists when they came back into power, but it was not. The

capital tax provision was included in all the bank charter renewals in 1812 and thereafter.

       Like the Democratic-Republican’s State Bank, the Federalist could have chartered a very

large Federalist bank, but they did not. Rather than reverse the reform provisions of the State

Bank charter, the Federalists embraced them. This was clearly a shift in policy by the Federalists.

The banks chartered before 1811sometimes included special provisions and often included

implicit geographic monopolies. After 1812 that policy changed and the new agreement codified


37
 Massachusetts, 1811, Chapter LXXXIV, “An Act to Incorporate the President, Directors, and
Company of the State Bank,” p. 507.
                                                                                                    32


when new bank charters formally became standardized with the passage of the general regulatory

act in 1829. The general regulatory act not only guaranteed that all existing bank charters would

have the same provisions, but any new provisions introduced in the future would retroactively

apply to all existing banks. Massachusetts had passed an “impersonal” rule for the creation and

governance of banks: it was a rule that treated all banks the same.

       Another contributing force was the tax on bank capital. As Wallis, Sylla, and Legler

show, by the decade of 1825-1834, the bank capital tax provided over 60 percent of all

Massachusetts state revenues. They developed a “fiscal interest” argument to explain why states

that taxed bank capital, like Massachusetts, had a fiscal incentive to create more banks and more

bank capital. States that taxed bank capital had many more banks and bank capital than states

that owned stock in banks or charged high charter fees. States that owned bank stock wanted to

maximize bank profits. States that earned substantial revenues from bank charter fees wanted to

limit the number of banks to maximize the entry fees the state could extract. Their analysis was

comparative across states and not as detailed as this paper, but it brings out an important

implication of the bank capital tax. Everyone in the Commonwealth, all political interests, even

ones without a direct interest in banking or in a bank in a specific town, would find it in their

interests to support the chartering of new banks to the extent that it raised revenues for the state

that could be expended on other favored projects. The bank capital tax supplied a common

interest to Massachusetts elites and non-elites to support more banks, particularly given the

significance of the tax to the state Treasury.

       The Democratic-Republicans intended to create a large state bank that would dominate

Massachusetts banking. The state took a significant position in the bank, investing $1,000,000 in

the bank’s initial capital. But it soon became apparent that the tax on bank capital was returning
                                                                                                 33


substantially more to the state and dividends on bank stock (Wallis, Sylla, and Legler, 1994).

The state sold off its bank stock and, as we have seen, began chartering banks in large numbers.

Naomi Lamoreaux stressed an important feature of the growing number of small, elite banks in

her study of New England banking in the early nineteenth century, Insider Lending. Many banks

in Massachusetts were established to facilitate the business of local elite manufacturing and

commercial interests. The banks were dominated by elite families, but offered the opportunity,

through stock ownership, for non-elites to share in some of the returns of banking. The large

number of small banks meant that most banks did not make above normal profits, there was

enough competition to prevent that. Warren Weber’s work documents that the dividends paid by

Massachusetts banks declined after 1812.38 These small banks were not intended to raise long-

term capital investment funds to their owners, they were commercial banks who benefits

consisted primarily in the ability to access commercial credit on favorable terms at low

transaction costs.39 The close connection between banking and manufacturing may help explain

why lower dividends on bank stock did not seem to have lowered the relative wealth of Boston

bankers.

          The pattern of insider lending lay behind the promoters of the Merchants Bank in Salem’s

complaint that they needed “a new bank in Salem because all the other banks belonged to a

different party and refused to lend their money to political opponents.” (Dennis, 1908, p. 7)

Insider lending was also a feature of land banks in the South (Wallis, 2008, Schwiekart 1987,

Sparks 1932, and Worley 1950). This pattern of many small banks closely allied with local

economic and political elites was not the pattern in New York or Pennsylvania. Those states
38
     (http://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/economists/wewproj.cfm#discounts)
39
  As Hildreth, 1840, notes, p. 151-2: “Many of the Massachusetts and Rhode Island banks are
constituted and managed much upon this principle. The stock is chiefly held by business men,
who hold it, not for the sake of the dividends, which in these States are always moderate, but on
account of the business facilities they derive from their concern in the bank.”
                                                                                                                34


chartered a few large banks, from which the state extracted revenues (in Pennsylvania) or

political organizations extracted financing for political machines (New York).40 These banks, by

necessity, had more outsider lending. What happened in Massachusetts was not that banks

stopped lending to insiders, instead all the important insiders got their own bank. This is

consistent with movement toward impersonal rules for banks as well. Every elite group who

wanted a bank and was able to exert a minimum level of political influence got a bank, but all the

banks would be the same.

        More or less by chance, the charter of the State Bank in 1812 contained a provision

requiring that all future charters follow the State Bank charter and levying a tax on bank capital.

These were not long standing demands of bank reformers, but a short-term strategy to get control

of banking on the part of the Democratic-Republicans. Both provisions could have been

reversed by subsequent legislatures, but they were not. Federalists might have been startled

when the state legislature refused to renew the charters of any Federalist banks, and Democratic-

Republicans could certainly see what might happen if the Federalist returned the favor in kind

when they were in power. What ensued probably began as a temporary arrangement to allow

either party to charter a bank under the State Bank charter rubric.

        We do not have explicit evidence that such an agreement was reached. Yet, when

Massachusetts held a constitutional convention in 1820, to reconsider important elements of their

democratic system, including the method of representing towns in the state legislature, debates

over banking played no role. In the report on the debates, corporations were mentioned in three

contexts. Most often with regard to a proposed provision to require the legislature to issue

corporate charters to all towns of over 12,000 people, next often with respect to the corporation


40
   See Wallis, Sylla, and Legler (1994) for the numbers and the history. Schwartz discusses Pennsylvania, and there
is a large literature on New York, Bodenhorn (2006).
                                                                                                  35


of Harvard University, and third with respect to churches. Banks were hardly mentioned at all,

although they were sometimes included in sundry list of businesses. Samuel Eliot Morison’s, A

History of the Constitution of Massachusetts (1917), only includes the word banks when

referring to individuals named “Banks.” A generation later, banks and corporations would be

hotly contested in the state constitutional conventions of other states in the 1840s and 1850s

(Wallis, 2005 and 2006). The Massachusetts Convention of 1820 was hotly contested as well,

but not over banks, bank charters, or bank entry. Some agreement had been reached, even if it

only made it into state legislation in the form of the 1829 regulatory Act.

       The critical decisions of 1812 and the decade that followed was to take bank chartering

out of the legislative process altogether. Two institutional changes in the nature of political

parties probably helped sustain the move to open access. Party identification in the

Massachusetts legislature broke down In the 1820s. The share of all legislators associated with a

Party ID in the Legislative Biographies began to decline in after 1812 and took a steep drop in

the 1820s, Figure 14. Part of the decline was due to confusion in party identification at the

national level. But there was also uncertainty within Massachusetts. The last legislature the

Federalists controlled was in 1821, after that party IDs plummet. At the same time the number of

banks chartered began to increase sharply. Whether opening entry in banking and the rise in the

number banks was a cause or consequence of the breakdown in political party identification is

beyond the scope of this paper. Nonetheless, the two movements occurred simultaneously.

       The second change in political outcomes was the decline in the average tenure of state

legislators, as calculated from the Legislative Biographies. Figure 18 presents the average

lifetime tenure of legislators serving in each legislature. A sharp drop began in 1820 and

continued all the way to 1850. Individual legislators served much less time as lawmakers. Elite
                                                                                                     36


groups who wanted their voice heard in the legislature could much more easily do so, given the

steadily rising turnover of legislators. Turnover itself would have magnified the interest that all

elites had in making sure that they could obtain a bank charter and, given the institutional rules

about granting bank charters, all the banks would enjoy the same privileges. Rising economic

elites whose fortunes were tied to manufacturing or commerce and wanted access to their own

banking facilities, ala Lamoreaux. Those elites were not excluded from banking because of their

party affiliation. As Figure 11 shows for the Boston bankers, most banker/legislators after 1820

were bankers first, legislators later.


IX. Lessons and Conclusions.

        When we started this paper, we were very much of the mind that Richard Sylla’s

conclusion about banking in Massachusetts after 1820 was essentially correct: “Massachusetts

had essentially free banking in the sense that entry into banking was open or free, and the state

remained a leader in terms of numbers of incorporated banks and capital invested in banking

enterprises for several decades” (Sylla, 1985). Figures 6, 7, and 12 seemed to clearly confirm the

idea that something important happened in 1811 and 1812, events that took a decade or so to

work themselves out. The decline of bank presidents and directors who were legislators seemed

to offer concrete evidence that an elite coalition of bankers, legislators, and party under the

Federalist Party system had given way to open access.

        As appealing as that conclusion was and how well it sets with the dominant strain in

American history that banking, like other parts of the American economy, opened up to everyone

as democracy became more inclusive, the evidence we found did not support that sweeping

conclusion. The substantial evidence for a large change in the relationship between banks,

legislatures, and parties occurred in Massachusetts in the 1810s and 1820s seems beyond dispute.
                                                                                                   37


The 1820s changes have their roots in the crisis of 1811 and 1812, before the War of 1812 broke

out. But as long as we maintain the working definition of elite banks as those banks with a

president or director who served as a legislator, we find that almost all the banks up to 1850 were

elite banks (keeping in mind the caveat about country banks for which the Register’s only report

the name of the bank president).

       Institutional development in Massachusetts followed a path in which the first step toward

open access was homogenizing the elite privileges that came with a banking charter. Those

privileges were essentially open to all individuals with the economic wherewithal to start a bank

or the social standing to be elected to the legislature. By 1829, Massachusetts had moved to

impersonal rules for forming and operating a bank. Those rules provided sophisticated and

powerful tools to banking organizations. The tools were not just listed in the charters, they were

embedded in the economic, political, and legal systems that gave shape and substance to the

organizations created by the charters. Non-elites banks (by our measure) did not begin to appear

until the 1850s, and they did not spring up in mass even after the free banking law in 1851 had

removed any obstacles to bank chartering. Massachusetts moved to open access banking in the

1820s, but it was access that only elites took advantage of.

       It would require much more detailed investigation into petitions for bank charters for the

entire antebellum period to see if non-elite petitions were denied with higher or lower frequency

over time and whether non-elite petitions were common. We have not attempted that very large

empirical project, but the narrative evidence suggests that bank charters were readily available

after 1820s. We have shown how the complex relationship between bankers, legislators, and

parties Massachusetts changed to enable public support for private organizations in banking

evolved in a critical time in American history.
                                                                                                     38


       Does this history hold more general lessons for the process of development? American

history has a complicated relationship with the notion of elites. Elites participated in and led the

American Revolution and played central roles in the formation of new governments in the late

eighteenth and early nineteenth century at both the national and state level. The widespread

antipathy towards political parties produced a curious politics in which elite groups competed for

control of governments, attempted to plausibly deny that they had formed a political party to

promote the interests and objectives of their group, and vehemently denounced the opposing elite

groups as corrupt, dangerous, partisans who would wreck American society in pursuit of their

own goals. It is difficult to overstate the sheer nastiness of early American politics.

       People outside the United States are doubtful that American history holds much in the

way of lessons for how their societies might attempt to promote development, and that is not

surprising. Their societies are plagued by elites that propose reforms and then subvert them, by

populist leaders who rise to influence and power and then act just like the elites they replaced.

The only way American history makes sense in the development context is if we recognize that

American elites were as competitive, vindictive, and personally motivated as well as idealistic

and well motivated elites in nations around the world today. What differed about elites in the

United States was the dynamics of how they interacted, not their moral character or political

philosophy.

       The central question for this volume is how societies come to provide organizational

tools to large blocs of their citizens. That has to be a process that begins with the interests of

elites who, in most societies, fail to provide organizational tools to anyone but themselves and

the rising elites who demand recognition. What happened in the United States, as exemplified

by Massachusetts bankers, was a change in the internal dynamic of intra-elite competition. The
                                                                                                    39


change produced a set of institutional changes that altered relationships between elites.

Significantly, Massachusetts moved to a set of impersonal rules for elites. At that point the

politics of banking moved from creating special privileges through unique provisions in charters

(geographic monopolies, for example) to a system where all elites enjoyed the same

organizational tools. Entry was open, but in practice all of the banks continued to maintain a

connection with the government. Nonetheless, the barriers became lower and lower as the

dynamics of political parties shifted and the average tenure (commitment) of a state legislator

declined. Impersonal rules and relative open elite entry produced a large number of relatively

small banks. The banks were profitable, but did not enjoy substantial rents from limited entry.

Instead, banks were useful in combination with the growing manufacturing and commercial

sectors (Lamoreaux, 1994). Under those conditions extending banking privileges to non-elites

no longer threatened existing arrangements tying political and economic elites together. When a

formal general incorporation act for banks was passed in 1851, there was no rush of banks to

take advantage of it. Access to banking was already effectively open to everyone who wanted a

bank.

        The primary lesson to learn from Massachusetts is that even in a society with a long

democratic tradition, with cultural norms that stress the importance of equality and charity, that it

is difficult for a society to consciously and deliberately eliminate elite organizational privileges.

Support for, and limits on, organizations is a key element in those privileges. Until we

understand the dynamics of how elites decide to move to impersonal rules for elites that can

genuinely create and sustain open access for elites, we are unlikely to understand how to do it for

the larger population.
                                                                                                   40


Appendix: A Note on Sources and Measures

       We made a serious attempt to identify economic and political elites and the political

factions they belonged to by linking bankers and legislators. We match two datasets, one on

bankers and the other on legislators from the late 18th century to 1859 to show the connection

between bankers, legislators, and parties.

       The names of bank directors and presidents were collected from the Massachusetts

Register (1790-1859). This is a sample of bank presidents and directors, because the registers

(or almanacs) did not collect information on every bank in every year. Particularly in the early

years, the Registers collected complete information on banks in Boston, but often only the name

of the bank president for the country banks outside of Boston. The second database is a

complete biographical history of every Massachusetts legislator between 1780 and 2003

constructed by the Massachusetts State Library. We match bankers and legislators by their

names, and after comparing the years that bankers appear in the data and legislators’ birth year

and death year, we remove the matches that went beyond a reasonable age (20-80). The dataset

has 20,457 banker-year observations, of which 16,794 (82.1%) are bank director-year

observations and 3,663 (17.9%) are bank-president-year observations. We matched 9,749

(47.7%) of the banker-year observations with legislators.

       We are confident that the banker sample includes almost all of the banks operating in

Massachusetts between 1792 and 1836 and again between 1848 and 1859. We compared our

bank series to the data collected by Weber, by Van Fenstermaker, and by Sylla and Wright and

are confident that we have essentially all of the banks in operation. Between 1837 and 1847,

however, the Registers stopped collecting information on most banks outside of Boston. They

resumed collecting data after 1848. The Registers also began to record every director in every
                                                                                                   41


bank after 1851. For most years we have complete information on presidents and directors for

the Boston banks, but often only bank presidents for the banks outside of Boston. The basic

empirical results are to be robust to what banks are included in the sample and whether we look

at presidents and directors, or just presidents.

        We have the universe of legislators, but only a sample of bankers. Many bankers appear

in more than one year, but a significant number do not. As a result, if we use the entire sample

of 20,457 banker-year observations we have a sample selection and weighting problem. Some

bankers have more weight in the “total” sample because their banks appear more often in the

Registers. One way to parse the data is to include all observations on bankers regardless of how

many times an individual banker appears. A second way of parsing the data is to focus on

bankers as individuals. A “new” banker is observed in the year when he first enters the sample

and only in that year. For each banker who enters, we note whether that banker had already been

a legislator, whether that banker would become a legislator, or whether that banker would never

become a legislator. The total sample and the new banker sample generally show the same

trends over time, but in individual years can be quite different. The third way of organizing the

sample is by individual banks rather than bankers. All three methods are used.

        We would like to have the political party affiliation of all the bankers, but we cannot do

so. We can directly identify the party affiliation of bankers who were also legislators in most

years. The party affiliations of legislators are not given in the biographies until 1797, and even

then many early legislators do not have a Party ID, that is, they are not associated with a party in

the biographies. We cannot identify bankers with political parties if they were not legislators at

some point in their life.
                                                                                                     42


        The last step in the empirical analysis is to match the Boston bankers to the Boston

property tax assessment lists from 1829 to 1859. The tax lists include only the richest taxpayers

and the sample cut-off varies over the years. We drew a large random sample of taxpayers from

the tax list. Between 1829 and 1859 there was essentially no trend in the ratio of average wealth

of bankers to the average wealth of (wealthy) taxpayers. It could be that wealthy taxpayers,

bankers or not, were subject to similar trends, but we cannot identify the relative wealth for the

entire wealth distribution. Despite the fact that access to banking was opening, bankers did not

suffer a loss in their relative wealth.

        Measuring elites and elite coalitions is a difficult problem. For purposes of the paper, we

define elites as anyone who was a banker or a legislator, and then measure the connection

between elites and elite factions by dividing bankers into those who were legislators and those

who were not, and for those who were legislators, by dividing them further into their parties.
                                                                                                43




             800
             600
   num_leg
             400
             200




                   1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
                                                      year

Figure 1: Number of Legislators, 1790-1859
Source: Massachusetts Legislators’ Biographies, Massachusetts State Library.
   .8
   .6
   .4
   .2
   0




         1796 1798 1800 1802 1804 1806 1808 1810 1812 1814 1816 1818 1820 1822 1824
                                            year

                                   Federalist         Democratic Republican


Figure 2: Senate Composition, 1797-1824
Source: Dubin
                                                                                          44




          1
          .8
          .6
          .4
          .2
          0




               1825   1830         1835   1840          1845      1850   1855      1860
                                                 year

                             Dem           NR                  Whig        AM
                             FS            KN                  Rep         Other


      Figure 3: Senate Composition, 1825-1859
      Source: Dubin
      Note: Dem – Democrat, NR – National Republican, AM – Anti-Mason, FS – Free Soil,
KN - Know-Nothing, Rep - Republican
                                                                                                45




  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0




       1796 1798 1800 1802 1804 1806 1808 1810 1812 1814 1816 1818 1820 1822 1824
                                          year

                            Federalist            Democratic Republican


Figure 4: House Composition, 1797-1824
Source: Dubin
        1
        .8
        .6
        .4
        .2
        0




             1825    1830         1835         1840          1845    1850         1855   1860
                                                      year

                      Dem                NR                  Whig           AM           FS
                      KN                 Rep                 Other          Lib          WK


              Figure 5New: House Composition, 1825-1859. Source: Dubin
                                                                                        46



   200
   150
   100
   50
   0




         1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
                                             year

                             Number of Banks in Almanacs 1790-1862
                             Number of Banks in Weber's data 1790-1860


Figure 6: Number of Banks in the Registers and Weber’s data, 1790-1862
Sources: Number of Banks in the Registers comes from Massachusetts Registers (1790-1862),
Massachusetts State Library. Number of Banks in Weber’s data comes from Weber “Census of
State Banks” (2011)




     Figure 7: Number of New Charters excluding Renewals, 1780-1860
                  Source: Sylla and Wright (2012)
                                                                                                                                   47




                                          300
                                 N_bankers_per_year
                                100       0  200




                                                      1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
                                                                                         year



    Figure 8: Number of Boston Bank Directors and Presidents in the Registers, 1790-
1859
                     15001000
            Number of Bankers
            500      0




                                1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
                                                                   year


   Figure 9: Number of Bank Directors and Presidents in the Registers (1790-1859)
                                                                                                                             48




                                 .8
                                 .7
                                 .6
                                 .5
                                 .4
                                 .3




                                      1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860

                                                   Proportions of Boston Bankers that had been or would become Legislators
                                                   Local Polynomial Smooth Plot



           Figure 10: Proportions of Boston Bank Directors and Presidents who had been or
       would become Legislators, and Local Polynomial Smooth Plot, 1790-1859
           Source: Massachusetts Registers (1790-1859), and Massachusetts Legislators
       Biographies (1780-2003). Both are from Massachusetts State Library.
                      .6
                      .5
                      .4
                      .3
                      .2
                      .1




                           1790 1795 1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
                                                              year

                                                            Had Been                       Would Be



Figure 11: Proportions of Boston Bank Directors and Presidents who had been Legislators, and
Proportions of Boston Bank Directors and Presidents who would be Legislators, 1790-1859.
                                                                                                              49




    Figure 12: Proportions of Boston Bankers that had been Federalist or Republican
Legislators before they became Bank Directors and Presidents, 1790-1827
                             .5
                             .4
                             .3
                             .2
                             .1
                             0




                                  1790   1795   1800      1805     1810     1815     1820       1825   1830
                                                                   year

                                                       Bankers First - Federalist
                                                       Bankers First - Democratic Republicans




      Figure 13: Proportions of Boston Bankers who became Federalist or Republican Legislators
after they became bankers, 1790-1827
50
                                                                                                  51



1.2
                       Share of Legislators with Party ID

 1



0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



 0
  1790        1800       1810       1820        1830       1840       1850        1860          1870
                                             Share Legislators…

Figure 14: Share of all Legislators (not just bankers) who have a Party ID in the Legislative
Biographies.
                                                                                           52



           Number of Banks with No Legislators, All Banks
 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

  5

  0
   1780      1790     1800     1810     1820     1830     1840     1850      1860     1870
 ‐5
                      Number of Banks with No Legislators, All Banks
Figure 15: The Number of Banks with No Legislators as President or a Director, All Banks
(whether they have Directors or not), 1790 to 1859.
                                                                                        53



            Number of Banks with Directors who have no
                           Legislators
  8
  7
  6
  5
  4
  3
  2
  1
  0
   1780     1790     1800    1810     1820     1830     1840     1850     1860     1870
 ‐1
                         Banks with Directors and No Legislators

Figure 16: Number of Banks with Directors who have No Legislators, 1790-1859. This sample
excludes banks with only Presidents in the Registers.
54
                                                                         55




          3
          2.5
          2
          1.5
          1
          .5
          0




                1830   1835   1840    1845   1850   1855   1860
                                     year




Figure 17: The ratio of Average Wealth of Bankers to Wealthy Taxpayers
                                                                                   56




        10
        8
   avg_tenure
      6 4
        2




                1780 1790 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900
                                          average tenure



Figure 18: Annual Average Tenure of State Legislators, 1780-1900.

                            Source: Legislators’ Biographies.
                                                                                                       57



                                          Table 1
                 The Number of Bankers in the Massachusetts Registers Total,
                The Number of Bankers who had been or would be Legislators,
               And the Number of Bankers who were Legislators with a Party ID

Period       Number of       Number of     Number of     Share of           Share of         Share of
             Bankers         Bankers       Bankers       Bankers            Bankers          Legislators
                             who were      who were      who were           who were         w/o
                             Legislators   Legislators   not Legislators    Legislators      Party ID
                                           w/Party ID

Column            (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)

1790‐1799            307            233            98                0.24             0.76         0.42
1800‐1809            545            391           272                0.28             0.72         0.70
1800‐1812            771            562           399                0.27             0.73         0.71
1810‐1819            954            664           503                0.30             0.70         0.76
1820‐1825            842            475           395                0.44             0.56         0.83
1825‐1839           5036           2302          1883                0.54             0.46         0.82
1840‐1859          12599           5585          5032                0.56             0.44         0.90

Total              21054          10212          8582


Source:
Data taken from the Massachusetts State Library Legislative Biographies, and Massachusetts
Registers.

Notes:

For each time period, the total number of banker years is counted, column (1), an individual
banker may be included in more than one year. Then bankers who had been or would be
legislators are counted, column (2). Then bankers who were legislators and were given a Party
ID in the Legislative Biographies, were counted, column (3).

Column (4) = ((1)-(2))/(1)
Column (5) = (2)/(1)
Column (6) = (3)/(2)
                                                                                                 58




                                          Table 2
                              Number of New Bankers in Sample
                         Number of New Bankers who are also Legislators

             ALL         Banker Only         Banker&Leg     %Banker Only    %Banker/Leg

                   (1)                 (2)            (3)             (4)                  (5)

1790‐1799           74                 25             49            0.34                  0.66
1800‐1809           81                 32             49            0.40                  0.60
1800‐1812          105                 40             65            0.38                  0.62
1800‐1815          142                 54             88            0.38                  0.62



1810‐1815           61                  22            39            0.36                  0.64
1815‐1819           95                  47            48            0.49                  0.51
1815‐1825          309                 171           138            0.55                  0.45
1820‐1825          214                 124            90            0.58                  0.42

1820‐1829          396                 221           175            0.56                  0.44

1830‐1839          482                 286           196            0.59                  0.41

1840‐1849          176                 110            66            0.63                  0.38

1850‐1859        1346                  749           597            0.56                  0.44

Note:

All Bankers, column (1), are all the individual bankers reported in the Massachusetts Registers.
       In contrast to Table 1, each banker is only counted once in Table 2.
Bankers only, column (2), are never legislators.
Bankers& Leg, column (3), either had been or would become a legislator.
                                                            59

                                                        Table 3
                                 All New Bankers, By Legislator or not, and By Party or not


                                                        As Share of all Bankers                   As Share of all Banker/Legislators
                  1790‐1815   1816‐1824    1825‐1859     1790‐1815       1816‐1824   1825‐1859    1790‐1815 1816‐1824             1825‐1859
                     (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)

Bankers                 217         218     2285

Not Legislators          80         121     1310                 0.37         0.56         0.57

Legislators             137          97      975                 0.63         0.44         0.43          1.00         1.00             1.00

W/PartyID                87          80      857                 0.40         0.37         0.38          0.64         0.82             0.88

Parties:
Federalist               54          49                          0.25         0.22                       0.39         0.51
Dem‐Republican           29          17                          0.13         0.08                       0.21         0.18
Other                     4          14                          0.02         0.06                       0.03         0.14

Whig                                         316                                           0.14                                        0.32
Republican                                   169                                           0.07                                        0.17
Democrat                                     159                                           0.07                                        0.16
Nat/Republican                                80                                           0.04                                        0.08
Federalist                                    59                                           0.03                                        0.06
Know Nothing                                  25                                           0.01                                        0.03
Other                                         49                                           0.02                                        0.05
No Party                 50          17      118                 0.23         0.08         0.05          0.36         0.18             0.12
                                               60


References:

Austin, James. Life of Elbridge Gerry. Vol. 1. Applewood Books's Store, 2009.

Benson, Lee. The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy: New York as a Test Case. (Princeton:
      Princeton University Press, 1961).

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2006. “Bank Chartering and Political Corruption in Antebellum New
      York: Free Banking as Reform.” In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s
      Economic History, eds. Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, 231-57. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Billias, George Athan. Elbridge Gerry, founding father and republican statesman. McGraw-Hill,
         1976.

Brooke, John L. The Heart of the Commonwealth: Society and Political Culture in Worcester
       County, Massachusetts, 1713-1861. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Dean, John W. "The gerrymander." New England Historical and Genealogical Register 46.1
       (1892): 374-383.

Dennis, Albert Woodbury. The Merchants National Bank of Salem, Massachusetts: An
       Historical Sketch. Salem Press, 1908.

Dodd, Edwin Merrick. American Business Corporations until 1860, with special reference to
      Massachusetts. Harvard Univ Pr, 1954.

Dubin, Michael J. Party affiliations in the state legislatures: a year by year summary, 1796-
       2006. McFarland & Company, 2007.

Evans, George Heberton, Jr. 1948. Business Incorporation in the United States, 1800-1943.
       New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Formisano, Ronald P. The transformation of political culture: Massachusetts parties, 1790s-
      1840s. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.

Goodman, Paul. The Democratic-Republicans of Massachusetts: politics in a young republic.
     Greenwood Press, 1965.

Gras, Norman Scott Brien. The Massachusetts First National Bank of Boston, 1784-1934. Arno
       Press, 1976.

Griffith, Elmer Cummings. The rise and development of the gerrymander. Scott, Foresman and
        Company, 1907.

Handlin, Oscar, and Mary Flug Handlin. Commonwealth: A Study of the role of Government in
                                              61


       the American Economy: Massachusetts, 1774-1861. Belknap Press of Harvard University
       Press, 1969.

Hildreth, Richard. 1840. Banking, Banking, and Paper Currencies. Boston: Whipple & Damrell.

Hilt, Eric, and Jaqueline Valentine. 2012. “Democratic Dividends: Stock Holding, Wealth, and
        Politics in New York, 1791-1926. Journal of Economic History, 72 (2), pp. 332-363.

Holt, Michael F. The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party. New York: Oxford University
       Press, 1999.

Knox, John Jay. A history of banking in the United States. B. Rhodes & Co., 1903.

Lake, Wilfred Stanley. The History of Banking Regulations in Massachusetts 1784-1860. Diss.
       Harvard University, 1932.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. Insider lending: Banks, personal connections, and economic development
      in industrial New England. Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Lu, Qian. 2014. From Partisan Banking to Open Access: A Study on the Emergence o Free
       Banking in Early Nineteenth Century Massachusetts. PhD Dissertation, University of
       Maryland.

McCormick, Richard P. 1966. The Second American Party System: Party Formation in the
     Jacksonian Era. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Maier, Pauline. 1993. “The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation.” William and
       Mary Quarterly 50 (January): 51-84.

Massachusetts. 1812. Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts passed at the Several
      Sessions of the General Court Holden in Boston beginning May 31, 1809 and ending on
      the 29th of Feburary, 1812. Boston: Adams, Rhoades, and Co. Usually cited as
      Massachusetts Acts and Resolves, 1812.

Massachusetts, 1823. Private and Special Statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. From
      Feburary 1806 to February 1814. Boston: Wells and Lilly.

Massachusetts. 1831. Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts passed at the Several
      Sessions of the General Court, Beginning May, 1828 and Ending March, 1831. Vol XI.
      Boston: Dutton and WEntworth. Usually cited as Massachusetts Acts and Resolves,
      1812.

Morison, Samuel Eliot. "Elbridge Gerry, Gentleman-Democrat." The New England Quarterly 2.1
      (1929): 6-33.

North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
                                              62


       Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.

Robinson, William Alexander. Jeffersonian Democracy in New England. Vol. 3. Yale University
      Press, 1916.

Seaburg, Carl, and Stanley Paterson. Merchant Prince of Boston: Colonel TH Perkins, 1764-
      1854. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971.

Stetson, Amos W. "History of the State Bank." (1895).

Schweikart, Larry. 1987. Banking in the American South from the Age of Jackson to
      Reconstruction. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987.

Sparks, Earl Sylvester. History and Theory of Agricultural Credit in the United States. New
       York: Thomas Crowell, 1932.

Sylla, Richard. "Early American banking: the significance of the corporate form." Business and
        Economic History 14 (1985): 105-123.

Van Fenstermaker, Joseph. The development of American commercial banking: 1782-1837. Vol.
      5. Kent State University, 1965.

Wallis, John Joseph. 2005. “Constitutions, Corporations, and Corruption: American States and
        Constitutional Change, 1842 to 1852.” Journal of Economic History 65 (March): 211-56.

Wallis, John Joseph. 2006. “The Concept of Systematic Corruption in American History.” In
        Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, eds. Edward L.
        Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, 23-62. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wallis, John Joseph. 2008. “Answering Mary Shirley’s Question or: What Can the World Bank
        Learn from American History?” Haber, Weingast, and North, ed. Political Institutions
        and Financial Development. Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 92-124.

Wallis, John Joseph, Richard E. Sylla, and John B. Legler. 1994. “The Interaction of Taxation
        and Regulation in Nineteenth-Century U.S. Banking.” In The Regulated Economy: A
        Historical Approach to Political Economy, eds. Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap,
        121-44. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Worley, Ted. R. 1950. “Control of the Real Estate Bank of the State of Arkansas, 1836-1855.”
      Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 37, 3 December, pp. 403-26.

Weber, Warren E. "Early state banks in the United States: how many were there and when did
      they exist?." Journal of Economic History 66.2 (2006): 433.

Williams, Ben Ames. Bank of Boston 200: a history of New England's leading bank, 1784-1984.
                          63


Houghton Mifflin, 1984.
