                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NON-COGNITIVE DEFICITS AND YOUNG ADULT OUTCOMES:
         THE LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF A UNIVERSAL CHILD CARE PROGRAM

                                            Michael Baker
                                           Jonathan Gruber
                                            Kevin Milligan

                                        Working Paper 21571
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We thank Timea Molnar for outstanding research assistance. Much of the analysis for this paper was
conducted at the British Columbia Interuniversity Research Data Centre, which is part of the Canadian
Research Data Centre Network (CRDCN). The services and activities provided by the CRDCN are
made possible by the financial or in-kind support of the SSHRC, the CIHR, the CFI, Statistics Canada
and participating universities whose support is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in this
paper do not necessarily represent the CRDCN’s, nor those of its partners, nor of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Baker gratefully acknowledges the research support of SSHRC (Grant, #410-2011-0724)
and a Canada Research Chair at the University of Toronto.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21571.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Non-Cognitive Deficits and Young Adult Outcomes: The Long-Run Impacts of a Universal
Child Care Program
Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 21571
September 2015
JEL No. I1,J13,K42

                                             ABSTRACT

Past research has demonstrated that positive increments to the non-cognitive development of children
can have long-run benefits. We test the symmetry of this contention by studying the effects of a sizeable
negative shock to non-cognitive skills due to the introduction of universal child care in Quebec. We
first confirm earlier findings showing reduced contemporaneous non-cognitive development following
the program introduction in Quebec, with little impact on cognitive test scores. We then show these
non-cognitive deficits persisted to school ages, and also that cohorts with increased child care access
subsequently had worse health, lower life satisfaction, and higher crime rates later in life. The impacts
on criminal activity are concentrated in boys. Our results reinforce previous evidence on the central
role of non-cognitive skills for long-run success.


Michael Baker                                       Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics                             Vancouver School of Economics
University of Toronto                               University of British Columbia
150 St. George Street                               #997-1873 East Mall
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                                 Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA                                              CANADA
and NBER                                            and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca                             kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E17-220
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
          Recent advances in the study of early childhood development have emphasized the role

of non-cognitive skills in fostering later-life success (e.g., Heckman and Mosso 2014). Traits such

as perseverance and industriousness are viewed as equally important to cognitive skills for

better adult outcomes. In contrast, non-cognitive attributes such as impulsiveness and

emotional instability are associated with poorer outcomes at older ages. For example, Bertrand

and Pan (2013) examine how childhood non-cognitive deficits account for the gender difference

in teenage disruptive behavior.

          Particularly striking evidence on this point comes from experimental or quasi-

experimental studies finding interventions improving non-cognitive skills—while having little

persistent effect on cognitive ability—lead to improved long run outcomes. Experimental pre-

school interventions such as the Perry Preschool program provide a useful example. As

reviewed by Heckman et al. (2013), the Perry Preschool program had no lasting measurable

cognitive benefit, with any improvement in test performance fading out during the school

years. Yet there were enormous long run benefits of the program in terms of improved

economic outcomes and a lower incidence of criminal behavior, such that the annualized

measured rate of return to this investment is 6-10%. Heckman et al. (2013) document an

association of the Perry program with dramatic and lasting improvements in non-cognitive

skills.

          This evidence is also consistent with evaluations of the Head Start program in the United

States. A number of studies, including a recent experimental evaluation, have found that

cognitive gains from this program fade out during the school years (e.g. Bitler et al., 2014). Yet

quasi-experimental studies have found sizeable long run benefits from Head Start program


                                                  1
participation. Carneiro and Ginja (2014) use a regression discontinuity design around program

eligibility rules to show that Head Start participation reduces behavior problems and obesity at

ages 12-13, and reduces depression, obesity, and criminality for those ages 16-17.

       These findings raise an important question of symmetry: are there equally persistent

and important negative long-run impacts of interventions that foster a deterioration in non-

cognitive skills? In this paper, we develop a causal estimate of the relationship between

negative shocks to young children’s non-cognitive skills and their later life outcomes. To do so

we study the longer-run impacts of the largest experiment with universal child care in North

America in recent years: an introduction of very low cost child care for children aged 0-4 in

Quebec beginning in 1997. In an earlier paper (Baker, Gruber & Milligan 2008, henceforth BGM)

we documented that relative to the rest of Canada, where child care services remained

unchanged, Quebec saw large increases in maternal labor supply and in the placement of

children in child care (see also Lefebvre and Merrigan 2008 and Lefebvre et al. 2009). However,

at the same time, there was a large, significant, negative shock to the preschool, non-cognitive

development of children exposed to the new program (with little measured impact on cognitive

skills). Subsequent research (Kottelenberg and Lehrer 2013a) has confirmed that this negative

impact of the program on young children’s non-cognitive development has persisted as the

program has matured.

       We begin our investigation by replicating earlier results showing that exposure to the

Quebec child care program increased use of child care among children age 0-4, and led to lower

non-cognitive outcomes at those ages as well. We then provide new evidence for those aged 5-

9 showing the negative effects on non-cognitive skills do not appear to have faded by those


                                                2
ages—and in some cases are even stronger. In this way, our results are a mirror-image of the

Perry Preschool and Head Start evidence.

        We next explore the longer run impacts of this child care intervention in the preteen

and teenage years. Using two large national data sets on test score performance, we find no

consistent evidence of any impact on test scores; the surveys give opposing answers for math

scores, and show no effect on English or science scores. We take this as further evidence that

any impacts at older ages are operating through the non-cognitive channel.

        We do, however, find a significant worsening in self-reported health and in life

satisfaction among teens. Most strikingly, we find a sharp and contemporaneous increase in

criminal behavior among the cohorts exposed to the Quebec program, relative to their peers in

other provinces. We illustrate graphically a monotonic increase in crime rates among cohorts

with their exposure to the child care program, and we show in regression analysis that exposure

led to a significant rise in overall crime rates. We also find that these effects are concentrated

in boys, who also see the largest deterioration in non-cognitive skills.

        Our results reinforce previous research emphasizing the importance of non-cognitive

development for later-life outcomes, and also provide an important input for the current

debate over child care policy. The rapid growth in female labor force participation has led policy

makers around the world to consider increased public entitlement to child care for two-worker

families. Most recently, the Obama Administration unveiled an ambitious child care agenda,

while the Mayor of New York has proposed universal pre-kindergarten availability.1 The



1
 See https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/13/fact-sheet-president-obama-s-plan-early-
education-all-americans and http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/home/downloads/pdf/reports/2014/Ready-to-Launch-
NYCs-Implementation-Plan-for-Free-High-Quality-Full-Day-Universal-Pre-Kindergarten.pdf

                                                   3
evidence presented here suggests that measurement of the near-term non-cognitive impact of

these policy efforts can serve as a key indicator of the likely long-run success of failure of the

program.

       Our paper also extends the record of North America’s best known experiment in

universal preschool care and education. Universal programs like the one in Quebec, are more

common in Europe. While the evaluation of their impacts is mixed (Dustmann et al. 2013, Felfe

et al. 2015, Datta Gupta and Simonsen 2010, Havnes and Mogstad 2011), the external validity

of the European evidence to other jurisdictions is not clear. European programs are run under

different funding levels, which reflect the public’s greater acceptance of an active state and

government’s assumption of a larger proportion of economic activity. The Quebec experience is

important for understanding a universal initiative within the context of North American tax

structures and labor market norms.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides a summary of the extant literature on

child care and child outcomes. Part II discusses the Quebec reform. Part III then introduces the

wide variety of data sources that we will use for the analysis, and discusses our empirical

strategy. Part IV presents our results, and Part V concludes.



Part I: Background

       There is now an enormous literature on the impacts of child care and preschool on the

outcomes of young children, and a smaller literature that examines any longer run impacts as

the children age. Two important distinctions have emerged in the interpretation of the

evidence. First is whether the child care intervention being studied was targeted at children in


                                                  4
more disadvantaged families or was universal and targeted all families. Second, is any impact of

the intervention on, considered separately, cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes, both in the

short and long run. We review this literature to place our results in context, with an emphasis

on recent research.2

         A recent view of effects of previous child care exposure on outcomes in adolescence

suggest that more hours in child care in general does not affect test scores, but has a negative

effect on non-cognitive outcomes, such as impulsivity and risk-taking (Vandell et al., 2010). That

study, typical of many in the literature, relies on parental choice of child care mode, raising the

question of whether any estimated impacts of child care mode are causal or due to selection by

parent type. Similar problems plague the large existing literature in economics on maternal

work and child outcomes.

         A growing body of evidence comes from the use of experimental and quasi-

experimental methods to examine the impacts of child care. Perhaps best known are programs

targeted toward at-risk children; for example the experimental variation embedded in the

evaluations of the Abecedarian and Perry Preschool interventions. These randomized trials

from the 1960s have shown that high quality pre-school targeted to low-income children has

substantial positive effects. For example, Heckman et al. (2010) estimate a statistically

significant annual return of between 7 and 10 percent for the Perry Preschool intervention.

Carneiro and Heckman (2003) summarize the evidence from these programs as improving

motivation and social skills, while reducing crime and related behavior. Importantly for our




2   See a review of the literature up to 2008 in BGM, and in Baker (2011) and Cascio (2015).
                                                  5
work, Heckman et al. (2013) argue that the non-cognitive improvements were pivotal to the

long-run impact on participant outcomes.

       Unlike the experimental evaluations of model programs, our paper focuses on a

universal program that services a more economically and socially diverse group of children. In

contrast to the literature on programs targeting at-risk children, the evidence on broader

programs is mixed (see Baker 2011 and Cascio 2015 for recent overviews). In addition to the

previous studies of the Quebec program, which are documented below, there have been

evaluations of programs in Denmark, Norway, Spain and Germany.

       Exploiting variation in access to center-based preschool (versus a family-based

alternative) in Denmark, Datta Gupta and Simonsen (2010) report little effect on non-cognitive

outcomes at age 7, and a negative impact of family child care3 for boys of parents with low

education. Black et al. (2014) utilize a discontinuity in the price of child care in Norway,

reporting that while neither child care utilization or parental labor supply is sensitive to price,

they observe a positive impact on children’s junior high school outcomes, presumably from a

disposable income effect. Havnes and Mogstad (2011) explore an expansion of the Norwegian

system, reporting positive impacts. The public system led to higher educational attainment

(primarily for children of low education mothers) and earnings (mostly for girls) at ages 30–40.

In a related paper Havnes and Mogstad (2014) provide more detail, finding that the earnings

gains are primarily for children of low income parents and that children of upper class parents

experience an earnings loss. Felfe et al. (2015) exploit variation across states in the expansion of



3Family child care is in private homes, but the carergivers are employed by the local
municipality. The municipality approves the facilities and the qualifications of the caregivers.
                                                  6
the Spanish child care system, finding improvements in reading skills at age 15 of 0.15 standard

deviations, driven by the impacts for girls and children from disadvantaged families. Finally,

Dustmann et al. (2013) explore a policy reform of the German child care system which entitles

every child to a place on their third birthday. They find child care attendance has a positive

impact on language and motor skill outcomes of children of immigrant ancestry but not on

children of native ancestry. While there are clearly studies here that report positive impacts of

universal children programs, in many cases these impacts are primarily enjoyed by less

advantaged children. There is a little clear evidence that these programs provide significant

benefits more broadly.

       Universal preschool has also been a focus of recent research in the United States. Many

of these studies exploit age cutoffs for preschool enrollment comparing the youngest children

in a preschool cohort to the children just a little bit younger who had to wait an additional year

before enrolling. Perhaps the best known program is in Oklahoma. Gormley and Gayer (2005)

document positive impacts for Hispanics and blacks, but not for whites, which is correlated with

eligibility for free school lunch. Using a different cognitive measure Gormley et al. (2005) report

more broadly based gains. A study of New Mexico’s program (Hustedt et al. 2008) finds positive

effects on math achievement and literacy in a sample that over represents Hispanics and Native

Americans. Taking a wider view, Wong et al. (2007) examine preschool programs in five states

(a mix of targeted and universal programs) on a variety of outcomes. They record positive

impacts on a little more than half of the outcomes investigated. Finally, Fitzpatrick (2008)

studies the introduction of pre-K program in Georgia, finding positive impacts for

disadvantaged children in small towns and rural areas. As with the European studies, the recent


                                                 7
American evidence mostly fits the pattern that the positive impact of universal programs is

concentrated in more at-risk children.

       Most relevant to the current paper is research on the introduction of universal child care

in Quebec. The initial evaluation of this policy in BGM found striking negative impacts of the

program on child non-cognitive and family outcomes. In a series of papers Kottelenberg and

Lehrer show that the most of these negative effects of the program on young children and family

outcomes measured shortly after it was introduced have persisted as the program has matured

(2013a), that the negative impacts on child outcomes are larger the younger the age the child

entered the program (2014) and that the impacts vary by the sex of the child (2013b). Haeck et

al. (2013) present evidence that the program had negative effects on children’s cognitive

development at age 5. Finally, Brodeur and Connolly (2013) report that the Quebec program led

to a small decrease in parent’s life satisfaction, although this was a result of large positive effects

for low education parents being offset by negative effects for highly educated parents.

       To summarize, the literature on child care and preschool seems to indicate that high-

quality interventions for low-income populations deliver both short and long-run benefits. But

broader child care expansions do not appear to provide short-term benefits, with mixed evidence

on long-term effects.



                          Part II: The Quebec Universal Child Care Policy

       Introduced in September 1997, the goal of the Quebec child care policy was to provide

regulated child care places to all children aged 0-4 in the province at a price of $5 per day, with

the rest of the cost covered by government subsidy. This program raised child care subsidies to


                                                  8
almost 80 percent on average in the province, which can be compared to subsidies of roughly

one-third in the other provinces.4 Children were eligible for the program whether or not their

parents worked. There was a phase-in period of 4 years starting with places for 4 year olds in

1997/98 and ending with places for 0 and 1 year olds in 2000/01.

         Child care under the program was provided in two venues. The first were child care

centers (centres de la petite enfance--CPE) created out of existing nonprofit child care centers.

The second was home-based care staffed by regulated providers and organized into networks

affiliated with a local CPE. Typically older children enrolled in the CPE-based care and younger

children were enrolled in family home-based care. The daily fee was raised to $7 a day in 2004

and to $7.30 in 2014. Haeck et al. (2013) report that the number of regulated child care places

in the province rose from 78,864 in 1997 to 245,107 in 2012, while provincial subsidies to child

care rose from 288 million dollars in 1996/97 before the program to 2.2 billion dollars in

2011/12.

         The introduction of the program was accompanied by some important reforms of the

structure of child care provision. Formal qualifications for caregivers were raised and

operational regulations were modified. The government also introduced new wage policies in

the sector to make employment more attractive. Child care providers in both CPEs and family

home facilities are unionized and have successfully used strikes to win better terms of

employment and wages. In our analysis, we cannot distinguish the impacts of these supply side

interventions on the quality of care from the reduction in fees which happened at the same

time.


4   See BGM for more detail on the program.
                                                9
       The program was first introduced to four year olds in September, 1997. So, children

born before 1993 were not eligible. In 1998, three year olds were included, followed in 1999 by

two year olds. Finally, in 2000, both zero and one year old children were included. So, birth

cohorts from 1999 onward were eligible at all ages from zero to four, while those born between

1993 and 1998 were eligible for part of their early lives. This pattern of birth cohort eligibility

means that outcomes for 15 year olds are available in 2014 for one fully-eligible cohort (1999

birth year), six partially eligible cohorts (born in 1993 to 1998; observed at age 15 between

2008 and 2013), and also completely ineligible cohorts (born in 1992 or earlier; observed at age

15 at or before 2007). We depict this cohort eligibility pattern in Appendix Figure 1.



                               Part III: Data and Empirical Strategy

       We make use of four types of data (consisting of six data sets) for our analysis to trace

the long-run impact of the Quebec program from the period of treatment through to young

adulthood, covering a variety of relevant outcomes. For all the data sources, our sample

selection decisions are guided by how each source covered the cohorts exposed to program

treatment. Below we describe each of the four data sources in turn.



Child Care Enrollment and Child Outcomes: NLSCY

       Our first dataset is the National Longitudinal Study of Children and Youth (NLSCY), which

was the primary dataset in BGM. The NLSCY is a nationally representative survey of children,

conducted biannually between 1994-95 (cycle 1) and 2008-09 (cycle 8). A cohort of about 2000

children for each age between 0 and 11 was selected in the initial cycle and followed


                                                 10
throughout the entire survey. In subsequent waves new cohorts of 0-1 year olds were added

but generally only followed until age 5. Therefore, in each wave the survey offers data on the

first wave cohort, as well as children aged 0-5.

       We use the NLSCY for two purposes, each with a different sample. First, we re-examine

the contemporaneous impact of the Quebec Family Plan on some child outcomes. For this, we

take a sample of children aged 0 to 4 from cycles 1 through 5 (excluding the transitional cycle 3,

as in BGM). Second, we want to see if the estimated contemporaneous impacts persist into

grade school. To do this, we take a sample of 5 to 9 year olds in cycles 1 and 2 (the ‘pre’ period)

and compare them to 5 to 9 year olds in cycle 7. We restrict the sample to cycle 7 to ensure we

have the same set of ages for the treatment and control groups.5

       We focus on a number of outcome measures. First is a binary indicator for the child

being in any type of non-parental care while the parent works or is at school. Next is a set of

parent reported non-cognitive scores. At ages 2 and 3 we observe indices of Hyperactivity,

Anxiety, Separation Anxiety, and Aggression, which are described in detail in BGM.6 For the 5-9

year olds we have indices of Hyperactivity, Anxiety, Aggression, Indirect Aggression and

Prosocial Behaviour. While some of indices for the older age group have the same names as

corresponding indices for the younger children, they are based on a different set of age




5 Cycle 7 is the only one with children at each age between 5 and 9 who are treated. The other
cycles have holes at some ages. We have also run our results using all cycle 4 to cycle 8
observations within the age 5 to 9 range and the results are similar. We view the restricted
sample we use for our main results as the more conservative approach.
6 For the non-cognitive outcomes we focus on 2-3 year olds (as in BGM) within the 0-4 age

group, because the measures do not exist for children ages 0-1 and as noted, the non-cognitive
indices for 4 year olds are based on different questions.
                                                   11
appropriate questions.7 We also investigate a parent report of how the child gets along at

school with his/her teacher. Finally, we examine the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)

score as a measure of cognitive development.



Test Scores: SAIP/PCAP and PISA

       To measure the impact of the Quebec program on test scores of older children, we turn

to two different data sets. The first data set combines data from the School Achievement

Indicators Program (SAIP) and subsequent Pan Canadian Assessment Program (PCAP), which

are initiatives of the Council of Ministers of Education. The SAIP initiated in 1993 is a set of

standardized tests to assess the performance of 13 and 16 year old students across the country,

in the core subjects of math, reading and science. The tests were conducted 9 times between

1993 and 2004, each time focusing on one of the core subjects. The PCAP succeeded the SAIP,

and has been conducted triennially starting in 2007. Like SAIP, one of math, reading or science

is the focus of each PCAP. Unlike SAIP, a smaller sample of students writes tests in the other

non-focal subjects. This means that scores for each subject are available in each PCAP wave. We

pool data from SAIP and PCAP to construct analysis samples for each subject area. Each subject

sample contains data from the 2007 and 2010 PCAPs, while the math sample adds SAIP data

from 1997 and 2001, the reading sample adds SAIP data from 1998 and the science sample

adds SAIP data from 1996.




7The age range for the scores for younger children is 2-3, while a different set of questions is
used to form the scores for children from age 4 up.
                                                 12
       The second data set comes from the Programme for International Student Assessment

(PISA), which is a triennial test of 15 year olds conducted by the OECD in countries around the

world. This testing program was initiated in 2000, and is conducted in the core subject areas of

math, reading and science. Because the test is conducted in many countries it is not tailored to

the curriculum of a particular school system. Our analysis sample includes the Canadian test

scores from 2000, 2003, 2006, 2009 and 2012.



Health and Well-Being: CCHS and CHMS

       To assess the impact of the child care intervention on the health of older children, we

use two further data sets. The first is the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS). The

CCHS offers biannual data for 2001, 2003, and 2005 of approximately 130,000 observations;

followed by annual surveys of around 65,000 observations starting in 2007. We use all available

surveys—the latest data is for 2013. The sampling coverage of the survey is national, with a

range of questions on individual health behaviors and outcomes. We use questions on self-

assessed health, life satisfaction, and mental health. We examine a sample of 12 through 20

year olds, which in the chosen years contains both individuals who were and were not exposed

to the child care program at younger ages.

       The second is the Canadian Health Measures Survey (CHMS), which started in 2007, with

data from 3 cycles—2007-2009, 2009-2011, 2012-2013—now available. This survey combines

information on health behaviors with a set of direct physical measurements. It is stratified—

collected only in 16 sites—but with weights, the sample of around 5,700 can recover nationally-

representative estimates. We select a sample of youth ages 15-20, which again contains both


                                               13
individuals who were and were not exposed to the child care program at younger ages.8 We

examine self-reported measures of health, ranging from general health to stress to mental

health and life satisfaction.



Criminal Behavior: UCRS

       We combine special tabulations of crime accusations9 and convictions from Statistics

Canada’s Uniform Crime Reporting Survey (UCRS) with single age population counts to

construct crime rates by age, sex, province, year cells. The UCRS is a survey of police reported

crime.10 This means that the crime incident has been substantiated by the police and therefore

the survey misses crimes that are never detected and/or not reported to the police.

       We examine rates (separately) for crimes against persons and property (separately),

“other criminal code violations” and drug violations, as well as an aggregate crime rate based

on these four categories.11 For our age groups most “other criminal code violations” involve

failures to appear in court and breaches of probation.12




8The CHMS surveys individuals aged 3-79, but all Quebec children younger than 15 were
exposed to the child care program in the survey years available.
9
 The accused includes those charged plus those dealt with through the use of extrajudicial
measures.
10 Responding to the coverage is mandatory and survey compliance is reported as “virtually 100
percent” (http://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=3302).
11 We omit the traffic crime category as in most provinces the legal driving age is 16, and there

are graduated licensing schemes that impose significant restrictions on older teenaged drivers.
12 Other prevalent youth crimes are theft under $5000, assault, mischief, breaking and entering,

cannabis possession, uttering threats and possession of stolen property. There is also a residual
category for ‘other federal statute violations’, that includes violations under legislation such as
the Bankruptcy Act and the Competition Act. See Zhang (2014) for a recent comparison of
youth and adult crime rates by offence.
                                                14
       Our data is for the years 2006 through the latest available, 2013. Our choice to start the

analysis in 2006 is, as explained below, made to stay clear of any impact of the introduction of

the Youth Criminal Justice Act in 2003. As in our analysis of the CCHS, we construct our sample

for 12 through 20 year olds.



Empirical Strategy

       For all but the crime analysis, the empirical strategy is a straightforward difference-in-

difference analysis that follows BGM. This empirical framework compares the pre and post

program outcomes of children/teenagers in Quebec, to the corresponding outcomes of

child/teenagers in the rest of Canada. We estimate models of the form:

(1)    Yipt = α + βEXPOSUREpt + πPROVp + δYEARt + λXipt + εipt

where i indexes individual children, p indexes province, and t indexes year in the survey. We

control for a set of province dummies (PROVp) and year dummies (YEARt ), as well as control

variables that vary (according to availability) by data set but can include gender, child’s age,

mother’s age and education, the number of older and younger siblings, urban status and

mother’s/father’s/family’s immigrant status and ethnicity. The full set of explanatory variables

by data set is reported in a table in the appendix. We focus on the estimation of β, the

coefficient on exposure to the Quebec child care program. Standard errors are clustered by

province by birth-year cohort.

       For the crime analysis, we have data that covers a larger number of cohorts over a larger

number of years. This allows us to estimate a more flexible version of equation (1) in which we




                                                 15
introduce a full set of province/(own) age/gender interactions as well as province specific time

effects.



Scaling Reduced Form Results

       As discussed in BGM, our modeling of outcomes is a reduced form of an underlying

process through which the Quebec policy impacts maternal labor supply and child care

utilization. To interpret the results structurally, in that paper we either scaled the estimated

effects by the impact of the Quebec policy on maternal labor supply (a 7% rise) or by its impact

on use of child care (a 14% rise). But we also noted that the effects could be even broader as

the program led to a large shift in the locus of child care as well. Haeck et al. (2013) show that

between the mid-1990s and 2008 the proportion of children, aged 1-4, who were in center-

based care as their primary arrangement rose in Quebec from under 10 percent to close to 60

percent, while in the rest of Canada it rose from about 10 percent to just under 20 percent. The

proportion in parental care fell from around 55 percent to roughly 25 percent in Quebec over

this same period, while the similar proportion in the rest of the country fell from just under 60

percent to about 50 percent, where it has stabilized since 1998. By this metric the proportion

of treated children in Quebec is much higher than the proportion who moved into non parental

care with the advent of the program.

       There are therefore a wide variety of “first stage” estimates one could apply to the

longer run reduced form impacts we estimate here. As a result, we are reticent here to

interpret any of our longer run results in a structural way, and focus instead on the sign and

significance of our reduced form findings.


                                                 16
Additional Factors

        In our previous study of the Quebec program we limited our analysis sample to children

in two parent families. This was to minimize any possible confounding effects of concurrent

changes to Canada’s National Child Benefit on our sample of 0-4 year olds. Due to income

testing, this program benefits single parent households disproportionately. As noted in Baker

and Milligan (2010) roughly 90 percent of children are born into two parent families in Canada,

so this restriction is not as limiting as it might be in other countries.

        As we turn our focus to children at older ages, the restriction to children in two parent

families makes less sense. Due to family dynamics, at older ages children currently living in

single parent families may have lived in two parent families when they were young. Likewise,

children currently in two parent families may have been born into single parent households. We

therefore sample children in all family types.

        BGM report a limited set of results demonstrating that the main findings of the study

extend to the children of single-parent households. We extend this point below in our re-

examination of the contemporaneous impacts of the program on the outcomes of young

children from all families. Milligan and Stabile (2011) report evidence that indicates the changes

to child benefits had positive impacts on child development. Therefore, any bias from including

children from single parent families in our sample will attenuate many of the impacts of the

Quebec Family Plan we report.13


13The impact of child benefits is much more important for single-parent families, as the
benefits examined in Milligan and Stabile (2011) are narrowly targeted on a fairly modest range
of family incomes.
                                                  17
Another factor relevant to our analysis of teenage criminal activity is that the Youth Criminal

Justice Act (YCJA) came into effect on April 1, 2003. This is a federal act governing the

prosecution of youth crimes across the country. Quebec has a history of taking a more

rehabilitative approach to youth criminal activity. One of the impacts of the YCJA was to make

the rest of Canada more like Quebec, in that it encouraged the use of extrajudicial remedies

instead of the courts for less severe crimes.14 Correspondingly there appears to be a sharp drop

in the proportion of youth offenders charged in most provinces in 2003 and corresponding

uptick in the proportion chargeable but not charged (Carrington and Scholenberg 2005). An

exception is Quebec, no doubt reflecting the province’s pre-existing proclivity for extrajudicial

measures for youth crime. As evidenced by Bala et al. (2009), this impact appears mostly

discrete to the year the Act was implemented, and the rates of charged and otherwise cleared

youth crimes “settled” into new post YCJA levels by about 2005. As a result we use crime data

starting in 2006 to stay clear of this impact of the YCJA.



                             Part IV: Impacts on Non-Cognitive Skills

       In this section we model the impact of exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on non-

cognitive skills of youths. We begin by replicating earlier analysis showing the negative effects

on non-cognitive skills of young children. We then extend the results to show that the

estimated deficits persist once these children enter school.




14As argued by Trepanier (2004) the YCJA also put some limits on Quebec’s rehabilitative
approach (for example, no rehabilitation while accused is remanded in custody) and was
perceived as a triumph of the principle of proportionality over rehabilitation and reintegration.
                                                 18
The Impact of the Quebec Child Care program on the Outcomes of Young Children

       In Table 1 we report the impact of the Quebec program on selected outcomes of young

children. This table is different from the analysis in BGM because we now include children of

both single-parent and two-parent families.

       In the first row is the estimate of the effect of the Quebec program on the probability of

the child being enrolled in child care at ages zero through four. At just over 15 percentage

points, this result is marginally larger than the estimate in our previous paper (0.146).

However, it leads to the same conclusion that the effect of the program is to increase child care

use by a little more than one-third of the baseline rate.

       In the next four rows are the estimates of the impact of the program on non-cognitive

outcomes at ages 2 and 3. Note that in each case a higher score indicates a poorer outcome.

The estimates echo the results in BGM in terms of statistical significance—statistically

significant estimates for Anxiety and Aggression but not for Hyperactivity and Separation

Anxiety. They are marginally larger in magnitude than the estimates in our previous paper,

although not enough to qualitatively change our inference. At 10 percent and 13 percent of a

standard deviation respectively, the inference for Anxiety and Aggression match well with the

conclusions in BGM.15

       In the last row is the estimated impact of the program on a measure of cognitive

development—PPVT—at ages 4 and 5. It is almost 1.7 points, or 11 percent of a standard

deviation and is statistically significant at conventional levels. This result, while consistent with



15In BGM the estimates for Anxiety and Aggression are 9 percent and 12 percent of a standard
deviation, respectively.
                                                 19
Haeck et al. (2013), is not consistent with the estimate in BGM. The estimate in BGM was for

the sample of 4 year olds, and the addition of five years olds here explains the difference.

When we restrict the sample to 4 year olds we obtain an insignificant estimate of -0.250

(0.843), consistent with the insignificant result (0.36 with standard error of 0.75) in BGM.

       The results in table 1 demonstrate that the main conclusions of BGM for young children

of two parent families extend to the full sample of young children from all family types. The

Quebec program led to a substantial increase in the use of child care and increases in children’s

levels of anxiety and aggression. One difference between the results here and in BGM is the

small negative impact on children’s cognitive development as measured by the PPVT, although

that distinction is driven by the age group used for the sample.



The Impact of the Quebec Child Care program on the Outcomes of Children aged 5-9 Years Old

       We next extend the analysis in table 1 to children of older ages. As noted above, the

questions about behavior in the NLSCY are different for ages 4-11 than for ages 2-3. This means

that for older children, we have two new indices for Prosocial behavior and Indirect Aggression,

and that the indices for Hyperactivity, Anxiety and Aggression, while similar in name to the

indices in table 1, are based on a different set of age-appropriate questions. The index of

Prosocial behavior is coded so that a higher score indicates a poorer outcome.

       The results presented in the first 5 rows of table 2 show that the Quebec program’s

negative effects on non-cognitive skills appear to strongly persist into school years, and in many

instances are larger than at younger ages. For Anxiety the impact is now just over one quarter

of a standard deviation, which is more than twice as large as for 2-3 year olds, while for


                                                20
Aggression it is now just under one fifth of a standard deviation, or roughly 50 percent higher

than at younger ages. New here is a statistically significant impact on Hyperactivity of almost

10 percent of a standard deviation. For the two new indices we see a statistically significant

impact on Indirect Aggression of 16 percent of a standard deviation, and while the result for

Prosocial behavior indicates a poorer outcome in sign, it is not statistically significant.

       For the older children we also have an alternative measure of behavior, a parent-

reported indication of how the child gets along with his/her teacher at school. The variable is

coded 0/1, where one indicates the child gets along very well with his/her teacher (there are no

problems). The estimate for this variable is in the last row of table 2. It is consistent with the

results for the non-cognitive indices, in that it indicates exposure to the Quebec program leads

to a statistically significant worse outcome.

       Taken together, the negative impact of the Quebec program on the non-cognitive

outcomes of young children appears to persist and grow as they reach school ages.

Unfortunately, there is no parallel cognitive measure available in the NLSCY at older ages to

follow up on the PPVT result in table 1.16 Instead we examine cognitive test scores at older

ages available from SAIP/PCAP and PISA.



16While school aged children in the NLSCY did complete a standardized test in math, there
were problems with its delivery in waves 1-3. First, in the initial wave of the survey, a ceiling
effect—a disproportionate number of perfect scores—was detected. This ceiling effect was
particularly pronounced for the province of Quebec, and it persisted in the second wave of data
(see documentation of these problems with the math test in the NLSCY microdata user guides
for Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and Cycle 3). Second, the response rate to the math test was low and
variable in the first waves of the survey. For example, just over 50 percent in wave 1 completed
the math test. This response rate increased to 74 percent in wave 2, and then fell back down to
54 percent in wave 3. Since these waves wholly constitute the pre-program data available in
the NLSCY, we do not include the math scores in the analysis.
                                                  21
                                Part V: Impacts on Teen Outcomes

       Having established that the Quebec program negatively affected non-cognitive

outcomes, and that this effect persisted into the school years, we next examine teen outcomes

along several dimensions. We look first at cognitive outcomes using standardized test scores.

This is followed by estimates for self reports of health and life satisfaction. Finally, we look for

any impact of the Quebec child care program on youth crime.



Cognitive Outcomes

       As noted above we are unable to follow any impact of the Quebec program on cognitive

outcomes at older ages in the NLSCY due to issues with the standardized math tests in the first

waves. Instead we use data from periodic standardized testing of Canadian teens through

SAIP/PCAP and PISA. Note that the 2009 PISA scores are likely to capture both teenagers in

Quebec who were and were not exposed to the child care program. We consider different

coding of the EXPOSURE dummy for the 2009 scores to discover how the estimates vary on this

margin.

       The estimates are presented in table 3. The standard deviations of the scores are

approximately one so the point estimates can be read directly as proportions of a standard

deviation. In the first row are the results for the PCAP/SAIP tests. The estimates indicate a

marginally significant, negative impact of exposure to the Quebec program on math scores of

over 20 percent of a standard deviation, and statistically insignificant, small, negative impacts

on reading and science scores.




                                                  22
       In the next two rows are the results for the PISA tests alternatively viewing the 2009

scores as capturing Quebec children who are not or who are exposed to the child care program.

If we view the 2009 scores as pre-program, we obtain a marginally significant positive impact of

exposure in math of almost 12 percent of a standard deviation and an almost equal marginally

significant negative impact in science. The impact on reading is positive, statistically

insignificant and very small. If instead we view the 2009 scores as post program, the impact on

math is still positive but larger and significant at the 1 percent level and one quarter of a

standard deviation, while the impact for reading and science are both statistically insignificant

and very small.

       On balance the results in table 3 do not provide strong evidence of a persistent negative

impact of the Quebec program on cognitive ability, as first evidenced on table 1 in PPVT scores.

The least precise inference is for math scores. The estimates show exposure to the Quebec

program leading to over a 20 percent standard deviation increase or decrease in scores. The

inference for science and reading scores is a more consistent story of no impact of the Quebec

program. Overall there is no strong evidence in these estimates that the Quebec Family Plan

had a lasting impact on children’s cognitive development.



Health and Life Satisfaction

       We next study the impact of exposure to the Quebec program on health status and on

life satisfaction using the CCHS and CMHS surveys. The results of this analysis are shown in

Table 4. For the CCHS, we show the results for ages 12-20, while in the CHMS we use a sample

of 15-20 year olds. All health measures are coded so a higher score indicates a worse outcome.


                                                 23
       The point estimates from each survey mostly indicate that exposure to the Quebec

program is associated with some worsening of self-reported health. For youths exposed to the

program, the health indicator rises in both surveys. The increase in the CCHS is 7.2 percent of a

standard deviation. The rise is a much larger in the CMHS but the standard error is larger as

well so that the estimate is not significant.

       The estimate for life satisfaction is small and statistically insignificant in the CCHS, but

indicates a statistically significant poorer outcome in the CMHS; the effect is large, amounting

to more than one-third of a standard deviation. There are no significant effects on mental

health or stress, but quality of life measure also worsens significantly in the CHMS, once again

by more than a third of a standard deviation. Overall, these results give strong indications of a

worsening of both health and life satisfaction among those older youths exposed to the Quebec

child care program.



Youth Crime

       Our final measure of longer-run outcomes is youth criminal activity. In evaluations of

the Perry Preschool program, the long-run impact on crime was a vital component of the

analysis.17 Our aim here is to investigate whether the link between non-cognitive development

and crime holds up in a symmetric case where there is a decrease in measured non-cognitive

development.



17 Belfield et al. (2006) find that crime reduction by males provides most of the long-run
financial benefit of the Perry Preschool program. Heckman et al. (2013, p. 2070) find in their
study of Perry that “…the evidence from this paper suggests that reducing early externalizing
behavior reduces crime.”
                                                 24
       As noted above, we have two measures of criminality—rates of accused and

convictions. We focus on four crimes (personal, property, other criminal code convictions and

drugs), as well as an aggregate measure of the incidence of all of these crimes.

       To lay the foundation for this analysis, Figures 1 and 2 show cohort-specific age profiles

of differences in the aggregate crime rates per 100,000 people between Quebec and the rest of

Canada, in which the cohorts vary by their exposure to the Quebec program. For example, the

bottom light dashed line in each graph shows the difference between the crime rate in Quebec

and the crime rate in the rest of Canada, at each age, for those born before 1993. These

children were not exposed to the child care program in Quebec. The light grey long dashed line

shows the same differences for those born in 1993, who had one year of exposure (at age 4).

The solid light grey line shows the differences for those born in 1994, who also had one year of

exposure. The dark grey lines show the results for cohorts born between 1995 and 1997, who

had two to three years of exposure. The final set of black lines at the top shows the results for

cohorts born from 1998 to 2000, who had three to five years of exposure.

       The differences in the age profiles by cohort in these graphs are quite striking: there is a

mostly monotonic decrease in the difference between the crime rates in Quebec and the rest of

Canada with years of exposure to the Quebec program. That is, as cohorts in Quebec were

more exposed to the program, their crime rates rose relative to the rest of Canada.

       This visual representation allows us to rule out the argument that this is just an aging

effect: more exposed cohorts have higher differential crime rates at every age. It also allows us

to rule out the idea that this is just a time series effect – at any year, crime rates are higher for


                                                  25
more exposed children (this can be seen by following the points diagonally – e.g. in 2010 those

born in 1993 are 17 and have a much lower differential than those born in 1997, who are 13 at

that year). This is striking evidence that exposure to this program is associated with higher

levels of crime.

       In the appendix we show similar figures for the four specific crime types that we study.

The story is similar to that told by figures 1 and 2-- a positive effect of exposure to the child care

program on crime rates for each type of crime. For drug accusations, the profiles are more

compressed, but still show the same pattern.

       In table 5 we formalize this inference with regression estimates. In column (1) we

present the simple difference-in-differences results, where we control for fixed effects for

province, year, age, and gender. In addition, we also include a set of dummies for crime type in

the pooled regression for all crime types. In column (2) is a richer specification that includes the

full set of second order interactions between province, age and gender (and crime type in the

regressions for the aggregate rates). Finally, in column (3) we add controls for province*year

trend to allow for province-specific trends in crime rates (as well as crime type*province*year

in the aggregate rate regressions).

       The estimates are generally consistent with the graphical evidence: exposure to the

Quebec program leads to higher rates of crime. Looking first at all crime counts, the estimates

from the simple difference-in-differences specification indicate increases in both the rates of

accused and convictions that is statistically significant. This estimate for rates of accused does

not change much when we add the second order province/age/gender interactions in the

second column, but there is an increase in the estimates for convictions. In column (3) the


                                                 26
estimate for accused falls but remains sizable and highly significant, while the estimate for

convictions returns to the level seen in column (1).

       The estimates from the richest specifications indicate sizeable effects on crime rates.

For accused, we estimate a rise of 300 crimes per 100,000 children, compared to a mean of

7,970 crimes. This is a rise of 3.7 percent. The result is slightly higher in percentage terms for

convictions per 100,000 (4.6 percent).

       The remaining rows of the table show the results for each type of crime. The impact of

exposure to the Quebec program is largest for other criminal code convictions; the estimates

from the richest specification show an increase in accusations of these crimes of 321 per

100,000 children, or nearly 19 percent of the mean, and for convictions for these crimes of 310

per 100,000, or about 28 percent of the mean. The estimated impacts on property crimes are

almost as large. Consistently smaller are the estimated impacts on crimes against persons, at

11 percent of the mean for both accusations and convictions. Finally, the impact for drug

crimes is 7.5 percent of the mean for accusations but over 17 percent of the mean for

convictions.



Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Quebec Child Care program on the Outcomes of Children at
Older Ages

       We next present estimates of the effect of the Quebec program by gender. Gender

differences are of potential importance as there is recent evidence that the impacts of non-

parental care vary by gender,18 as well as growing interest in gender differences in childhood


18In addition to the evidence in table 6 see, for example, Datta Gupta and Simonsen (2010),
Felfe et al. (2015) and Kottelenberg and Lehrer (2013b).
                                                 27
and adult success.19 Gender differences in life outcomes have also captured the popular

imagination, with some arguing that male attributes are at odds with changes in social and

economic norms (e.g., Rosin 2012). Certainly the increasing prevalence of the non-parental

care of children in developed countries, make it an obvious candidate to explain any emerging

differences in the outcomes of men and women.

       In Table 6 are estimates of the impact of the Quebec program on non-cognitive skills at

ages 5-9, by gender. We see much stronger impacts on hyperactivity and aggression for boys,

even relative to their higher standard deviations. For example, the negative impact on

Aggression is primarily for boys, and the estimate in this case is one third of a standard

deviation. For girls the strongest effect is on prosocial behavior, which worsens by 22 percent

of a standard deviation. The larger impacts for boys on aggression in particular suggest that

there may be gender differences in the impact of the program on criminal activity later in life.

Indeed, that is what we see in the gender splits in crime rates in Table 7. The estimates indicate

larger absolute impacts on the crime rates for boys, particularly for other criminal code

violations and drugs.20 Therefore, the gender differences in the impacts of the Quebec program

on crime rates line up with the gender differences in the impact of the program on non-

cognitive development.




19 See for example, Baker and Milligan (2013), Bertrand and Pan (2013), Cornwell et al. (2013),
Fortin et al. (2013) and Jacob (2002).
20 Baseline crime rates are also higher for boys, but what matters here is not the share of crimes

committed by boys but whether there is more criminal activity when there is a reduction in
population non-cognitive skills.
                                                28
                                       Part VI: Conclusions

       The rapid growth in the labor force participation of mothers of young children has led to

a strong policy interest in expanding access to non-parental child care. In particular, there has

been much interest expressed in “universal” child care availability. Although that term has

come to take many meanings, the best example in North America is clearly the program

introduced in Quebec in the late 1990s. This program made child care much cheaper for all

residents and led to an enormous expansion in use of child care by the population. Previous

work has shown that this policy change led to a large decline in measured non-cognitive skills

among young children exposed to the subsidized child care. This is a striking finding that allows

us to assess whether the growing consensus that increases in non-cognitive skills foster later life

success is symmetric to decreases in non-cognitive skills.

       Indeed, our evidence is consistent with such symmetry. We find that the Quebec policy

had a lasting negative impact on the non-cognitive skills of exposed children, but no consistent

impact on their cognitive skills. At older ages, program exposure is associated with worsened

health and life satisfaction, and increased rates of criminal activity. Increases in aggression and

hyperactivity are concentrated in boys, as is the rise in the crime rates.

       The implications of these findings for early child care policy are profound. They provide

strong support for the argument that non-cognitive development is a crucial determinant of the

long-term success of child care programs. This suggests that measuring the impact of child care

programs on the non-cognitive development is important. When a child care program fails to

improve non-cognitive development, it may have no long-standing positive effects on children.




                                                 29
As non-cognitive skills can be evaluated relatively easily in the short-run, this suggests non-

cognitive skill development can act as an important guide for policy in this area.

       In evaluating the implications of our results for the universal option, the key question

for policy-makers is whether the evidence of negative impacts are particular to the Quebec

program, or whether the lessons apply more broadly to other such expansions in child care. Our

findings for young children clearly contrast with those of the Perry, Abecedarian, and Head

Start studies. These latter programs both provide higher quality care and are targeted at less

advantaged children. An important outstanding question is whether universally provided child

care can have widespread positive impacts on non-cognitive development, which our results

together with evidence such as Heckman et al. (2013) suggest should lead to long run positive

outcomes.




                                                30
References


Baker, Michael (2011.) “Innis Lecture: Universal Early Childhood Interventions: What Is the
Evidence Base?” Canadian Journal of Economics 44 (4): 1069-105.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2010) “Evidence from maternity leave expansions of the
impact of maternal care on early child development,” Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), 1-32.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2013) “Boy-Girl Differences in Parental Time Investments:
Evidence from Three Countries”, NBER Working Paper #18893.

Baker, M., J. Gruber, and K. Milligan (2008) “Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Supply, and
Family Well-Being.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (4): 709-45.

Bala, Nicholas, Carrington, Peter J. and Julian V. Roberts (2009) “Evaluating the Youth Criminal
Justice Act after Five Years: A Qualified Success”, Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal
Justice, 51(2) 131-167.

Belfield, Clive R., Milagros Nores, Steve Barnett, and Lawrence Schweinhart (2006), “The
High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40
Followup,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 162-190

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan (2013), “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the
Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 5, No.
1, pp. 32-64

Bitler, Marianne P., Hoynes, Hilary W. and Thurston Domina (2014) “Experimental Evidence on
Distributional Effects of Head Start”, NBER Working Paper No. 20434.

Black, Sandra E., Devereux, Paul J., Løken, Katrine V. and Kjell G. Salvanes (2014) “Care or Cash?
The Effect of Child Care Subsidies on Student Performance”, The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 96(5) 824-837.

Brodeur, Abel and Marie Connolly, (2013), “Do higher child care subsidies improve parental
well-being? Evidence from Quebec’s family policies”, Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 93, 1– 16.

Canadian Test Centre, Educational Assessment Services (1992) Canadian Achievement Tests,
3rd ed. (Ontario: Canadian Test Centre, Educational Assessment Services )

Carneiro, Pedro, and J. Heckman (2003) “Human capital policy,” in Inequality in America: What
Role for Human Capital Policies? Ed. J. Heckman and A. Krueger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).


                                                31
Carneiro, Pedro and Rita Ginja (2014) “Long Term Impacts of Compensatory Pre-School on
Health and Behavior: Evidence from Head Start” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
6(4), 135-73.

Carrington, Peter J. and Jennifer Scholenberg (2005), “The Impact of the Youth Criminal Justice
Act on Police Charging Practices with Young Persons: A Preliminary Statistical Assessment”,
Report to the Department of Justice Canada, Ottawa Canada.

Cascio, Elizabeth U. (2015) “The Promises and Pitfalls of Universal Early Education,” IZA World
of Labor, 116.

Cornwell, Christopher , David B. Mustard, and Jessica Van Parys (2013), “Noncognitive Skills and
the Gender Disparities in Test Scores and Teacher Assessments: Evidence from Primary School,”
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 238-266.

Datta Gupta, Nabanita and Marianne Simonsen (2010) “Non-cognitive child outcomes and
universal high quality child care,” Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 30-43.

Dustmann, Christian, Raute Anna and Uta Schönberg (2013) “Does Universal Child Care
Matter? Evidence from a Large Expansion in Pre-School Education, mimeo UCL.

Felfe, Christina, Natalia Nollenberger, Núria Rodríguez-Planas (2015), “Can’t buy mommy’s
love? Universal childcare and children’s long-term cognitive development”, Journal of
Population Economics, 28(2), pp. 393-422.

Fitzpatrick, Maria D. (2008) “Starting school at four: the effect of universal prekindergarten on
children’s academic achievement,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8 (advances),
article 46.

Fortin, Nicole M., Oreopoulos, Philip and Shelley Phipps, (2013) “Leaving Boys Behind: Gender
Disparities in High Academic Achievement”, NBER Working Paper No. 19331

Gormley, William T. Jr, and Ted Gayer (2005) “Promoting school readiness in Oklahoma: an
evaluation of Tulsa’s pre-k program,” Journal Human Resources 40, 533–58

Gormley, William T. Jr, Ted Gayer, Deborah Phillips, and Brittany Dawson (2005) “The effects of
universal pre-k on cognitive development,” Developmental Psychology 41, 872–84

Haeck, Catherine, Pierre Lefebvre and Philip Merrigan, (2013) “Canadian Evidence on Ten Years
of Universal Preschool Policies: the Good and the Bad, CIRPEE Working Paper No. 13-34.

Havnes, Tarjei, and Magne Mogstad (2011), “No child left behind: subsidized child care and
children’s long-run outcomes,’ American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3, 97-129”.


                                                32
Havnes, Tarjei, and Magne Mogstad (2014), “Is universal child care leveling the playing field? ”,
Journal of Public Economics, 127 100-114.

Heckman, James J. and Stefano Mosso (2014) “The Economics of Human Development and
Social Mobility”, NBER Working Paper No. 19925

Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev and Adam Yavitz
(2010) “The rate of return to the High Scope Perry Preschool Program,” Journal of Public
Economics 94, 114–28

Heckman, James J.,Pinto, Rodrigo and Peter Savelyev (2013) “Understanding the Mechanisms
Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes”, American
Economic Review, 103(6) 2052-2086.

Hustedt, Jason T., W. Steven Barnett, Kwanghee Jung, and Alexandra Figueras (2008) “Impacts
of New Mexico prek on children’s school readiness at kindergarten entry: results from the
second year of a growing initiative,” National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers
University

Jacob, Brian A. (2002), “Where the boys aren’t: non-cognitive skills, returns to school and the
gender gap in higher education,” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 589–598.

Kottelenberg, Michael J. and Steven F. Lehrer, (2013a), “New Evidence on the Impacts of Access
to and Attending Universal Child-Care in Canada” Canadian Public Policy, 39(2) 263-285.

Kottelenberg, Michael J. and Steven F. Lehrer, (2013b), “The Gender Effects of Universal Child
Care in Canada: Much ado about Boys?, Mimeo, Queen’s University.

Kottelenberg, Michael J. and Steven F. Lehrer, (2014) “Do the Perils of Universal Child Care
Depend on the Child’s Age?”, CLSRN Working Paper No. 132.

Lefebvre, Pierre and Philip Merrigan, (2008) Childcare policy and the labor supply of mothers
with young children: a natural experiment from Canada. Journal of Labor Economics 23, 519–
548.

Lefebvre, Pierre, Philip Merrigan and Matthieu Verstraete (2009), "Dynamic Labour Supply
E.ects of Childcare Subsidies: Evidence from a Canadian Natural Experiment on Universal Child
Care," Labour Economics, 16(5): 490-502.

Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2011) "Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Wellbeing of Children?
Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions” American Economic Journal--Economic
Policy, 3(3) 175-205.

Rosin, Hanna (2012), The End of Men and the Rise of Women, New York: Penguin.

                                                33
Trepanier, Jean (2004) “ What Did Quebec Not Want: Opposition to the Adoption of the Youth
Crime Justice Act in Quebec” Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice, 46(3) 273-
299.

Vandell Deborah Lowe, Belsky, Jay, Burchinal, Margaret, Vandergrift, Nathan and Lawrence
Steinberg, (2010) “Do Effects of Early Child Care Extend to Age 15 Years? Results From the
NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development” Child Development, 81(3) 737-756.

Wong, Vivian C., Thomas D. Cook, W. Steven Barnett, and Kwanghee Jung (2007) An
Effectiveness-based Evaluation of Five State Pre-Kindergarten Programs using Regression-
Discontinuity (New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early Education Research)

Zhang, Haimin (2014) “Immigration and Crime: Evidence from Canada,” CLSRN Working Paper
No. 135.




                                              34
Figure 1




Figure 2




           35
Table 1: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Non-cognitive and
Cognitive Outcomes at Young Ages

 Outcome                             Mean              EXPOSURE
 In Care                              0.45              0.153***
                                     (0.50)             (0.032)


 Hyperactivity                        2.86                0.131
                                     (2.12)              (0.100)

 Anxiety                              1.23              0.154***
                                     (1.50)             (0.044)

 Separation Anxiety                   2.77                0.137
                                     (2.03)              (0.108)

 Aggression                           5.00              0.398***
                                     (2.93)             (0.105)


 PPVT                               100.02              -1.686***
                                    (15.28)              (0.569)



Notes: Authors’ calculations from NLSCY data. Sample—all families. The sample ages are
0-4 years for In Care, 2-3 years for Hyperactivity, Anxiety, Separation Anxiety and
Aggression, and ages 4-5 for PPVT. Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating
exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3
asterisks respectively.




                                              36
Table 2: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Non-cognitive Outcomes
at ages 5-9



 Outcome                              Mean               EXPOSURE
 Hyperactivity                         4.02               0.290**
                                      (3.12)              (0.145)

 Anxiety                               2.41               0.638***
                                      (2.29)              (0.157)

 Aggression                            1.38               0.326***
                                      (1.83)              (0.100)

 Indirect Aggression                   1.09               0.260***
                                      (1.63)              (0.090)

 Prosocial                            13.11                 0.185
                                      (3.90)               (0.183)

 Child gets along with Teacher         0.80               -0.061**
 (parent report)                      (0.40)               (0.025)



Notes: Authors’ calculations from NLSCY data (waves 1, 2 and 7). Sample—all families.
Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3 asterisks respectively.




                                               37
Table 3: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Standardized test Scores



                          Math                  Reading                    Science
                 Mean        EXPOSURE      Mean     EXPOSURE         Mean       EXPOSURE
 SAIP/PCAP       0.125         -0.229*     0.107       -0.074        0.060        -0.042
                (0.986)        (0.117)    (1.000)     (0.180)       (0.990)      (0.087)

 PISA (2009      0.119         0.114       0.144        -0.008       0.122      -0.120***
 control)       (0.998)       (0.071)     (0.973)      (0.034)      (0.991)      (0.039)

 PISA (2009       0.119        0.257***      0.144          0.072        0.122     -0.032
 treated)        (0.998)        (0.038)     (0.973)        (0.048)      (0.991)   (0.073)
Notes: Authors’ calculations from SAIP/PCAP and PISA test score data. Sample—all
families. Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating exposure. Significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3 asterisks respectively.




                                            38
Table 4: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Self-Reported Health
Outcomes




                                 CCHS                          CHMS
 Age                             12-20                         15-20
                        Mean         EXPOSURE         Mean         EXPOSURE
 Health                  2.10         0.072***         2.40           0.337
                        (0.85)         (0.021)        (0.85)         (0.212)

 Life Satisfaction       1.63           0.022          1.65         0.228***
                        (0.63)         (0.018)        (0.62)        (0.068)

 Mental Health           1.88           -0.011         1.92           -0.094
                        (0.87)         (0.017)        (0.87)         (0.074)

 Stress                                                2.80           0.075
                                                      (0.80)         (0.139)

 Quality of Life                                       1.98          0.294**
                                                      (0.82)         (0.131)

Notes: Authors’ calculations from CCHS and CHMS data. Sample—all families. Reported is
the coefficient on a dummy indicating exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3 asterisks respectively.




                                           39
Table 5: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Crime Rates, Ages 12-20


                        Mean                (1)               (2)                (3)
 Accused
 All                     8112             464***             548***            301***
                                           (76)               (71)              (74)
 Person                  1962             455***             536***            224***
                                           (80)               (73)              (74)
 Property                3447             413**             1016***            580***
                                          (102)              (171)             (196)
 Other CC                1712             650***             509***            321***
                                          (129)               (65)              (75)
 Drugs                   990              338***             129***            75***
                                           (66)               (24)              (25)
 Convictions
 All                     4120             188***             312***            188***
                                           (43)               (51)              (55)
 Person                  1059             274***             258***             119*
                                           (55)               (51)              (62)
 Property                1492               51               527***            340***
                                           (68)              (100)             (112)
 Other CC                1119             297***             309***            310***
                                           (64)               (55)              (56)
 Drugs                   450              133***             154***            78***
                                           (25)               (24)              (26)

Notes: Authors’ calculation from the Uniform Crime Reporting data. In column (1) are
estimates from the difference in differences specification. In column (2) are estimates that
add all second order province, age, gender interactions. In column (3) are estimates that
add province, year trend interactions. Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating
exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3
asterisks respectively.




                                            40
Table 6: Gender Differences in the Impacts of the Quebec child care program on Non
cognitive skills




             Hyperactivity     Anxiety    Aggression     Indirect     Prosocial       Get
                                                        Aggression                  Along
                                                                                     with
                                                                                   Teacher
 Girls           0.105        0.478**        0.140       0.286***     0.819***      -0.041
                (0.187)       (0.187)       (0.123)      (0.109)      (0.185)      (0.029)
 Boys           0.463*        0.796***      0.525***     0.245**      -0.458*     -0.081***
                (0.261)       (0.215)       (0.155)      (0.119)      (0.248)      (0.029)

Notes: Authors’ calculations from NLSCY data (waves 1, 2 and 7). Sample—all families.
Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3 asterisks respectively.




                                             41
Table 7: Impact of Exposure to the Quebec Family Plan on Crime Rates by Gender, Ages 12-20


                         All                 Person                Property               Other CC                   Drugs
                 Girls         Boys     Girls      Boys        Girls      Boys        Girls      Boys        Girls           Boys
 Accused
 (1)            357***         692***   313***    686***      522***      527***     392***     1064***     198***       493***
                 (59)           (80)     (52)      (93)       (103)       (133)       (74)       (172)       (38)         (73)
 (2)            343***         742***   377***    688***      792***     1229***     173***      829***      32***       221***
                 (58)           (88)     (65)      (92)       (154)       (214)       (46)       (100)       (12)         (57)
 (3)            170**          428***   154**     292***       367*       781***      131*       513***       24*        124***
                 (72)           (82)     (66)      (94)       (202)       (217)       (68)       (109)       (14)         (43)
 Convictions
 (1)            160***         294***   161***    451***      200***        41       203***      469***      76***       214***
                 (30)           (45)     (31)      (66)        (48)        (97)       (40)        (82)       (16)         (32)
 (2)            162***         455***   168***    345***      338***      706***     98***       511***      43***       261***
                 (27)           (77)     (32)      (77)        (56)       (159)       (37)        (88)        (8)         (46)
 (3)             92**          289***    85*       164*       180**       496***      90*        350***       15         143***
                 (37)           (79)     (45)      (97)        (73)       (166)       (54)        (99)       (11)         (41)

Notes: Authors’ calculation from Uniform Crime Reporting data. In rows titled (1) are estimates from the difference in
differences specification. In rows titled (2) are estimates that add all second order province, age, gender interactions. In
rows titled (3) are estimates that add province, year trend interactions. Reported is the coefficient on a dummy indicating
exposure. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels is indicated with 1, 2, and 3 asterisks respectively.




                                                               42
APPENDIX

Appendix Table: Control Variables Available in the Various Analysis Samples.

                                NLSCY          CCHS            CHMS      SAIP/PCAP     PISA      UCRS
Male                            Dummy         Dummy            Dummy       Dummy      Dummy     Dummy
Province                       Dummies       Dummies          Dummies     Dummies    Dummies   Dummies
Year                           Dummies       Dummies          Dummies     Dummies    Dummies   Dummies
Own Age                        Dummies       Dummies          Dummies                          Dummies
Month of Birth                                                                       Dummies
Mother’s Education             Dummies                                               Dummies
Mother’s Age                   Dummies
Father’s Education             Dummies
Father’s Age                   Dummies
Highest Education in Family                  Dummies          Dummies
Two Parent Family               Dummy         Dummy            Dummy
Urban Size                     Dummies
Number of Younger Siblings     Dummies
Number of Older Siblings       Dummies
Number of Children in                        Dummies          Dummies
Household <12
Mother is Immigrant             Dummy                                                Dummy
Father is Immigrant             Dummy                                                Dummy
Child born in Canada                          Dummy           Dummy
Family is not “white”                         Dummy           Dummy




                                                         43
Appendix Figure 1: Cohort Map for Program Eligibility.

                                        Age
                        0   1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9    10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
               1997     0   0   0   0    1    0   0   0   0   0    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               1998     0   0   0   1    1    1   0   0   0   0    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 Year          1999     0   0   1   1    2    1   1   0   0   0    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 Of            2000     1   1   1   2    2    2   1   1   0   0    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 Observation   2001     1   2   2   2    3    2   2   1   1   0    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2002     1   2   3   3    3    3   2   2   1   1    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2003     1   2   3   4    4    3   3   2   2   1    1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2004     1   2   3   4    5    4   3   3   2   2    1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2005     1   2   3   4    5    5   4   3   3   2    2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2006     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   4   3   3    2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2007     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   4   3    3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
               2008     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   4    3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
               2009     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0
               2010     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0
               2011     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0
               2012     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 5 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0
               2013     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 5 5 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1
               2014     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 5 5 5 5 4 3 3 2 2 1
               2015     1   2   3   4    5    5   5   5   5   5    5 5 5 5 5 5 4 3 3 2 2

Notes: The figure shows eligibility for the Quebec childcare program for a child reaching the given age in the given year. The
eligibility reported is the number of years of lifetime exposure, so a child age 9 who was eligible from ages 0 to 4 has 5 years of
lifetime eligibility. The eligibility ranges from zero for those born before the program was introduced to 5 for those who were
eligible from ages 0 to 4.




                                                                  44
Appendix Figure 2




Appendix Figure 3




                    45
Appendix Figure 4




Appendix Figure 5




                    46
Appendix Figure 6




Appendix Figure 7




                    47
Appendix Figure 8




Appendix Figure 9




                    48
