                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES, EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, AND THE LEGACY OF JIM CROW:
                   EVIDENCE FROM NORTH CAROLINA

                                         Charles T. Clotfelter
                                           Helen F. Ladd
                                          Jacob L. Vigdor

                                        Working Paper 21577
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21577


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We are grateful to Ying Shi for research assistance and to the University of North Carolina and the
North Carolina Education Research Data Center for access to administrative data. Funding for this
project was provided by grants from the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Gates Foundation through
the Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research. Seminar participants at the
University of Southern California provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of any institution, nor of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Universities, Equal Opportunity, and the Legacy of Jim Crow: Evidence from North
Carolina
Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 21577
September 2015
JEL No. I2

                                             ABSTRACT

College attendance and completion in the U.S. are strongly correlated with race and socioeconomic
background. Do public postsecondary institutions themselves exacerbate pre-college disparities, or
reduce them? We address this question using longitudinal data linking the records of students at North
Carolina’s public four-year universities to their public K-12 records. As a result of an institutional
structure forged during the period of Jim Crow segregation, black students who attend the state’s public
university system are likely to experience markedly more racial isolation in college than they did in
middle school. Another, more positive consequence of this structure is to boost in-state public four-year
college enrollment and graduation by African-American students relative to white students with similar
backgrounds. Conditional on enrolling in one of the state’s public universities, however, black students
lag behind whites in grades and graduation rates. Regarding socioeconomic background, we find that
lower-status youth are less likely to enter the system and less likely to succeed once they enter than
those with higher status. The socioeconomic gap in graduation rates among matriculants has, however,
declined in recent years.


Charles T. Clotfelter                               Jacob L. Vigdor
Sanford Institute of Public Policy                  Evans School of Public Affairs
Duke University                                     University of Washington
Rubenstein Hall Room 178                            Box 353055
201 Science Drive                                   Seattle, WA 98195
Box 90312                                           and NBER
Durham, NC 27708                                    jvigdor@uw.edu
and NBER
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu

Helen F. Ladd
Sanford School of Public Policy
Box 90245 Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
hladd@duke.edu
I.INTRODUCTION
         Among the criticisms of American education, none has been more explosive than the

charge that it perpetuates rather than reduces inequality. Inequality in American education is an

undeniable fact. At the K-12 level large racial gaps in achievement exist, although there is

evidence that socioeconomic gaps are becoming more important than racial ones (Clotfelter,

Ladd and Vigdor 2009; Reardon 2011). Inequality at the postsecondary level is in some respects

even more acute than in K-12 schools. In 2010 non-Hispanic whites between 25 and 30 were

twice as likely to hold a bachelor’s degree as non-Hispanic blacks (American Community

Survey 2010).2 This 18.6 percentage point black-white gap in college completion is more than

double the 7.5 percentage point gap in high school completion.3 Moreover this gap in college

completion is also nearly identical to the corresponding gap between blacks and whites born 30

years earlier.

         A nagging question in education policy is whether these persistent disparities reflect a

failing of the postsecondary system itself, or is merely a legacy of inequality rooted earlier in

childhood. As a matter of stated public policy, public higher education in the U.S. has no higher

principle than equality of opportunity. This principle is heralded by the most famous flagship

universities and community colleges alike. It underlies longstanding efforts of many states to

keep tuition low.4 But some critics dismiss these official pronouncements, seeing in public



2 Throughout the rest of this paper, we simply use the term white students to refer to non-Hispanic white
students and black students to refer to non-Hispanic black students.
3 These statistics are based on a weighted sample. Calculated high school graduation rates include GED

recipients. Excluding them widens the gap by eight-tenths of a percentage point.
4 In North Carolina the state constitution explicitly states that the cost of publicly provided college education should
be as low as practicable, a fact that has figured in debates about maintaining the traditional low-tuition policy
pursued by the University of North Carolina. (“The General Assembly shall provide that the benefits of the
University of North Carolina and other public institutions of higher education, as far as practicable, be extended to
the people of the State free of expense.” article IX, section 9;
http://www.northcarolina.edu/sites/default/files/3._proposed_four-year_tuition_plan_for_school_years_2015-19-
6.pdf, 1/5/15.) From at least the time of the Hansen-Weisbrod study (1969) of California’s traditionally low-tuition

                                                           2
higher education an elaborate construct for perpetuating and justifying on-going inequities.

Hansen and Weisbrod (1969) argued that California’s ostensibly egalitarian low-tuition

university system actually benefitted the affluent at the expense of the poor. Likewise, Carnevale

and Strohl (2013) state, “The postsecondary system mimics and magnifies the racial and ethnic

inequality in educational preparation it inherits from the K-12 system.” In American history,

official appeals to “equality” made by the states that operated racially segregated schools and

universities were disingenuous at best. Only half of “separate but equal” was ever taken

seriously.

         In this paper, we examine disparities in higher education using data from one of those

states, North Carolina. Indistinguishable in many respects from other U.S. states in 21st century

America, it, together with its neighboring states in the South and Border regions, retains one

distinctive institutional holdover – state-supported historically black colleges and universities

(HBCUs). And, like other states in these regions, North Carolina has a historical legacy of

explicit discrimination against African Americans that is largely invisible today. For two

centuries preceding Brown v. Board of Education, the state of North Carolina systematically

discriminated against African Americans in the provision of education. Slaves were forbidden to

teach other slaves to read and write. In the first half of the 20th century, the state’s official reports

documented vast gaps in education spending for blacks and whites (Bond 1934, Table X, pp.

155-156). In the contemporary age, official discrimination is gone, but disparities continue to

exist between schools by race and socioeconomic status in the qualifications of teachers

(Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2005, 2007).




system, it has been understood that tuition is not the only thing to consider. Also important is access to the highest
level university campuses.

                                                           3
       In this paper we examine contemporary disparities in access, persistence and a variety of

postsecondary achievements in North Carolina, We use detailed administrative data on students

who attended 8th grade in one of the state’s public schools. We use these data to measure the

likelihood that students will reach a variety of educational milestones in the 16-campus

University of North Carolina system. We measure racial and socioeconomic gaps in this

likelihood and whether the gaps we observe in the cross section have grown over time. We

further assess whether these gaps persist after conditioning on a variety of pre-collegiate factors,

including performance on 8th grade standardized tests.

       We find significant racial and socioeconomic disparities in the likelihood of obtaining a

four-year college degree at a UNC campus, and in several intermediate outcomes on the path to

receiving one. The black-white disparities we observe, however, can be fully explained

statistically by pre-collegiate student characteristics. In fact, once we control for 8th grade test

scores, African-American students are more likely to enroll and make good grades (at UNC

institutions) than non-Hispanic white students. This reversal can be explained entirely by that

legacy of the Jim Crow era -- the state’s operation of several HBCUs. These institutions are

officially open to all students, but in practice they continue to serve an overwhelmingly black

population of students.

       In contrast to these racial disparities, socioeconomic disparities – both in postsecondary

attainment and the widening of disparities through the college years – are not readily explained

by our controls for pre-collegiate characteristics. Although the unexplained residual gaps by

socioeconomic status may reflect the influences of pre-collegiate factors that we are not able to

control for – such as high school teacher quality, course taking, and performance – we cannot

rule out the possibility that the higher education system itself contributes to socioeconomic



                                                   4
inequality. The good news is that the residual gap by socioeconomic status has declined over

time.

           Our research raises a policy dilemma regarding the strategies employed to address

inequality. To the extent that opportunities for disadvantaged students depend on less selective,

poorly-resourced institutions originally designed to serve one race, any expansion of these

opportunities may well reduce disparities in educational attainment at the cost of perpetuating

both segregation by race and inequality in the quality of education. But the current stratification

of students across campuses might be desirable, if students learn more when taught alongside

others who share their educational aspirations, needs, and backgrounds. Fully addressing this

dilemma is well beyond the scope of this paper.



II. BACKGROUND

           It is a long-established fact that students from high SES backgrounds are markedly more

likely to attend college than those from lower SES groups. This association remains even when

test scores are controlled for.5 Bailey and Dynarski (2011) show that differences in enrollment by

economic status have grown in recent decades, adding support for critics, like Carnevale and

Stohl (2013), quoted above. In addition to gaps in enrollment, researchers have paid particular

attention to the failure of many college students to complete their degrees. Comparing the high

school classes of 1972 and 1992, Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) show that completion

rates among those who did enroll in college have declined for all but the students scoring in the

top math quartile. These authors place most of the blame on under-resourced colleges. When

they divide students by sector, they find that completion rates declined in only two types of

institutions – two-year colleges and lower-ranking public four-year institutions. Declines in these

5   For example, see Clotfelter et al (1991, Ch. 2).

                                                       5
two sectors were sufficient to bring down completion rates in the lowest three test quartiles

simply because so many students enroll in them. Bailey and Dynarski (2011) note as well a

divergence in college completion rates by socioeconomic status.

        Racial and socioeconomic disparities in postsecondary attainment could arise for any of

several reasons. These disparities could arise from gaps in academic preparation that reflect

differences in family background or inequities in K-12 school quality. They might also arise

because disadvantaged students face a more challenging path to a degree conditional on

enrollment in college. For example, they may face more intense pressures to earn income while

enrolled, distracting their attention from their studies. With less chance of having college-

educated parents, disadvantaged students may lack guidance about what to expect from college

and how to surmount obstacles in their path. Efforts to distinguish the sources of disparities in

postsecondary educational outcomes can help policy-makers target appropriate interventions,

from enriching educational environments from pre-kindergarten through high school to

introducing additional supports for disadvantaged college students.

        The prevailing stratification of American college students into institutions of varying

selectivity raises a series of concerns. As noted above, completion rates at less-selective

institutions tend to be low. Those who do graduate from these institutions may receive smaller

economic returns to their degrees, a possibility highlighted in a recent study of the earnings of

graduates of HBCUs (Fryer and Greenstone 2010). The existence of HBCUs also contributes to

racial segregation, an apparent anomaly alongside frequent references to the benefits of racial

and ethnic diversity in higher education.6 To the extent that systems of higher education reduce

racial disparities in access by steering disadvantaged students to campuses with fewer resources

6
 See, for example, Harvard University et al., 2003 WL 399220 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief)
United States Supreme Court Amicus Brief, Grutter v. Bollinger, and Lt. Gen. Julius W. Becton, Jr., et al., 2003 WL
1787554 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief), United States Supreme Court Amicus Brief, Grutter v. Bollinger.

                                                        6
and lower standards, it would be reasonable to question whether the benefit of narrower

attainment disparities justifies the cost of disparate educational quality. Alternatively,

stratification may permit colleges to tailor their curricula more narrowly to their students’

backgrounds.7

         This study cannot claim to resolve all these concerns. By examining the educational

trajectories of students who follow a path from North Carolina’s public schools to the state’s

public universities, we instead hope to provide basic descriptive evidence on whether state’s

four-year institutions appears to offset the disparities they face in their applicant pool.



III. DATA AND INSTITUTIONAL SETUP

         In North Carolina, all of the state’s public four-year institutions are contained in a single

system – the University of North Carolina system. They are listed in Table 1. The 16 colleges

and universities in that system include the state’s flagship university, UNC Chapel Hill, as well

as the state’s best known land-grant and engineering campus, North Carolina State University.

Five other campuses that share the title University of North Carolina are in Asheville, Charlotte,

Greensboro, Pembroke, and Wilmington.8 There are five historically black universities

(HBCUs): Elizabeth City State, Fayetteville State, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical

(NCA&T), North Carolina Central, and Winston-Salem State. Three more universities had

previously been state-funded teachers’ colleges: Appalachian State, East Carolina, and Western




7
  For an argument that stratification by academic aptitude serves economic efficiency, see Hoxby (2009, pp. 12ff.).
8
  The UNC system also includes one high school, the North Carolina School of Science and Math. Because of our
focus on postsecondary outcomes, we do not include this school in our analysis.

                                                         7
Carolina. The 16th campus is the North Carolina School of the Arts, which houses both a college

and a high school.9

         We use a data set that combines administrative records for the state’s K-12 schools with

data from the UNC system. The data we use in the present paper are based on two cohorts of

public school students in North Carolina. The first is composed of students who were in the 8th

grade in the spring of 1999 and the second of those who were in 8th grade in the spring of 2004.10

For each of these two cohorts, Table 2 lists the years most students could have expected to

achieve certain educational milestones, including high school and college graduation, assuming

they had made normal progress in school. Our sample is restricted to students for whom we have

scores from the statewide 8th grade end-of-grade tests in mathematics and reading. We express

each student’s score on these tests by denoting the corresponding decile in that year’s statewide

distribution of scores for each of the two tests. For students who proceeded directly from high

school to one of the 16 campuses in the UNC system, we also have detailed information on

matriculation, courses, grades, majors, and graduation.11

         Created in the era of racial segregation and legitimized by the federal government’s

Morrill Acts, which established the land grant universities, North Carolina’s five HBCUs now

exist in the space somewhere between beacon of opportunity and institutional anachronism.

Although HBCUs educate a smaller proportion of African American college students than they

once did, they remain a very important part of the higher education system in the South, and in


9
  Information comparing the UNC institutions is given in University of North Carolina (2013). For information on
their geographical reach, see pp. 4 and 6. For information on SAT levels, see pp. 171 and 174.
10 Each cohort is defined by the year when students were in 8 th grade (for the first time, if they repeated that grade.
11
   While the UNC system data includes information on students matriculating with transfer credits earned outside
the system, we do not have access to information for students who matriculated after the 2008/2009 school year. As
such, we are unable to observe whether a student in our latter cohort transfers into the system. Our main analysis
will therefore code transfer students as not matriculating at UNC. In alternative specifications, we made use of the
1999 cohort to infer the impact of coding transfer students as non-matriculants. Our basic conclusions about racial
and socioeconomic disparities in postsecondary outcomes are unchanged.

                                                           8
North Carolina. Nevertheless, it is an ironic fact, that the racial segregation associated with these

HBCUs is perhaps the most striking dimension of stratification in the system.

       Stratification is in fact a signal feature of the higher education landscape, both public and

private. That is, college campuses differ in their mix of students, on any number of measures.

Some forms of stratification exist by design and are more or less universally accepted. No voices

in debates about higher education object in principle to the concentration of academically

talented and well-prepared students in some colleges and not in others, and this consensus

applies as well to institutions that are operated by state governments. The acclaim for elite public

universities like Michigan and Berkeley supports this point. It is other dimensions of

stratification that raise objection. Most egregious was the de jure segregation of public

universities in the Jim Crow South. Today critics often decry what is seen as class-biased

disparities in higher education, as some of the sources noted above illustrate.

       Table 3 describes three dimensions of stratification evident in the University of North

Carolina system – academic, socioeconomic, and racial. For each of them, it is possible to

distinguish stratification at two levels – whether a student enrolls at any campus and where he or

she enrolls. The first level occurs because not all 8th graders go on to enroll in a UNC college or

university; the second occurs because students enroll at systematically different rates from

campus to campus. Each panel in the table presents four percentages that trace these two levels

of stratification. The first level is shown by comparing the first two rates – one for all 8th graders

in the state and one just for those who entered the UNC system. To illustrate the effects of the

second level of stratification, we calculate own-category exposure rates for UNC students, shown

in the last column, which is the mean percentage of the students at a UNC matriculant’s campus

who were in his or her own category. For comparison’s sake, we also show, in the third column,



                                                  9
the corresponding own-group exposure that the UNC matriculant experienced when he or she

was an 8th grader.12

         The top panel shows the extreme degree of stratification by academic preparation,

proxied by students’ 8th grade math test scores, implicit in the UNC system. Illustrating the first

level of stratification, fully half of all UNC matriculants scored in the top quartile. This pattern

should surprise nobody, since application and acceptance rates for the state’s universities are

skewed toward the academically strongest applicants. Nor are the results of the second level of

stratification surprising or necessarily alarming: UNC matriculants who had scored in the top

quartile as 8th graders tended to gravitate toward campuses loaded with other top-scoring

students. Fully 63% of the classmates of these top scorers also had scored in the top quartile as

8th graders. Both of these levels of stratification related to academic preparation follow naturally

from the academic selectivity built into the application and admission process.

         The table’s second panel shows the effects of stratification of a different kind – by

socioeconomic status, proxied by parental education. Children of college graduates enjoy higher

rates of entry into UNC and its most selective institutions than do those of less well educated

parents. This pattern is by no means unique to North Carolina, as much research has previously

established. Although children of college-educated parents made up only 29% of the 8th graders

in 2004, they constituted 57% of the subset that would eventually enroll in the UNC system.

And, on average, these children of college graduates ended up on campuses where 62% of their

fellow students also had college-educated parents. Thus the winnowing that occurs between

middle school and college brings with it an increase in socioeconomic segregation.

12       The own-group exposure rate, equivalent to the percentage of like students (that is, belonging to the same
category) in the average student’s 8th grade or UNC campus. For example, the own-group exposure rate for black
students in UNC is EBB = ∑ PBi NBi, where PBi is the proportion of black students at campus i and N Bi is the number
of black students attending that campus i. We calculate similar own-group exposure rates for students in their 8 th
grade.

                                                         10
        The third panel in Table 3 describes stratification by race. By this dimension North

Carolina is probably very different from many other states –those outside the South. Much of the

stratification seen in this third panel is a direct result of the existence of the five HBCUs in the

system, and the fact that more than half of the black matriculants in the system attend one of

them.13 Focusing on the row applying to black students, the numbers reveal two noteworthy

facts. First, the share of UNC students who are black, 26%, was almost as high as the percentage

of 8th graders who were black (29%). The second, deeply ironic fact is that black UNC students,

on average experienced a remarkably more racially isolated experience in college than they had

in 8th grade. Whereas the average black UNC matriculant had been in an 8th grade where 34% of

the other students were also black, in college that average was a dramatically higher 65%.

        In summary, stratification occurs at two levels. First, entry into the UNC system is highly

differentiated by educational and parental background. Second, among those who enter the

system, students of different backgrounds are further stratified across campuses. By race, rates

of enrollment are similar, but the system exhibits a marked degree of racial segregation. It

should be noted that this racial segregation need not imply that otherwise identical students are

steered towards different campuses on the basis of race. Our results below show that the UNC

system serves a disproportionate share of black students with moderate-to-low 8th grade test

scores. These students are disproportionately represented at HBCUs; white students with

comparably modest 8th grade test scores are much less likely to be found on any UNC system

campus.

        Nor does the system’s stratification necessarily imply that the system contributes to

disparities in outcomes by parental background or race. As we have suggested, stratification by


13In 2011 56% of UNC’s black students attended one of the five HBCUs (University of North Carolina 2013, Table
19, p. 58).

                                                     11
academic preparation or achievement may well be a productive element of any higher education

system, especially if complementarities arise from grouping similar students together.14 If these

academic qualifications are the result of disparities by race or socioeconomic status in K-12

education, academic stratification of the type we observe could be thought of as reflecting

inequality that arises much earlier in a student’s career. Our regression analyses are intended to

shed light on this very crucial distinction.



IV. POSTSECONDARY OUTCOMES FOR TWO COHORTS OF 8TH GRADERS

           We examine the success of North Carolina students in reaching several significant

mileposts in postsecondary education, keeping in mind that many students will have attained

college training by pursuing paths other than through the UNC system. We look at four main

outcomes: enrolling in a UNC institution immediately after high school graduation and three

other outcomes once enrolled in UNC – achieving a grade point average of 3.0 after 45 credit

hours, majoring in a STEM subject (after 60 credit hours), and graduating. We further divide two

of these outcomes by focusing on certain institutions within the UNC system. First, in order to

infer the role of HBCUs in promoting equity of access, we separately examine enrollment at the

system’s predominantly white institutions. Second, to focus on the state’s flagship university, we

also estimate some models for enrollment at UNC Chapel Hill. As for graduation, we look at

graduation within four years. All of these outcomes are informative markers of success along the

way in a young person’s education.

           When examining each outcome, we begin by providing a basic estimate of the unadjusted

racial or socioeconomic gap, using parental education levels as a measure of socioeconomic



14
     For an exposition of this view, see Hoxby (2009).

                                                         12
status.15 All specifications include gender as an explanatory variable. We then proceed in a

“stepwise” manner to examine whether the unadjusted gaps can be explained with controls for

other factors observed before college entry. When considering outcomes beyond college entry,

we complete the exercise by estimating models that condition on college entry itself.

Regressions are estimated as linear probability models.



Enrollment

         Table 4 examines enrollment in the UNC system as a function of race. It begins with

specifications showing the raw gap in the probability of enrollment between blacks and non-

Hispanic whites conditioning only on race and gender, then tracks the change in the estimated

racial gap as we add a widening array of covariates to the model.

         Coefficients in the first row confirm that there is a racial gap in the unadjusted likelihood

of enrolling in a public university in the state and that the gap has nearly tripled over the five

years spanned by our data. African-American students we observe in 8th grade in 2004 are

nearly 5 percentage points less likely to enroll at a UNC campus relative to non-Hispanic white

students. This gap reverses sign, however, once we control for a set of indicators for parental

education. The raw black-white gap can thus be entirely explained, in a statistical sense, by

intergenerational transmission of educational attainment. That is, students of all races are less

likely to attend the UNC system if their parents received less formal education, and African-

American students are overrepresented once these socioeconomic disparities are accounted for.


15
   Thee administrative data used in this study has the advantage of containing information on the educational
attainment of the more educated parent of each student. Although the categories employed were not consistently
defined in all survey years, they were consistent for two levels: less than a high school diploma and college
graduate. The estimated equations include dichotomous indicators for all available categories, with less than high
school being the omitted category in all estimated equations that include parental education. The tables show the
coefficient for college graduate parents, and this coefficient is interpreted as the difference between a student with a
parent who finished college and an otherwise similar student without a parent with a high school diploma.

                                                           13
When comparing students whose parents received the same amount of education, African-

American students are significantly more likely to enroll in a UNC university. Note, however,

that this adjusted advantage has declined considerably over time from 4 to 1.3 percentage

points.16

         The statistically adjusted advantage of African-American students appears even stronger

once we account not only for parental education but also for 8th grade test scores. When we

compare students who are equivalent along these two dimensions, we find that African-

American students in the 1999 cohort are nearly 15 percentage points more likely to enroll in the

UNC system. This advantage declines to 12 percentage points in the 2004 cohort.17

         The analyses underlying the estimates in Table 4 incorporate a complete set of indicators

for students of other nonwhite races. Selected coefficients from these and other specifications

appear in Appendix Table A4. For both the 1999 and 2004 cohorts, we find that Hispanic

students are no less likely to enroll in the UNC system than white students once we control for

parent education and 8th grade test scores. Indeed, in the early cohort, Hispanic students exhibit

a marginally significant positive advantage relative to white students. That table also shows that

Asian students enroll in the UNC system at higher rates than white student with similar parent

education and 8th grade test scores.

         The system’s HBCUs play a pivotal role in enrolling African-American students.

Relative to white students with similar parent education and test scores, black students have

higher rates of enrollment largely because of the five HBCUs operated by the state. The


16
   Conditioning on parent education substantially reduces, but does not eliminate, the gaps between non-Hispanic
white students and their Hispanic, American Indian, or multiracial counterparts. Parent education controls have very
little impact on the estimated gap between Asian and non-Hispanic white students.
17
   In additional specifications, we added controls for school fixed effects, using the identity of the school attended in
8th grade. These fixed effects reduce the estimated race coefficient marginally but do not alter the basic conclusions
of the analysis. School fixed effects have similarly modest effects on the intermediate and graduation outcomes
studied below.

                                                           14
importance of HBCUs in this regard can be seen when we redefine the outcome variable in our

regression to indicate enrollment in a UNC campus other than an HBCU. Now the estimated

black-white gap approaches zero (see Table 4, row 4) and shows no significant change over

time.18 Black and white students with equivalent levels of parental education and 8th grade test

scores are thus roughly equally likely to enroll in one of the state’s non-HBCU campuses. Aside

from the HBCUs, then, black students have no advantage in enrollment. Nor do they bear any

disadvantage, a finding that in itself heralds a level of equality that once would have been

unthinkable in this region of the country.

         The final row in Table 4 reveals a slight advantage for African-American students,

relative to white students with equivalent parent education and test scores, in terms of enrolling

at the system’s flagship campus, UNC-Chapel Hill. Though not shown in this table, the

unadjusted gap in the probability of enrolling at UNC-CH favors white students. This gap, like

the more general racial gap in four-year college enrollment, can be attributed, in a statistical

sense, entirely to factors observed before high school.

         Table 5 repeats the analysis, focusing on an indicator of socioeconomic status – parental

education – rather than race. The coefficient of interest measures the gap between children with

college-educated parents and children in the omitted parent education category, those whose

parents did not complete high school, in a specification that simultaneously controls for other

categorical parent education variables. For sake of brevity, those other coefficients are not

reported here.




18
  In an additional specification, using only the 1999 cohort, and recoding transfer students as matriculants so long
as they appear in the UNC system within 4 years of their prospective high school graduation, the black-white
enrollment gap at non-HBCU campuses is a statistically significant 2.2 percentage points. This implies that white
students are more likely to transfer into the system with credits accumulated elsewhere.

                                                         15
         Our results above imply that there is a significant gap in the likelihood of college

enrollment among children with different parental education levels. The first row of Table 5

confirms this pattern. A child with a college graduate parent enjoys a 35 percentage point

advantage in the likelihood of enrolling at a UNC campus, relative to one without a parent with a

high school diploma.19 This significant differential shows very little trend between the 1999 and

2004 cohorts. The second row illustrates a consistent finding in our regressions –that

introducing controls for race has very little influence on the estimated coefficients.

         Although the coefficients of the parent education variables are approximately halved

when we introduce controls for 8th grade test scores (as shown in the third row), they remain

quite large and positive. Thus, unlike racial disparities in college enrollment, which can largely

be ascribed to factors observed before high school, a significant unexplained residual remains in

this analysis after we add pre-college controls. Students with a college-educated parent are

roughly 17 percentage points more likely to enroll in the UNC system than students with

equivalent 8th grade performance whose parents are high school dropouts. This residual could

imply that the college admissions process, or elements of college policy such as tuition and

financial aid practices, contribute to socioeconomic disparities in educational attainment.

Alternatively, the residual could reflect unmeasured early-life factors, or socioeconomic

differences in high school experiences, ranging from counseling to course offerings, arising from

differences in the high schools attended by students at low and high socioeconomic levels. We

cannot distinguish between these alternate explanations. We can only conclude that, whatever

steps the UNC system is taking to admit and enroll academically strong students of



19
  In analysis of the 1999 cohort recoding transfer students as matriculants, each of the parent education effects
reported here is slightly larger, on the order of an extra 3 percentage points. This implies that students with college-
educated parents are more likely to enter the UNC system with credits accumulated elsewhere.

                                                          16
disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds, it is not enough to offset large and persistent

differences in enrollment by economic status.

       When we focus on enrollment only at non-HBCU universities in the UNC system, we

obtain a smaller estimated disparity. Although the smaller disparity could be attributable in part

to the somewhat smaller overall likelihood of attending such universities, it is still somewhat

surprising. Given the large share of students of modest economic backgrounds who attend

HBCU institutions, one might well predict that excluding HBCUs from the analysis would

increase, rather than decrease, socioeconomic disparities in enrollment patterns for the remaining

universities. The socioeconomic disparity in the likelihood of enrolling at UNC-Chapel Hill is

an order of magnitude smaller than that observed overall, consistent with the smaller overall

likelihood of attending the flagship campus.



Intermediate outcomes

       Enrollment in a four-year college is a significant milestone for any student, but success

on campus is by no means guaranteed, particularly for students from disadvantaged backgrounds.

In Table 6 we begin examining post-matriculation outcomes, analyzing the likelihood that 8th

graders in our sample will not only enroll at a UNC university, but attain one of two milestones:

a 3.0 GPA (after 45 credit hours) or majoring in Science, Technology, Engineering or

Mathematics (STEM) after 60 credit hours.

       Just as there is a significant raw black-white enrollment gap in the cohorts we observe,

there is a racial disparity in the likelihood of enrolling and reaching both of these academic

milestones. As was the case for enrollment disparities, the estimated black-white gaps are

reversed once we condition on both parental education and 8th grade test scores (see row 3).



                                                 17
African-American students are between 1 and 2 percentage points more likely to attain a 3.0

GPA or declare a STEM major relative to white students with similar background characteristics,

although this advantage appears to have eroded between the 1999 and 2004 cohorts.

       Finally, we note that African-American students are slightly less likely to attain a high

GPA at UNC-Chapel Hill relative to white students with similar background characteristics. We

observe no disparity in the propensity to select a STEM major at UNC-CH. Appendix Table A4

shows that we find modest Hispanic-white differences in intermediate outcomes controlling for

parent education and test scores, and that Asian students are more likely than whites to select a

STEM major or earn a 3.0 GPA at a UNC institution.

       Table 7 examines socioeconomic disparities in post-matriculation outcomes. The table

shows that students with college-educated parents are significantly more likely to earn high

grades or choose a STEM major, either as a result of being more likely to matriculate or to do

well once they are enrolled or some combination of both. The raw GPA gap is reduced by more

than half, but not eliminated, for each outcome once we condition on race and 8th grade test

scores. This pattern is very similar to that observed for overall matriculation rates; the children

of college-educated parents retain some advantage that cannot be explained by their academic

performance in 8th grade.



Graduation

       Table 8 presents two sets of estimates of racial differences in the likelihood of receiving a

bachelor’s degree from any UNC campus within four years of matriculation. The first set

utilizes the full sample of students observed in 8th grade and yields unconditional estimates of the

black-white difference in the joint probability of enrolling and graduating from a public



                                                 18
university in the state. The second set shows disparities in the probability of graduating

conditional on enrollment which isolate the racial or socioeconomic disparities in college

experiences that occur after matriculation.

         Both sets of estimates in Table 8 show statistically significant disadvantages for black

students relative to whites which dissipate substantially once we condition on parental education

and reverse sign, in the unconditional specifications, when 8th grade test score performance is

added. When comparing individuals with identical parent education and 8th grade test scores

(row 3), we find that black students are roughly 2 percentage points more likely than white

students to receive a UNC system degree within four years of graduating high school. 20 This

advantage can be attributed largely to the already-established black advantage in gaining entry to

the system. Conditional on enrolling in the system, however, there is no black advantage in any

specification. Among students who actually enroll in the system the black-white gap in

graduation rates holds at 5 to 6 percentage points even after controlling for test scores and parent

education. Relative to white students with comparable backgrounds, African-American students

enjoy better access to the UNC system – and access matters. But once on campus, black students

have less success than whites in earning a degree.

         The conditional results with campus fixed effect show that nearly half of the 5 to 6

percentage point black-white graduation rate gap, controlling for background characteristics, can

be attributed to black students’ concentration on campuses where students of all races are less

likely to succeed. The black-white conditional graduation gap is larger at non-HBCU campuses,

but relatively modest at UNC-Chapel Hill – where the black-white graduation rate gap is

observed to fall by more than three-quarters between the 1999 and 2004 cohorts. Appendix


20 Recall that these estimates apply to receiving a degree from a public university in the state, not to receiving degree
at all.

                                                           19
Table A4 once again shows modest Hispanic-white differences in graduation rates. Relative to

whites, Asian students are more likely to graduate overall but differences conditional on

matriculation are small and not statistically significant.

       Table 9 shows that the children of college-educated parents are significantly more likely

to graduate in four years from one of the state’s public universities, both overall and conditional

on matriculating. Such differences in graduation rates by economic status should not be too

surprising. Relieved of the necessity of taking out loans or working while in school, students

from affluent families often have an easier road to graduation than students of modest means,

even when need-based financial aid is available. The raw gaps in graduation rates, conditional on

matriculation, which reach as high as 22 percentage points for UNC system matriculants in the

1999 cohort, are reduced by about half, on average, once we condition on 8th grade test scores.

Coefficients are reduced still further when we add institution fixed effects to the conditional

specifications, indicating that the advantage enjoyed by students with college educated parents

can be attributed in at least some part to their tendency to enroll at campuses where all students

are more likely to succeed.

       Even conditioning on campus attended and 8th grade test scores, students born to college-

educated parents enjoy a 10 percentage point advantage in four-year graduation rates in the 1999

cohort. Interestingly, this gap shrinks considerably, to a statistically insignificant 3 percentage

points, for the 2004 cohort. This reduction is also apparent when we exclude HBCUs from the

sample. At UNC-Chapel Hill, there is no evidence of a parent education gap in either cohort.



VII. CONCLUSION




                                                  20
         The purpose of this paper is to examine post-secondary educational disparities in order to

assess how the public universities in one state, North Carolina, shape the educational outcomes

of its young people. By examining progress from the public K-12 schools to the state’s four-year

institutions, we are necessarily ignoring several very important alternative routes students could

take. In particular, our data do not include students who spend their 8th grade in a private school,

or who moved into the state as high school students. We also miss students who, instead of

enrolling in a public four-year institution in the state, enroll in a two-year community college, a

private four-year college or university, or go out of state to college. Nonetheless, the institutions

in the UNC system together constitute a major postsecondary destination in the state, with total

enrollments almost as large as for the state’s community colleges.21

         Across the range of outcomes we examine, we consistently observe an unadjusted

disadvantage for African American students. For example, if we control only for gender, black

8th graders in the 2004 cohort were 4.6 percentage points less likely to attend a UNC campus

than white 8th graders (where the average for all 8th graders was 21%), and they were 5.5

percentage points less likely to enroll and graduate within four years. Once we control

statistically for parental education and 8th grade test scores, however, we find that black 8th

graders were subsequently more likely than otherwise similar whites to enroll in a UNC

institution (12.0 percentage points) and slightly more likely to enroll and graduate (1.7

percentage points).22




21
   In 2010 they were 47% of two- and four-year enrollees and were undoubtedly a majority of FTE enrollments.
(University of North Carolina 2013, pp. 58-59).
22
   The 12.0 percentage point estimate is based on specification (4) in Table 4. If that regression were re-estimated
without parental education, the coefficients would show a slightly reduced but positive advantage for black students
of 11.4 percentage points.

                                                         21
        Much of the test score-corrected comparative advantage for black students can be

attributed to the generous supply of places at the state’s five public HBCUs.23 Indeed, when we

restrict attention to non-HBCU campuses, we find no evidence of a black advantage in any

outcome measure. Compared to the U.S. as a whole, more than half (56%) of North Carolina’s

black students who stay in state to enroll in public four-year colleges and universities attend an

HBCU. By comparison, only 19% of black students in four-year institutions in the country as a

whole attend an HBCU.

        At the same time that the state’s HBCUs serve to raise the college enrollment rates of

African American students, the Jim Crow legacy embodied in these institutions intensifies racial

isolation for black college students. As a result, black students who enroll in the UNC system are

likely to attend college classes with markedly higher percentages of black students than they had

encountered in 8th grade. Conditional on enrollment in any UNC institution, students at the

HBCUs have lower rates of completion, holding constant both parental education and 8th grade

test scores. Although, holding 8th grade scores constant, African-American students in North

Carolina are more likely than whites to earn a four-year degree within four years of finishing

high school from a UNC institution, this advantage can be attributed entirely to a higher

propensity to matriculate in the first place. This matriculation advantage more than offsets the

black deficit in conditional graduation rates.

        Our analysis is not designed to estimate a “treatment effect” of attending an HBCU or

any other campus. Nonetheless, our findings do yield an important insight regarding the

construction of a counterfactual for such an analysis. Fryer and Greenstone (2010) estimate

treatment effects of attending an HBCU by comparing HBCU students with students attending


23
  Calculations based on data from University of North Carolina (2013, Table 19, pp. 58-59) and U.S. Department of
Education (2012, Tables 238 and 255).

                                                       22
more traditional four-year colleges. Our findings indicate that this estimation strategy would be

problematic when applied to students in North Carolina. The state’s HBCUs enroll students who

would otherwise most likely not have attended a four-year college – at least not immediately

after high school – if those HBCUs did not exist. To the extent that this pattern holds more

broadly, a more reliable strategy for identifying the effects of HBCUs would be to compare

HBCU attendees to students from states containing no HBCU at all. Many of those would not

have attended any four-year college at all.

       Like other research on postsecondary education, our study finds that students from

families with higher socioeconomic status (indicated by parental education) exhibit higher rates

of matriculation and higher graduation rates than those with less well educated parents. We also

find that they have better grades and a higher propensity to select a STEM major. We find that

controlling for race does little to diminish these coefficients. Adding 8th grade achievement tests

to the model, however, generally reduces the size of the parental education coefficients by about

half. The residual advantage associated with parental education, visible for all outcomes, is

consistent with the hypothesis that the postsecondary system serves to exacerbate inequality by

favoring those with more advantaged family backgrounds. An alternative explanation for our

estimates of the advantage of having college-educated parents, however, is that the college

background characteristics we use as statistical controls are simply incomplete. In this case, it

remains noteworthy that a set of controls sufficient to explain away racial disparities in our full

sample is not sufficient to counteract socioeconomic ones. We also note that a sizable portion of

the socioeconomic disparities in conditional probabilities of graduation that we estimate can be

attributed to campus-wide differences. This finding could suggest that there are policies or

practices at certain campuses that, if implemented at other campuses, would reduce the



                                                 23
socioeconomic outcome gradient overall. Or they may simply indicate the degree to which class-

based segregation exists at the campus level. Finally, we note that adjusted socioeconomic

disparities in graduation rates conditional on enrollment diminished substantially between the

early and later cohorts studied here.




                                               24
                                       REFERENCES

       Bailey, Martha and Susan Dynarski, “Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in U.S.
College Entry and Completion,” Duncan and Murnane (eds.), Whither Opportunity? (New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 2011).

      Bond, Horace Mann, The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order
(New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1934).

      Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. "Why Have College
Completion Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate
Resources." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 129-57.

        Bowen, William G. Matthew M. Chingos and Michael S. McPherson, Crossing the
Finish Line: Completing College at America's Public Universities (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2011).

        Braddock, Jomills Henry II, “The Perpetuation of Segregation across Levels of
Education: A Behavioral Assessment of the Contact-Hypothesis,” Sociology of Education 53
(July 1980), 178-186.

       Carnevale, Anthony P. and Jeff Stohl, Separate and Unequal: How Higher Education
Reinforces the Intergenerational Reproduction of White Racial Privilege, 2013.

       Carnevale, Anthony P. and Jeff Strohl, “White Flight Goes to College,” Poverty and
Race, 22 (September/October 2013).

      Clotfelter, Charles T., Ronald G. Ehrenberg, Malcolm Getz, and John J. Siegfried,
Economic Challenges in Higher Education (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).

      Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “The Academic
Achievement Gap in Grades 3 to 8,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (May 2009), 420-
431.

         Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “Who Teaches Whom?
Race and the Distribution of Novice Teachers,” Economics of Education Review 24 (2005),
377-392.

         Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, Jacob L. Vigdor, and Justin Wheeler, “High
Poverty Schools and the Distribution of Teachers and Principals,” North Carolina Law
Review 85 (June 2007), 1345-1379.

         Fryer, Roland and Michael Greenstone. "The Changing Consequences of Attending
Historically Black Colleges and Universities," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
2, 1 (2010): 116-48.


                                              25
       Gerald, Danette and Kati Haycock. 2006. Engines of Inequality: Diminishing Equity in
the Nation’s Premier Public Universities (Washington: The Education Trust).

      Hansen, W. Lee and Burton Weisbrod, "The Distribution of Costs and Direct Benefits of
Public Higher Education: The Case of California," Journal of Human Resources 4(Spring, 1969),
176-191.

      Hoxby, Caroline M., “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23 (Fall 2009), 1-25.

       Radford, Alexandria. 2013. Top Student, Top School? How Social Class Shapes Where
Top Students Go to College (Chicago: U Chicago Press).

        Reardon, Sean F., “The Widening Academic Achievement Gap Between the Rich and the
Poor: New Evidence and Possible Explanations,” in Greg J. Duncan and Richard M. Murnane
(eds). Whither Opportunity? (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2011).

       University of North Carolina, Statistical Abstract of Higher Education in North Carolina,
Research Report 1-13, August 2013.

       U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of
Education Statistics 2011(Washington: Department of Education, June 2012).

       Hansen, W. Lee and Burton A. Weisbrod, “The Distribution of Costs and Direct
Benefits of Public Higher Education: The Case of California,” Journal of Human Resources
4(1969), 176-191.




                                              26
Table 1. Institutions in the University of North Carolina System
Campus name                                           Enrollment                  Percent black HBCU
Appalachian State University                              11,051                           0.04
Elizabeth City State University                            2,277                           0.87   Yes
East Carolina University                                  14,724                           0.17
Fayetteville State University                              3,189                           0.89   Yes
NC Agriculture & Technical State University                7,521                           0.94   Yes
NC Central University                                      4,116                           0.96   Yes
NC School of the Arts                                        237                           0.06
NC State University                                       18,467                           0.09
UNC Asheville                                              2,152                           0.03
UNC Charlotte                                             11,227                           0.13
UNC Chapel Hill                                           13,223                           0.12
UNC Greensboro                                            10,271                           0.24
UNC Pembroke                                               4,076                           0.28
UNC Wilmington                                             7,364                           0.05
Western Carolina University                                6,604                           0.06
Winston-Salem State University                             4,380                           0.95   Yes
Total                                                    120,879                           0.27
Note: Enrollment denotes all NC 8th graders from 1999-2004 who enrolled in a UNC campus by 2008.
Source: North Carolina Education Research Data Center, University of North Carolina.




                                                     27
Table 2. Two Cohorts
8th Grade Cohort                                          1999     2004
Expected year of:
 taking the 8th grade EOGs                                1999     2004
 graduating from high school                              2003     2008
 entering college                                         2003     2008
 college graduation, 4 yrs                                2007     2012
 college graduation, 6 yrs                                2009     2014
Note: All years refer to the spring of the academic year
Source: North Carolina Education Research Data Center, University of North
Carolina.




                                                     28
 Table 3. Exposure to Own-Group Students, 2004 8th Grade Cohort
                                                               Own-category
                           % of all  % of all              exposure in student's
                           2004 8th      UNC               8th              UNC
                            graders    students           grade            campus
 ACHIEVEMENT
    Bottom quartile                    25.4%           4.9%                 27.9%                 17.2%
    Second quartile                    24.9%          15.4%                 25.3%                 26.2%
    Third quartile                     22.6%          28.8%                 23.1%                 32.0%
    Top quartile                       22.6%          50.8%                 25.3%                 63.0%

 PARENTAL EDUCATION
    LT H.S.                            9.2%            1.1%                 10.4%                  2.0%
    H.S., LT college                   60.3%          40.3%                 61.7%                 46.1%
    College or more                    29.1%          57.4%                 36.3%                 61.9%

 RACE/ETHNICITY
    Asian                              1.8%            2.6%                  3.5%                  4.3%
    Black                              29.1%          26.3%                 34.4%                 65.0%
    Hispanic                           3.2%            1.0%                  4.1%                  1.2%
    Native American                    1.5%            1.0%                 14.1%                 12.3%
    Multiracial                        0.8%            0.6%                  1.3%                  0.8%
    White                              63.6%          68.5%                 67.2%                 82.7%
Source: North Carolina Education Research Data Center, University of North Carolina. The table’s first column
gives the percentage of all North Carolina public school 8 th graders in 2004 who were in each category, and the
second column gives the corresponding percentage for all students in that cohort who enrolled in one of the 16 UNC
institutions. The third and fourth columns present own-group exposure rates for students in the 2004 8 th grade
cohort. See footnote 10 for a full description.




                                                       29
Table 4. Enrollment in UNC – coefficient on African American
                                            1999 cohort      2004 cohort
Basic model: race and gender                 -0.017***        -0.046***
                                               (0.003)          (0.003)
+ parental education                          0.040***         0.013***
                                               (0.003)          (0.003)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles                  0.147***         0.120***
                                               (0.003)          (0.003)
Restrict to enrollment at non-HBCUs           -0.006**           -0.003
                                               (0.003)          (0.002)
Restrict to enrollment at Chapel Hill         0.011***         0.007***
                                               (0.001)          (0.001)

 N                                                   88,960              104,076
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                              30
Table 5. Enrollment in UNC – coefficient on college graduated parents
                                             1999 cohort      2004 cohort
Basic model: parental education and gender    0.348***         0.350***
                                               (0.005)          (0.005)
+ race                                        0.352***         0.340***
                                               (0.005)          (0.005)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles                  0.178***         0.168***
                                               (0.005)          (0.005)
Restrict to enrollment at non-HBCUs           0.151***         0.147***
                                               (0.005)          (0.004)
Restrict to enrollment at Chapel Hill         0.016***         0.014***
                                               (0.002)          (0.002)

 N                                                    88,960             104,076
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
Coefficients for dichotomous indicator for students with at least one parent who is a college
graduate. Since the omitted parental education category is less than high school, the coefficients
measure the difference between students with a college-educated parent and those without a
parent who graduated from high school.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                                31
Table 6. Intermediate outcomes – coefficient on African American
                                        3.0+ GPA                     STEM after 60 hours
                               1999 cohort 2004 cohort       1999 cohort       2004 cohort
Basic model: race and gender    -0.044***      -0.054***       -0.011***        -0.016***
                                  (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.001)
+ parental education            -0.024***      -0.030***          -0.001        -0.005***
                                  (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.001)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles    0.012***        0.010***       0.019***          0.014***
                                  (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.001)
Restrict to enrollment at non-  -0.012***      -0.012***          -0.001           -0.000
HBCUs                             (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.001)
Restrict to enrollment at       -0.005***      -0.003***          -0.000           -0.000
Chapel Hill
                                  (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)          (0.000)

 N                                     88,291         103,534             88,291           103,534
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                                32
Table 7. Intermediate outcomes – coefficient on college graduated parents
                                         3.0+ GPA                    STEM after 60 hours
                                1999 cohort     2004 cohort       1999 cohort   2004 cohort
Basic model: parental            0.119***         0.130***         0.059***      0.058***
education and gender              (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.002)
+ race                           0.113***         0.120***         0.059***      0.056***
                                  (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.002)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles     0.054***         0.053***         0.025***      0.024***
                                  (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.002)
Restrict to enrollment at non-   0.017***         0.013***           0.002          0.002
HBCUs                             (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.002)
Restrict to enrollment at          0.001            0.001            0.000         -0.001
Chapel Hill                       (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)

 N                                       88,291          103,534             88,291          103,534
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
Omitted parental education category is less than high school.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                                33
Table 8. Graduation by 4 years – coefficient on African American
                                        Unconditional                             Conditional
                              1999 cohort        2004 cohort             1999 cohort      2004 cohort
Basic model: race and          -0.039***          -0.055***               -0.181***        -0.209***
gender                           (0.002)            (0.002)                 (0.008)          (0.008)
+ parental education           -0.016***          -0.028***               -0.142***        -0.170***
                                 (0.002)            (0.002)                 (0.008)          (0.008)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles   0.022***            0.017***               -0.050***        -0.064***
                                 (0.002)            (0.002)                 (0.009)          (0.009)
+ institution fixed effects         ---                ---                -0.029***        -0.029***
                                                                            (0.011)          (0.010)
Restrict to enrollment at          -0.007***         -0.007***            -0.043***        -0.037***
non-HBCUs                            (0.002)           (0.002)              (0.011)          (0.010)
Restrict to enrollment at          -0.003***            -0.001            -0.023***         -0.005*
Chapel Hill                          (0.001)           (0.000)              (0.004)          (0.003)

 N                                    88,291           103,534               18,196            20,649
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Unconditional models employ samples of all students who
were in 8th grade in the specified year. Conditional models are restricted to students in the two
cohorts who attended a UNC institution. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                                34
Table 9. Graduation by 4 years – coefficient on college graduated parents
                                       Unconditional                    Conditional
                               1999 cohort     2004 cohort      1999 cohort    2004 cohort
Basic model: parental           0.133***         0.148***         0.221***      0.168***
education and gender             (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.032)       (0.032)
+ race                          0.130***         0.139***         0.175***      0.107***
                                 (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.032)       (0.032)
   th
+ 8 grade test score deciles    0.067***         0.065***         0.132***       0.063**
                                 (0.004)          (0.003)          (0.032)       (0.031)
+ institution fixed effects         ---              ---          0.105***         0.029
                                                                   (0.031)       (0.030)
Restrict to enrollment at non-  0.021***         0.014***         0.086***         0.020
HBCUs                            (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.029)       (0.028)
Restrict to enrollment at         0.001            -0.000           0.010         -0.008
Chapel Hill                      (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.010)       (0.009)

 N                                    88,291          103,534              18,196           20,649
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Each reported coefficient is taken from a separate
specification. Models estimated by OLS. The last two sets of estimates are based on the model
that includes controls for race, gender, parental education, and 8th grade test score deciles.
Omitted parental education category is less than high school.
*** denotes a coefficient significant at the 1% level, ** the 5% level, * the 10% level.




                                                35
Appendix Table A1. Summary Statistics
                                                      Mean        Standard deviation     Min   Max
Female                                                 0.49              0.50             0     1
White                                                  0.62              0.48             0     1
Black                                                  0.29              0.45             0     1
Hispanic                                               0.04              0.20             0     1
American Indian                                        0.01              0.12             0     1
Asian                                                  0.02              0.13             0     1
Multiracial                                            0.01              0.11             0     1
Other                                                  0.00              0.01             0     1
Less than high school                                  0.09              0.28             0     1
High school graduate                                   0.39              0.49             0     1
Community and technical college grad                   0.21              0.41             0     1
College graduate                                       0.24              0.43             0     1
Graduate degree                                        0.06              0.24             0     1
8th grade math decile                                  5.40              2.86             1    10
8th grade reading decile                               5.32              2.84             1    10
Enrolled in UNC                                        0.21              0.40             0     1
Appalachian State University                           0.02              0.14             0     1
Elizabeth City State University                        0.02              0.16             0     1
East Carolina University                               0.00              0.06             0     1
Fayetteville State University                          0.01              0.07             0     1
NC Agriculture & Technical State University            0.01              0.11             0     1
NC Central University                                  0.01              0.08             0     1
NC State University                                    0.03              0.17             0     1
UNC Asheville                                          0.00              0.06             0     1
UNC Charlotte                                          0.02              0.15             0     1
UNC Chapel Hill                                        0.02              0.14             0     1
UNC Greensboro                                         0.02              0.13             0     1
UNC Pembroke                                           0.01              0.08             0     1
UNC Wilmington                                         0.01              0.11             0     1
Western Carolina University                            0.01              0.11             0     1
Winston-Salem State University                         0.01              0.09             0     1
STEM                                                   0.04              0.19             0     1
Social sciences                                        0.03              0.17             0     1
Business                                               0.03              0.17             0     1
Education                                              0.02              0.14             0     1
Health                                                 0.01              0.10             0     1
Trades                                                 0.00              0.07             0     1
Other                                                  0.00              0.05             0     1
Never declared                                         0.03              0.16             0     1
Declared later                                         0.02              0.15             0     1
Note: Number of observations 589,169, except for 8th grade test scores, which is 571,309
Source: North Carolina Education Research Data Center, University of North Carolina.




                                                 36
Appendix Table A2. Definition of Parental Education

The 1999, 2001, 2002 EOG8 cohorts define parental education in the following manner:

Definition 1         Parent Education Level
                            1 = Did not finish high school
                            2 = High school graduate
                            3 = Trade or business school graduate
                            4 = Community, technical or junior college graduate
                            5 = Four-year college graduate
                            6 = Graduate school degree

The 2000, 2003, and 2004 EOG8 cohorts distinguish between 1) high school graduates only and
2) those with some college-level coursework but did not graduate. They define parental
education as:

Definition 2         Parent Education Level
                            1 = Did not finish high school
                            2 = High school graduate
                            3 = Some education after high school, but did not graduate
                            4 = Trade or business school graduate
                            5 = Community, technical or junior college graduate
                            6 = Four-year college graduate
                            7 = Graduate school degree
                                                        Cohort year
                                        1999        2000   2001   2002   2003   2004
          Less than HS                   9.67       9.35   8.10   9.59   8.89     8.89
          HS grad & some college        41.16 46.14 40.57 40.97 45.85 47.80
          Community & technical grad 20.12 15.03 19.39 18.38 16.26 14.04
          College grad                  22.40 22.93 25.31 24.50 23.05 23.57
          Graduate degree                6.65       6.55   6.65   6.56   5.95     5.70


                                                                  Cohort year
                                                    1999   2000   2001   2002   2003     2004
  Less than HS                                      9.67   9.35   8.10   9.59     8.89   8.89
  HS grad                                           41.16 37.43 40.57 40.97 37.44 39.50
  Community & technical grad & some college 20.12 23.74 19.39 18.38 24.67 22.34
  College grad                                      22.40 22.93 25.31 24.50 23.05 23.57
  Graduate degree                                   6.65   6.55   6.65   6.56     5.95   5.70


                                               37
Appendix Table A3. Parental Education, North Carolina 8th Graders, 1999 and 2004
Cohorts, by Race/Ethnicity
                                          Race/Ethnicity
1999 cohort                                                  Am.
                       Asian     Black    Hispanic                       Multi Other White           Total
                                                            Indian
Less than HS            267      2,981           1,007            195        55        3    4,182     8,690
                       16.93     11.29           41.05           14.50    9.63     13.64     7.04      9.47
HS grad                 518 13,664                901             735      256       12 21,534 37,620
                       32.85     51.75           36.73           54.65   44.83     54.55    36.23     40.98
Community,              207      5,357            259             238      114         4 12,383 18,562
technical grad
                       13.13     20.29           10.56           17.70   19.96     18.18    20.83     20.22
College grad            368      3,635            224             131      115         2 16,294 20,769
                       23.34     13.77            9.13            9.74   20.14      9.09    27.41     22.62
Graduate degree         217        765             62              46        31        1    5,048     6,170
                       13.76      2.90            2.53            3.42    5.43      4.55     8.49      6.72
Total                  1,577 26,402              2,453           1,345     571       22 59,441 91,811



2004 cohort                                                          Am.
                           Asian       Black      Hispanic                        Multi White       Total
                                                                    Indian
Less than HS                    268      2,754           2,185            193      129     3,719      9,248
                               13.03      8.65           37.86           13.01     7.21     5.88       8.71
HS grad                         623 16,051               2,339            738      726 21,291        41,768
                               30.29     50.41           40.52           49.76    40.56    33.66      39.33
Some college                    104      3,087            309             137      174     5,045      8,856
                                5.06      9.70            5.35            9.24     9.72     7.98       8.34
Community, technical            182      4,427            322             163      262     9,605     14,961
grad                            8.85     13.90            5.58           10.99    14.64    15.19      14.09
College grad                    572      4,745            509             201      374 18,842        25,243
                               27.81     14.90            8.82           13.55    20.89    29.79      23.77
Graduate degree                 308       777             108              51      125     4,742      6,111
                               14.97      2.44            1.87            3.44     6.98     7.50       5.75
Total                          2,057 31,841              5,772           1,483    1,790 63,244 106,187


                                                   38
                             Appendix Table A4: Additional race coefficients
Outcome              Controls                       Cohort Hispanic            Asian
                                                               0.016*          0.081***
                                                    1999
                     Test scores, parent education,            (0.008)         (0.010)
Enrollment
                     race, gender                              -0.006          0.063***
                                                    2004
                                                               (0.005)         (0.008)
                                                               0.004           0.050***
                                                    1999
                     Test scores, parent education,            (0.004)         (0.005)
STEM major
                     race, gender                              -0.001          0.058***
                                                    2004
                                                               (0.003)         (0.004)
                                                               -0.005          0.019***
                                                    1999
                     Test scores, parent education,            (0.005)         (0.006)
GPA 3.0+
                     race, gender                              -0.009***       0.041***
                                                    2004
                                                               (0.003)         (0.005)
                                                               0.003           0.024***
                                                    1999
Unconditional 4-     Test scores, parent education,            (0.006)         (0.006)
year graduation      race, gender                              -0.010***       0.032***
                                                    2004
                                                               (0.004)         (0.006)
                                                               0.002           -0.007
                     Test scores, parent education, 1999
Conditional 4-year                                             (0.035)         (0.022)
                     race, gender, campus fixed
graduation                                                     -0.055**        -0.001
                     effects                        2004
                                                               (0.026)         (0.018)
Note: Coefficients are derived from the same specifications as those reported in tables 4-8.




                                                  39
